--------------------------The Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 1986  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3.  [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. [Repealed .] 
8. [Repealed .] 
9. [Repealed .] 
10. [Repealed .] 
11. [Repealed .] 
12. [Repealed .] 
13. [Repealed .] 
14. [Repealed .] 
15. [Repealed .] 
16. [Repealed .] 
17. [Repealed .] 
18. [Repealed .] 
19. [Repealed .] 
20. [Repealed .] 
21. [Repealed .] 
22. [Repealed .] 
23. [Repealed .] 
24. Provisions as to existing Members of Central Administrative Tribunal . 
25. Validation . 
26. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNALS (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1986  
[25th March , 1986 .] 
An Act to amend the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title  and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Administrative Tribunals 
(Amendment) Act, 1986.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be deemed to have come into force on the 22nd day 
of January, 1986.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
24. Provisions as to existing Members of Central Administrative Tribunal .—Every person 
holding office as Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member of the Central Administrative Tribunal 
immediately before the c ommencement of this Act shall, — 
(a) if he possesses any of the qualifications specified for appointment as a Judicial Member under 
the principal Act, as amended by this Act, be deemed, on and from such commencement, to have 
been appointed as a Judicial Member of such Tribunal; and  
(b) in any other case, be deemed, on and from such commencement, to have been appointed as an 
Administrative Member of such Tribunal.  
25. Validation .—Anything done or any action taken (including any application admitted or orders 
passed) by the Central Administrative Tribunal or any of its Be nch or Benches immediately before the 
commencement of this Act in the exercise or purported exercise of its jurisdiction, powers and authority 
conferred by or under the principal Act shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken as if the 
provisions o f the princip al Act, as amended by this Act had been in force at all material times and, 
accordingly, anything done or any action taken by the said Tribunal or any of its Bench or Benches shall 
not be called in ques tion merely on the ground that — 
(a) the Bench or Benches of such Tribunal had not been properly constituted, or  
(b) the said Tri bunal had no jurisdiction to adj udicate or try any dispute or complaint or to hear 
any appeals in relation to such dispute or complaint.  
26. Repeal and saving .—(1) The  Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Ordinance, 1986  
(1 of 1986 ) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken u nder the principal Act, as 
amended by this Act.  
 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 23 r ep. by Act 30 of 2001 , s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
--------------------------The Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE AGRICULTURAL AND PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY  ACT, 1985  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Power to amend Schedule.  
CHAPTER II  
AGRICULTURAL AND PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Authority.  
5. Salary and A llowances and other conditions of servic e of Chairman and allowances of 
members.  
6. Chairman to be chief executive.  
7. Secretary of the Authority and other staff.  
8. Special provision for transfer of employees to the Authority.  
9. Committees of the Authority.  
10. Functions of the Authority . 
10A. Functions in respect of Special products, etc.  
11. Power to supersede the Auth ority.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION  
12. Registration of exporters.  
13. Application, cancellation, fee payable and other matters relating to registration.  
14. Returns to be made by exporters.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
15. Grants or loans by the Central Government.  
16. Constitution of Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Fund.  
17. Borrowing powers of the Authority.  
18. Accounts and audit.  
  2 
 CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
SECTIONS  
19. Power to prohibit or control  imports and exports of Scheduled products . 
20. Directions by the Central Government.  
21. Returns  and reports.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Penalty for making false reports.  
23. Penalties for obstructing a member or officer of the Authority in the discharge of his duty and 
for failure to produce books and records.  
24. Other penalties.  
25. Offences by companies.  
26. Jurisdiction of court.  
27. Previous sanction of the Central Government.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
29. Power to deleg ate. 
30. Suspension of operation of this Act.  
31. Application of other laws not barred.  
32. Power to make rules.  
33. Power to make regulations.  
34. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
35. Validation.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
  3 
 THE AGRICULTU RAL AND PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT 
AUTHORITY  ACT , 1985  
ACT NO. 2 OF 1986 
[8th January , 1986 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of an Authority for the development and promotion o f 
exports of certain agricultural  and processed food products and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Agricultural and 
Processed Food Products Export Development Authority Act, 1985.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different  dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Authority ” means the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Developme nt 
Authority established under s ection 4;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Authority;  
(c) “export ” means taking out of India by land, sea or air;  
(d) “exporter ” means a person registered as an exporter of   Scheduled products under section 12;  
(e) “member ” means a member of the Authority an d includes the Chairman;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescrib ed by rules made under this Act ; 
(g) “processing ” in relation to 2[Scheduled products o r, as the case may be, Special p roducts] 
includes the process of preservation of such products such as canning, freezing, drying, salting, 
smoking, peeling or filleting and any other method of proc essing which the Authority may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;  
(h) “regulations ” means regulations made under this Act ; 
(i) “Scheduled pr oduct ” means any of the agricultural or proc essed food products included in 
3[the First Schedule] ; 
4[(j) “Special product ” means any of the agricultural or processed food products included in the 
Second Schedule.]  
 
5[3. Power to amend  the Schedule .— The Central Government may, having regard to the objects to 
this Act, and if it considers necessary or expedient so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to, 
or, as the case may be, omit from, the First Schedule or the Second Schedule any agricul tural or processed 
food product and on such addition, or as the case may be, omission, such product shall be, or shall cease 
to be, a Scheduled product or Special product as the case may be.]   
                                                           
1. 13th February, 1986, vide notification No. S. O. 55( E), dated  13th February, 1986,  see Gazette of India, 1986, Extraordinary,        
Part II, s ec. 3(ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 20 of 2009, s.  2, for “Scheduled products” (w.e.f. 13-10-2008 ). 
3. Subs. by  s. 2, ibid.,  for “the Schedule ” (w.e.f. 13 -10-2008 ). 
4. Ins. by s.  2, ibid. (w.e.f. 13 -10-2008 ).  
5. Subs. by s.  3. ibid., for section 3 (w.e.f. 13 -10-2008 ).  4 
 CHAPTER II  
AGRICULTURAL AND PROCESSED FOOD PRODUCTS EXPORT DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY  
4. Establishment and constitution of the Authority .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established 
for the purposes of this Act,  an Authority to be called the Agricultural and Processed Food Products 
Export Development Authority.  
(2) The Authority shall be  a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The head office of the  Authority shall be at Delhi and the Authority may, with the previous 
approval of the Central Government, establish offices or agencies at other places in or outside India.  
(4) The A uthority shall consist of the following members , namely: — 
(a) a Chairman, to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) the Agricultural Marketing Adviser to the Government of India, ex officio ; 
(c) one member to be appointed by the Central Government to re present the Planning 
Commission ; 
(d) three members of Parliament of whom  two shall be elected by the House of the People a nd 
one by the Council of States ; 
(e) eight members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent, respectively, the 
Ministries of the Central Government dealing with — 
(i) agriculture and rural deve lopment ; 
(ii) commerce;  
(iii) finance;  
(iv) industry;  
(v) food;  
(vi) civil supplies;  
(vii) civil aviation;  
(viii) shipping and transport ; 
(f) five members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the alphabetical order 
to represent the St ates and the Union territories:  
Provided that an appointment under this clause shall be made on the recommendation of the 
Government of the State, or as the case may be , the Union territory concerned ; 
(g) seven members to be appointed by the Central Govern ment to represent, — 
(i) the Indian C ouncil of Agricultural Research ; 
(ii) the National Horticulture Board ; 
(iii) the National Agricultural Co -operative Marketing Federation;  
(iv) the Central Food Technological Research Institute;  
(v) the Indian Institute of Packaging ; 
(vi) the Spices Export Promotion Council; and  
(vii) the Cashew nut Export Promotion Council ; 
  5 
 (h) twelve members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent, — 
(i) fruit an d vegetable products industries ; 
(ii) meat , poultr y and dairy products industries ; 
1[(iii) other Scheduled products or Special products industries;]  
(iv) packaging industry:  
Provided that the number of members appointed to represent any of the groups of industries 
specified in sub -clauses ( i) to ( iii) or the industry specified in sub -clause ( iv) shall in no case be less 
than two;  
(i) two members to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst specialists and 
scientists in the field of agriculture, economics and marketing of Scheduled product s. 
(5) The term of office of the members, other than the member referred to in clause ( b) of                
sub-section ( 4) and the manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in the 
discharge of their functions by, the members shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) Any officer of the Central Government, not being a member of the Authority, when deputed by 
that Government in this behalf, shall have the right to attend meetings of the Authority and take part in the 
proceedings thereo f but shall not be entitled to vote.  
(7) No act or proceeding of the Authority or any committee appointed by it under sectio n 9 shall be 
invalid  merely by reason of — 
(a) any  vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority or such committee; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority or such 
committee; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority or such co mmittee not affecting the merits of 
the case.  
(8) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in 
regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its meetings) as may be 
provided  by the regulations.  
5. Salary and A llowances and other conditions of service of Chairman and allowances of 
members .—(1) The Chairman shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such 
conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may, from time to 
time, be fixed by the Central Government.  
(2) The other members of the Authority shall receive such allowances as may be fixed by the Central 
Government.  
(3) A member, other than the ex officio  member, may resign his office by giving notice thereof in 
writing to the Central Government and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to have 
vacated his office . 
6. Chairman to be chief executive .—The Chairman shall be the chief executive  of the Authority and 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed.  
7. Secretary of the Authority and other staff .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint a 
Secretary to the Authority who shall exercise such powers and perform s uch duties as may be prescribed 
or as may be delegated to him by the Chairman.  
(2) The Secretary shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to such 
conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and such other matters as may, from 
time to time, be fixed by the Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 2009, s. 4, for sub-clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 13 -10-2008 ). 6 
 (3) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed, the Authority may appoint such 
other officers and employees, as may be necessary, for the efficient performance of its  functions and the 
method of appointment, the scale of pay and allowances and other conditions of service of such other 
officers and employees of the Authority shall be such as may be provided by the Authority by regulations.  
(4) The Chairman, the Secretary and other officers and employees of the Authority shall not 
undertake any work unconnected with their duties under this Act except with the permission of the 
Central Government . 
8. Special provision for transfer of employees to the Authority .—(1) On the establishment of the 
Authority, it shall be lawful for the Central Government to transfer to the Authority, by order, and with 
effect from such date or dates as may be specified in the order, any officer or other employee holding 
office as such in the Processed Foods Export Promotion Council (hereafter in this section referred to as 
the Council) immediately before the date on which the Authority is established:  
Provided that the scale of pay of the post in the Authority to which such officer or oth er employee is 
transferred shall not be lower than the scale of pay of the post he was holding immediately before such 
transfer and the other terms and conditions of service (including pension, leave, provident fund and 
medical benefits) of the post to whic h he is transferred shall not be less favourable than the terms and 
conditions of service in relation to the post held by him immediately before such transfer.  
(2) An order under sub -section ( 1) may be made so as to have retrospective effect from a date no t 
earlier than the date of the commencement of this Act.  
(3) Before any order is issued under sub -section ( 1), all officers and employees of the Council shall 
be given an option to express, in such form as may be prescribed, and within such time as may be 
specified in that behalf by the Central Government, their willingness or otherwise to become employees 
of the Authority and such option once exercised shall be final:  
Provided that no order under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in relation to any officer or other 
employee s of the Council who has intimated his intention of not becoming an employee of the Authority 
within the time specified in that behalf:  
Provided further that such of the officers and employees of the Council who do not express, within 
the time specified in that behalf, their intention of becoming the employees of the Authority, shall be dealt 
with in the same manner and in accordance with the same laws and standing orders as would have applied 
immediately before the commencement of this Act  to the employees of the Council in the event of the 
reduction of the strength of the officers and employees of the Council.  
(4) An officer or other employee transferred by an order made under sub -section ( 1) shall, on and 
from the date of transfer, cease to be an employee of the Council and become an officer or other 
employee of the Authority with such designation as the Authority may determine and shall, subject to the 
provisions of the proviso to sub -section ( 1), be governed by the regulations made by th e Authority under 
this Act in respect of remuneration and other conditions of service (including pension, leave, provident 
fund and medical benefits) and shall continue to be an officer or other employee of the Authority unless 
and until his employment is duly terminated by the Authority:  
Provided that till such time as the regulations referred to above governing the conditions of service of 
its officers or other employees are framed by the Authority, the relevant laws and standing orders 
applicable to the officers and employees of the Council shall continue to be applicable to them.  
(5) If a question arises whether the terms and conditions of service prescribed in the regulations 
framed by the Authority in respect of any matter, including remuneration, pens ion, leave, provident fund 
and medical benefits, are less favourable than those attached to the post held by an officer or other 
employee immediately before his transfer to the Authority, the decision of the Central Government in the 
matter shall be final.  
9. Committees of the Authority .—(1) The Authority may appoint such committees as may be 
necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act.  7 
 (2) The Authority shall have the po wer to co -opt as members of any  committee appointed under    
sub-section ( 1) such number of persons , who are  not members of the Authority  as it may think fit and the 
persons so co -opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee and take part in its 
proceedings but sha ll not have the right to vote.  
(3) The persons co -opted as members of a committee under sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled to receive 
such allowances for attending meetings of the committee as may be fixed by the Central Government.  
10. Functions of the Aut hority .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Authority to undertake, by such 
measures as it thinks fit, the development and promotion, under the control of the Central Government, of 
export of Scheduled products.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the measures referred to 
therein may provide for — 
(a) the development of industries relating to the Scheduled products for export by way of 
providing financial assistance or otherwise for undertaking surveys and feasibility s tudies, 
participation in the equity capital through joint ventures and other reliefs and subsidy schemes;  
(b) the registration of persons as exporters of the Scheduled products on payment of such fees as 
may be prescribed;  
(c) the fixing of standards and s pecifications for the Scheduled products for the purposes of 
export;  
(d) the carrying out of inspection of meat and meat products in any slaughterhouse, processing 
plant, storage premises, conveyances or other places where such products are kept or handled  for the 
purpose of ensuring the quality of such products;  
(e) the improving of packaging of the Scheduled products;  
(f) the improving of the marketing of the Scheduled products outside India;  
(g) the promotion of export oriented production and development  of the Scheduled products;  
(h) the collection of statistics from  the owners of factories or establishments engaged in the 
production, processing, packaging, marketing or export of the Scheduled products or from such other 
persons as may be prescribed on any matter relating to the Scheduled products; and the publication  of 
the statistics so collected, or of any por tions thereof or extracts there from;  
(i) the training in various aspects of the industries connected with the Scheduled products;  
(j) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
1[10A. Functions in respect of Special products, etc .—Without prejudice to any law for the time 
being in force, it shall be the duty of the Authority to undertake, by such measures as may be prescribed 
by the Central Government for registration and protection of the Intellectual Propert y rights in respect of 
Special products in India or outside India.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this section “Intellectual Property ” means any right to intangible 
property, namely, trade marks, designs, patents, geographical indications or any other sim ilar intangible 
property, under any law for the time being in force.]  
11. Power to supersede the Authority .—(1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that the 
Authority is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the performance of, the  duty imposed 
on it by or under this Act  or has exceeded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without sufficient 
cause, failed to comply with any direction issued by the Central Government under section 20, the Central 
Government may, by notification i n the Official Gazette, supersede the Authority for such period as may 
be specified in the notification : 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 0 of 2009, s. 5 (w.e.f. 13 -10-2008 ). 8 
 Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section, the Central Government shall give 
reasonable time to the Authority to show cause wh y it should not be superseded and shall consider the 
explanation and objections, if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notificat ion under sub -section ( 1) supers eding the Authority, — 
(a) all the members of the Authority shall, notwithstanding that their term of office has not 
expired as from the date of super session, vacate their offices as such members;  
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exerc ised or 
performed by or on behalf of the Authority sh all, during the period of super session, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct;  
(c) all property vested in the Authority shall, during the period of sup ersession, vest in the Central 
Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under           
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may — 
(a) extend the period of super session for such further period a s it may consider necessary; or  
(b) reconstitute the Authority in the manner provided in section 4.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION  
12. Registration of exporters .—(1) Every person exporting any  one or more of the Scheduled 
products shall, before the expiration of  one month from the date on which he undertakes such export or 
before the expiration of three months from the date of coming into force of this section, whichever is 
later, apply to the Authority to be registered as an exporter of the Scheduled product or Scheduled 
products:  
Provided that the Authority may, for suf ficient reason, extend the time -limit for registration by such 
period as it thinks fit.  
(2) Registration once made shall continue to be in force until it is cancelled by the Authority.  
13. Applica tion, cancellation, fee payable and other matters relating to registration .—The form 
of appl ication for registration under s ection 12 and for the cancellation of such registration, the fee 
payable on such applications, the particulars to be included in suc h applications, the procedure to be 
followed in granting and cancelling registration and the registers to be kept by the Authority shall be such 
as may be prescribed.  
14. Returns to be made by exporters .—(1) Every exporter, referred to in sub -section ( 1) of    
section 12, shall furnish to the Authority at the prescribed time and in the prescribed manner such returns 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Authority may authorise a member or any of its officers to inspect any processing plant or 
any other establish ment of the exporter at any time to verify the accuracy of any return made under this 
section.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
15. Grants or loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Authority by way of grants or loans 
such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this 
Act. 9 
 16. Constitution of Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development Fund .—(1) 
There shall be formed a Fund to be called the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export 
Development Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any sums of money which the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, provide from and out of the proceeds of the cess credited under  
section 4 of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Cess Ac t, 1985, af ter deducting 
there from the expenses of collection of the cess a nd the amount, if any, refunded ; 
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of registration and other matters under t his Act or the 
rules made there under;  
(c) any  grants or loans that may be made by the Central Government for the purposes of this Act 
under s ection 15; and  
(d) any grants or loans that may be made by any State Government, voluntary organisation or 
other institution for the purposes of this Act:  
Provi ded that no such grant, loan or donation shall be credited to the Fund except with the prior 
approval of the Central Government.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied for — 
(a) meeting the cost of the measures referred to in section 10;  
(b) meeting  the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other 
employees, as the case may be, of the Authority;  
(c) meeting   the other administrative expenses of the Authority and any other expenses authorised 
by or under this Act ; and  
(d) repayment of any loan .  
17. Borrowing powers of the Authority .—Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf,  the 
Authority shall have power to borrow on the security of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products 
Export Development Fund or any other asset for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
18. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audit ed by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Aud itor-General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally h as in connection with 
the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of 
the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shal l cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
19. Power to prohibit or control imports and exports of Scheduled products .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make provision for prohibiting, restricting 10 
 or otherwise controlling the import or export of the Scheduled products, either generally or in specified 
classes of cases.  
(2) All Schedu led products to which any order under sub -section ( 1) applies, shall be deemed to be 
goods of which the export has been prohibited under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962), 
and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect accordingly.  
(3) If any person contravenes any order made under sub -section ( 1), he shall, without prejudice to any 
confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962           
(52 of 1962), as applied by sub -section ( 2), be pu nishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
20. Directions by the Central Government .—The Authority shall carry out such directions as may 
be issued to it from time to time by the Central Government for the efficient administration of this Act . 
21. Returns  and reports. —(1) The Authority shall furnish to the Central  Government at such time 
and in such form and manner as may be prescribed or as the Central Government may direct, such returns 
and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the promotion 
and development of the exp ort of the Scheduled products, as the Central Government may, from time to 
time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Authority shall, as soon as possible, 
after the end of each financial year, submit to the Central Gove rnment a report in such form and before 
such date, as may be prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes 
during the previous financial year.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as s oon as may be, after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
22. Penalty for making false reports .—Any person who, being required by or under this Act to 
furnish any return, fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false 
and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine which ma y 
extend to five hundred rupees.  
23. Penalties for obstructing a member or officer of the Authority in the d ischarge of his duty 
and for failure to produce books and records .—Any person who — 
(a) obstructs any member authorised by the Chairman in writing or any officer or other employee 
of the Authority authorised  in this behalf by the Central Government or by the Authority, in the 
exercise of any power conferred, or in the discharge of any duty impo sed on him by or under this Act ; 
or 
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record fails to p roduce such book 
or record when required to do so by or under this Act,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
24. Other penalties .—Whoever contra venes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of 
the provisions of this Act or of any rules made hereunder other than the provisions, the punishment for the 
contravention wh ereof has been provided for in s ections 19, 22 and 23, shall be punish able with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which may 
extend to fifty rupees for every day during  which such contravention continues after conviction for the 
first such contravention.  
25. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 11 
 to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company shall be d eemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed w ithout his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offe nce has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guil ty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or o ther association of individuals ; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in t he firm.  
26. Jurisdiction of court .—No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of 
the first class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
27. Previous sanction of the Central Government .—No prosecution for any offence punishable 
under this Act shall be instituted except with previous sanction of the Central Government.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie agains t the Central Government, or the Authority or any committee appointed by it, or any member of 
the Authority  or such committee, or any officer  or other employee of the Central Government or of the 
Authority or any other person authorised by the Central Gove rnment or the Authority, for anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done under t his Act or the rules made there under.  
29. Power to delegate .—The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exerc isable by it under this Act (not being the power to make rules under        
section 32) may also be exercised in such cases and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified 
in the order, by such officer or authority as may be specified therein.  
30. Suspension of operation of this Act .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that 
circumstances have arisen rendering it necessary that certain of the restrictions imposed by this Act 
should cease to be imposed or if it considers necessary or expedi ent so to do in the public interest, it may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, suspend or relax to such extent and either indefinitely or for such 
period as may be specified in the notification, the operation of all or any of the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has under sub -section ( 1) been suspended or 
relaxed indefinitely, such suspension or relaxation may, at any time while this Act remains in force, be 
removed by the Central Government by notification  in the Official Gazette.  
31. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
32. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government  may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the term of office of the members [other than the member referred to in clause ( b) of          
sub-section ( 4) of section 4 ], the manner of filling vacanci es among, and the procedure to b e followed 
in the discharge of their functions by the members, under sub -section ( 5) of section 4;  
(b) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which may be performed by the Chairman 
as the chief executive of the Authority under section 6;  12 
 (c) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which shall be per formed by the Secretary 
of the Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(d) the control and restrictions subject to which other officers and employees may be appointed 
by the Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 7;  
(e) the form in which and the time within which option m ay be given by the officers and 
employees of the Processed Foods Export Promotion Council under sub -section ( 3) of s ection 8;  
(f) payment of fees for the registration of exporters of Scheduled products under clause ( b) of        
sub-section ( 2) of section 10;  
(g) persons other than the owners from whom the collection of statistics in respect of any matter 
relating to Scheduled products may be made under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(h) the additional matters in res pect of which the Authority may undertake measures in the 
discharge of its functions under clause ( j) of sub -section ( 2) of s ection 10;  
1[(ha) the measures for registration and protection of the Intellectual Property rights under section 
10A;]  
(i) the form  and the manner of making application for registration and for cancellation of 
registration, the fee payable on such ap plication and the procedure to b e followed in granting and 
cancelling registration and the conditions gove rning such registration, under section 13;  
(j) the time at which and the manner in which an exporter shall furnish returns to the Authority 
under sub -section ( 1) of s ection 14;  
(k) the form in which the accounts of the Authority shall be maintained under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 18;  
(l) the  form and manner in which and the time at which the Authority shall furnish returns and 
statements to the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of s ection 21;  
(m) the  form in which and the date before which the Authority shall furnish to the Central 
Government the report of its activities and programme under sub -section ( 2) of section 21;  
(n) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed under this Act.  
33. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Authority may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions 
of th is Act and the rules made there under, to provide for  all matters for which provision is necessary or 
expedient for the purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the times and places at which meetings of the Authority or any committee thereof, shall be  
held and the procedure t o be followed thereat and the number of members which shall form a quorum 
at a meeting under sub -section ( 8) of s ection 4;  
(b) the method of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay and allowances of 
any of the officers and other employees of the Authority under sub -section ( 3) of s ection 7;  
(c) generally  for the efficient conduct of the affairs of the Authority.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, modify or rescind any 
regulation sanctioned by it and the regulation so modified or rescinded shall have effect only in suc h 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
rescission shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything done under the regulation before its 
modification or rescission.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 0 of 2009, s. 6 (w.e.f . 13-10-2008 ). 13 
 34. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, as  
the case may  be, or b oth Houses agree that the rule or regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, 
the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case 
may be;  so, however, that any such modification or annulmen t shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
1[35. Validation .—All things done, or, omitted to be done, and all actions or measures taken, or, not 
taken, during the period beginning on or after the  13th day of October, 2008 and ending immediately 
before the date of commencement of the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development 
Authority (Amendment) Act, 2009  (20 of 2009) , shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the 
provision s of this Act, as amended by the Agricultural and Processed Food Products Export Development 
Authority (Amendment) Act, 2009, be deemed to have been done, or, omitted to be done, or, taken, or, 
not taken, under the provisions of this Act, as amended by the  Agricultural and Processed Food Products 
Export Development Authority (Amendment) Act, 2009, as if such provisions were in force at the time 
such things were done or omitted to be done and actions or measures taken or not taken during the said 
period.]  
  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 0 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e.f. 13 -10-2008 ). 14 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE ] 
[See section 2( i)] 
1. Fruits, vegetables and their products.  
2. Meat and meat products.  
3. Poultry and poultry products.  
4. Dairy products.  
5. Confectionary, biscuits and bakery products.  
6. Honey, jaggery and sugar products.  
7. Cocoa and its products, chocolates of all kinds.  
8. Alcoholic and non -alcoholic beverages.  
9. Cereal products.  
10. Cashewnuts, groundnuts, peanuts and walnuts.  
11. Pickles, chutneys and papads.  
12. Guar Gum.  
13. Floriculture and floriculture products.  
14. Herbal and medicinal plants.  
 
  
                                                           
1. The Schedule numbered as the First Schedule by Act 20 of 2009, s. 8 (w.e.f. 13 -10-2008).  15 
 1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( j)] 
Basmati rise .] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2009,  s. 8 (w.e.f. 13 -10-2008 ). 
--------------------------The Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS ACT, 1986  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Bureau of Indian Standards.  
4. Constitution of Executive Committee.  
5. Constitution of the Advisory Committees and other committees.  
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Bureau, Executive Committee, etc.  
7. Director -General of the Bureau.  
8. Officers and employees of the Bureau.  
CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF ASSESTS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF THE INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTIO N TO                                   
THE BUREAU  
9. Transfer of  assets, liabilities and employees of Indian Standards Institution.  
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BUREAU  
10. Functions of the Bureau.  
11. Prohibition of improper use of Standard Mark.  
12. Prohibition of use of certain names, etc.  
13. Prohibition o f registration in certain cases.  
14. Compulsory use of Standard Mark for articles and processes to certain scheduled industries.  
CHAPTER V  
LICENCE  
15. Grant of licence.  
16. Appeal.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
17. Grants and loans by the Central Government.  
18. Fund.  
19. Borrowing powers of the Bureau.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Budget.  
21. Annual report . 
22. Accounts and audit.  
23. Annual report to be laid before Parliament.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
25. Inspecting officer.  
26. Power to search and seizure.  
27. Delegation.  
28. Power to obtain information.  
29. Savings.  
30. Certain matters to be kept confidential.  
31. Members, officers and employees of the Bureau to be public servants.  
32. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
33. Penalty for improper use of Standard Mark, etc.  
34. Cognizance of offenses by courts.  
35. Offences by companies.  
36. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Bureau.  
37. Power to make rules.  
38. Power to make re gulations . 
39. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
40. Act not to affect operation of certain Acts.  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  
42. Repeal and saving.  
  3 
 THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 63 OF 1986  
[23rd December , 1986 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a  Bureau for the harmonious development of the 
activities of standardisation, marking and quality certification of goods and for matters 
connected therewith  or incidental  thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Bureau of Indian 
Standards Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this  Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “article” means (as respects standardisation  and marking) any substance, artificial or natural, 
or partly artificial or partly na tural, whether raw or partly or wholly processed or manufactured;  
(b) “Bureau” means the Bureau of Indian Standards established under section 3;  
(c) “consumer ” means a con sumer of any article or process;  
(d) “covering” includes any stopper, cask, bottle, vessel, box, crate, cover, capsule, case, frame, 
wrapper or other container;  
(e) “Executive Committee ” means the Executive Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(f) “Fund” means the F und constituted under section 18;  
(g) “Indian Standard ” means the standard (including any tentative or provisional standard) 
established and published by the Bureau, in relation to any article or process indicative of the q uality 
and specification of such a rticle or process and includes — 
(i) any standard recognis ed by the Bureau under clause ( b) of section 10; and  
(ii) any standard establ ished and published, or recognis ed, by the Indian Standards Institution 
and which is in force immediately before the date of establishment of the Bureau;  
(h) “Indian Standards Institution ” means the Indian Standards Institution set up under the 
Resolution of the Government of India in the late Department of Industries and Supplies No. 1 Std. 
(4)/45, dated the  3rd day of September, 1946, and registered under the Societies Registration Act,  
1860 (21 of 1860);  
(i) “inspecting officer ” means an inspecting officer appointed under section 25;  
(j) “licence” means a licence  granted under section 15 to use the India n Standards Certification 
Mark i n relation to any article or process which conforms to the Indian Standard and includes any 
licence granted under the Indian Standards Institution (Certification Marks) Act, 1952 (36  of 1952) 
and is in force immediately before the date of establishment of the Bureau;  
(k) “manufacturer ” means the manufacturer of any article or process;  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 272(E), dated 31 st March, 1987, see Gazett e of India, Extraordinary,  Part II,        
sec. 3(ii). 4 
 (l) “mark” includes a device, brand, heading, label, ticket, pictorial rep resentation, name,  
signatur e, word, letter or numeral or any combination thereof;  
(m) “member” means a member of the Bureau;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) “process” includes any practice, treatment and mode of manufacture of any article;  
(p) “registering authority ” means any authority competent unde r any law for the time being in 
force to register any company, firm or other body of persons, or any trade mark or design, or to grant 
a patent;  
(q) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Bureau  under this Act;  
(r) “rules” means rules made by the Central Government under this Act;  
(s) “specification ” means a description of an article or process as far as practicable by reference to 
its nature, quality, strength, purity, composition, quantity, dim ensions, weight, grade, durability, 
origin, age, material, mode of manufacture or other characteristics to distinguish it from any other 
article or process;  
(t) “Standard Mark ” means the Bureau of Indian Standards Certification Mark specified by the 
Bureau  to represent a particular Indian Standard ; and also includes any Indian Standards Institution 
Certification Mark specified by the Indian Standards Institution;  
(u) “trade mark ” means a mark used or proposed to be used in relation to goods for the purpose of 
indicating, or so as to  indicate, a connection in the course of trade between the goods and some 
person having the right, either as proprietor or as registered user, to use t he mark, whether with or 
without any indication of the identity of that person;  
(v) an article is said to be marked with a Standard Mark if the article itself is marked with a 
Standard Mark or any covering containing, or label attached to, such article is so marked.  
CHAPTE R II 
THE BUREAU OF INDIAN STANDARDS  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Bureau of Indian Standards .—(1) With effect from such 
date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , appoint in this behalf, there  
shall be established for the purpose s of this Act, a Bureau, to  be called the Bureau of  Indian Standards.  
(2) The Bureau shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall b y the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Bureau shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of the Central Government having 
administrative control of the Bureau who shall be  ex officio  President of the Bureau;  
(b) the Minister of State or a Deputy Minister, if any, in the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government having adminis trative control of the Bureau who shall be  ex officio  Vice -President of the 
Bureau, and where there is no such Minister of State or Deputy Minister, such person as may be 
nominated by the Central Government to be the Vice -President of the Bureau;  
(c) the S ecretary to the Government of India in charge of the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government having administrative control of the Bureau  ex officio ; 
(d) the Director -General of the Bureau  ex officio ; 
(e) such number of other persons, to represent the Government, industry, scien tific and research 
institutions  and other interests, as may be  prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government.  5 
 (4) The term of office of the members referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) and the manner of 
filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in t he discharge of their functions  by, the 
members, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Bureau may associate with itself, in such manner and  for such purposes as may be prescribed, 
any pers ons whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the provisions of this Act 
and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the Bureau relevant to the 
purposes for which he has been associated but sha ll not have the right to vote.  
4. Constitution of Executive Committee .—(1) The Bureau may, with the prior approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Executive Committee which 
shall consist of  the following me mbers, namely: — 
(a) Director -General of the Bureau, who shall be its  ex officio  Chairman;  
(b) such number of members, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Executive Committee  constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall perform, exe rcise and discharge 
such of the  functions, powers and duties of the Bureau as may be delegated to it by the Bureau.  
5. Constitution of the Advisory Committees and other committees .—(1) Subject  to any 
regulations made in this behalf, the Bureau may, from time to time and as and when it is considered 
necessary, constitute the following Advisory Committees for the efficient disc harge of its functions, 
namely:— 
(a) Financial Committee;  
(b) Certification Advisory Committee;  
(c) Standards Advisory Committee;  
(d) Laboratory Advisory Committee;  
(e) Planning and Development Advisory Committees;  
(f) such number of other committees as may be determined by regulations.  
(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairman and such other members as may be 
determined by regulations.  
(3) Without prej udice to the powers contained in sub -section ( 1), the Bureau may constitute, as and 
when considered necessary, such number of technical committees of experts for the formulation of 
standards in respect of articles or processes.  
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Bureau , Execut ive Committee, etc. —No act or 
proceedings of the Bureau, the Executive Committee or any Committee constituted under section 5 shall 
be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitutio n of the Bureau or the Committee; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Bureau or Committee; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Bureau or the Committee not affecting the merits of 
the case.  
7. Director -General of the Bureau .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint a Director -General 
of the Bureau.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Director -General of the Bureau shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) Subject to the general superint endence and cont rol of the Bureau, the Director -General of the 
Bureau shall be the Chief Executive Authority of the Bureau.  
(4) The Director -General of the Bureau shall exercise and discharge such of the powers and duties of 
the Bureau as may be determined  by regulations.  6 
 8. Officers and employees of the Bureau .—(1) The Bureau may appoint such other officers and 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of officers and employees of the Bureau appointed under   
sub-section ( 1) shall be such as may be determined by regulations.  
CHAPTER III  
TRAN SFER OF ASSESTS, LIABILITIES, ETC.,  OF THE INDIAN STANDARDS INSTITUTION TO                                
THE BUREAU  
9. Transfer of  assets, liabilities and employees of Indian Standards Institution .—(1) On and from 
the date of establishment of the  Bureau,— 
(a) any reference to the Indian Standards Institution in any law other than  this Act or in any 
contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Bureau;  
(b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or belonging to, the Indian Standards 
Institution shall vest in the Bureau;  
(c) all the rights and liab ilities of the Indian Standards Institution shall be transferred to, and be 
the rights and liabilities of, the Bureau;  
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( c), all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, 
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Indian 
Standards Institution immediately before that date, for or in connection with the purposes of the said 
Institution shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into , or engaged to be done by, with or for, 
the Bureau;  
(e) all sums of money due to the Indian Standards Institution immediately before that date shall 
be deemed to be due to the Bureau;  
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Indian Standards Institution immediately before that date may be continued or may be 
instituted by or against the Bureau; and  
(g) every employee holding any office under the Indian Standards Institution immediately before 
that date shall hold his office in the Bureau by the same tenure and upon the same terms and 
conditions of service as respects remunera tion, leave, provident fund, retirement or other termin al 
benefits as he would have held such office if the Bureau had not been established and shall continue 
to do so as an employee of the Bureau or until the expiry of a period of six months from that date if 
such employee opts not to be the employee of the B ureau within such period.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947)  or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the absorption of any employee by the Bureau in its regular service 
under  this section shall  not entitle  such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law and no 
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BUREAU  
10. Functions of the Bureau .—(1) The Bureau may exercise such powers and perform such duties as 
may be assigned to it by or under this Act and, in particular, su ch powers include the power to — 
(a) establish, publish and promote in such manner as may be prescribed the Indian Standard, in 
relation to any article or process;  
(b) recognis e as an Indian Standard, in such manner as may be prescribed, any standard 
established by any other Institution in India or elsewhere, in relation to any article or process;  
(c) specify a Standard Mark to be called the Burea u of Indian Standards Certification Mark which 
shall be of such design and contain such particulars as may be prescribed to represent a particular 
Indian Standard;  7 
 (d) grant, renew, suspend or cancel a licence for the use of the Standard Mark;  
(e) levy  fees for the grant or renewal of any licence;  
(f) make such inspection and take such samples of any material or substance as may be necessary 
to see whether any article or process in relation to which the Standard Mark has been used conforms 
to the Indian  Standard or whether the Standard Mark has been improperly used in relation to any 
article or process with or without a licence;  
(g) seek recognition of the Bureau and of the Indian Standards outside India on such terms and 
conditions as may be mutually ag reed upon by the Bureau with any corresponding inst itution or 
organis ation in any country;  
(h) establish, maintain and recognis e laboratories for the purpose s of standardis ation and quality 
control and for such other purposes as may be prescribed;  
(i) undertake research for the formulation of Indian Standards in the interests of consumers and 
manufacturers;  
(j) recognis e any institution in India or outside wh ich is engaged in the standardis ation of any 
article or process or the improvement of the quali ty of any article or process;  
(k) provide services to manufacturers and consumers of articles or processes on such terms and 
conditions as may be mutually agreed upon;  
(l) appoint agents in India or outside India for the inspection, testing and such other purposes as 
may be prescribed;  
(m) establish branches, offices or agencies in India or outside;  
(n)  inspect any article or process, at such times and at such places as may be prescribed in 
relation to which the Standard Mark is used or which is required to conform to the Indian Standard by 
this Act or under any other law irrespective of whether such article or process is in India or is brought 
or intended to be brought into India from a place outside India;  
(o) co-ordinate activities of any manufacturer o r association of manufacturers or consumers 
engag ed in standardis ation and in the improvement of the quality of any article or process or in the 
implementation of any quality control activities;  
(p) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Bureau shall perform its functions under this section in accordance with, and subject to, such 
rules as may be made by the Central Government.  
11. Prohibition of improper use of Standard Mark .—(1) No person shall use, in relation to any 
article or proces s, or in the title of any patent, or in any trade mark or design the Standard Mark or any 
colourable imitation thereof, except under a licence.  
(2) No person shall, notwithstanding that he has been granted a licence, use in relation to any article 
or proce ss the Standard Mark or any colourable imitation thereof unless such article or process conforms 
to the Indian Standard.  
12. Prohibition of use of certain names, etc .—No person shall, except in such cases and under such 
conditions as may be prescribed, use  without the pre vious permission of the Bureau, — 
(a) any name which so nearly resembles the name of the Bureau as to deceive or likely to deceive 
the public or which contains the expression “Indian Standard ” or any abbreviation thereof; or  
(b) any  mark or trade mark in relation to any article or process containing the expressions “Indian 
Standard” or “Indian Standard Specification ” or any abbreviation of such expression s. 
13. Prohibition of registration in certain cases .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything con tained in any 
law for the time being in force, no registering authority shall — 
(a) register any company, firm s other body of persons which bears any name or mark; or  8 
 (b) register a trade mark or design which bears any name or mark; or  
(c) grant a patent, in respect of an invention, which bears a title containing any name or mark,  
if the use of such name or mark is in contravention of section 11 or section 12.  
(2) If any question arises before a registering authority whether the use of any name or mark is in 
contravention of section 11 or section 12, the registering authority may refer the question to the Central 
Government whose decision thereon shall be final.  
14. Compulsory use of Standard Mark for articles and processes to certain schedu led 
industries .—If the Central Government, after consulting the Bureau, is of the opinion that it is necessary 
or expedient so to do, in the public interest, it may, by order pub lished in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) notify any article or process of any sche duled industry which shall conform to the Indian 
Standard; and  
(b) direct the use of the Standard Mark under a licence as compulsory on such article or process.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “scheduled industry ” shall have the 
meaning assigned to it in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
CHAPTER V  
LICENCE  
15. Grant of licence .—(1) The Bureau may, by order, grant, renew, suspend or cancel a licence  in 
such manner as may be determined by regulations.  
(2) The grant or renewal of the licence under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to such conditions and 
on payment of such fees as may be determined by regulations.  
16. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 15 may pre fer an appeal to 
the Central Government within such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefore:  
Provided that an appeal may be a dmitted after the expiry of the period prescribed th erefor  if the 
appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
the prescribed period.  
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant sh all be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
17. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Bureau grants and loans of such 
sums of money as that Government may consider necessary.  
18. Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Bureau of Indian Standards Fund 
and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any  grants and loans made to the Bureau by the Central Government under section 17;  
(b) all fees and charges received by the Bureau under this Act;  
(c) all sums received by the Bureau from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
  9 
 (2) The Fu nd shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, Director -General, officers and 
other employees of the Bureau;  
(b) expenses of the Bureau in the discharge of its functions under section 10;  
(c) expenses on objects and for  purposes authorised by this Act.  
19. Borrowing powers of the Bureau .—(1) The Bureau may, with the consent of the Central 
Government or in accordance with the terms of any general or special authority given to it by the Central 
Government, borrow money from any source as it may deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions 
under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may guarantee in such manner as it thinks fit, the repayment of the 
principal and the payment of interest ther eon with respect to the loans borrowed by the Bureau under  
sub-section ( 1). 
20. Budget .—The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each  financial year as may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Bureau and forward the same to the Central Government.  
21. Annual report .—The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year 
as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
22. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Bureau shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form a s may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Bureau shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him an d any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Bureau to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of  the Bureau shall have the same rights and privileges and the authority  in 
connection with such audit a s the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in connection with the 
audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to deman d the production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the 
Bureau.  
(4) The accounts of the Bureau as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointe d by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
23. Annual report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government shall cause the annual 
report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Bureau shall, in the exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions 
under this Act , be bound by such directions on  questions of policy as the Central Government may give in 
writing to it from time to time:  
Provided  that the Bureau shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  
  10 
 25. Inspecting officer .—(1) The Bureau may appoint as many inspecting officers as may be 
necessary for the purpose of inspecting whether any article or process in relation to which the Standard 
Mark has been used conforms to the Indian Standard or whether the Standard Mark has been p roperly 
used in relation to any article or process with or without licence, and for the purpose of performing such 
other functions as may be assigned to them.  
(2) Subject to any rules made under this Act, an inspecti ng officer shall have power to — 
(a) insp ect any operation carried on in connection with any article or process in relation to which 
the Standard Mark has been used; and  
(b) take samples of any article or of any material or substances used in any article or process, in 
relation to which the Stand ard Mark has been used.  
(3) Every inspecting officer shall be furnished by the Bureau with a certificate of appointment  as an 
inspecting officer and the certificate shall, on demand, be produced by the inspecting officer.  
26. Power to search and seizure .—(1) If the inspecting officer has reason to believe that any article 
or process in relation to which the contravention of section 11 or section 12 has taken place are secreted 
in any place, premises or vehicles, he may enter into and search such place, prem ises or vehicle for such 
article or process.  
(2) Where, as a result of any search made under sub -section ( 1), any article or process has been found 
in relation to which contravention of section 11 or section 12 has taken place, he may seize such article 
and other things which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act:  
Provided  that where it is not practicable to seize any such article or thing, the inspecting officer may 
serve on the owner an order that he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with, the article or 
things except with the previous permission of the inspecting officer.  
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may b e, apply to every search or seizure made under this section.  
27. Delegation .—The Bureau may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member, 
member of the Executive Committee, officer of the Bureau or any other person subject to such conditions, 
if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the 
powers under section 38) as it may deem necessary.  
28. Power to obtain information .—Every licensee  shall supply the Bureau with such informati on, 
and with such samples of any material or substance used in relation to any article or process, as the 
Bureau may require.  
29. Savings .—Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding which 
might, apart from this Act, be brought against him.  
30. Certain matters to be kept confidential .—Any information  obtained by an inspecting officer or 
the Bureau from any statement made or information supplied or any evidence given or from inspection 
made under the provisions of this Act  shall be treated as confidential:  
Provided  that nothing in this section shall apply to the disclosure of any information for the purpose 
of prosecution under this Act.  
31. Members, officers and employees of the Bureau to be public servants .—All members, o fficers 
and other employees of the  Bureau shall be deemed, when acting or  purporting to act in pursuance of any of the 
provisions of this Act, to be public servants  within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal             
Code (45 of 1860).  
32. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer of the Government or any member, officer or other employee of 
the Bureau for anything which is in good faith done or in tended to be done under this Act or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder.  11 
 33. Penalty for improper use of Standard Mark, etc .—(1) Any person who contravenes the 
provisions of section 11, or section 12 or section 14 or section 15 shall be punishable wit h imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with 
both.  
(2) Any court trying a contravention under sub -section ( 1) may direct that any property in respect of 
which the contravention has t aken place shall be forfeited to the Bureau.  
34. Cognizance of offenc es by courts .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
punishable under this Act , save on a complaint made by or under the authority of the Government or 
Bureau or by any officer empowered in this behalf by the Government or the Bureau, or any consumer or 
any association recognised in this behalf by the Central or State Government.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
specially empowered in this behalf shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
35. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and sha ll be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge  or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Not withstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager , secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that of fence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of   
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to  a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
36. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Bureau .—All orders and decisions of, 
and all other instruments issued by, the Bureau shall be authenticated by the signature of such officer or 
officers as may be authorised by the Bureau in this behalf.  
37. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the number of members of the Bureau and the interest suc h members would represent under 
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(b) the term of office of the members of the Bureau, the manner of filling vacancies and the 
procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, the mem bers under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 3;  
(c) the manner in, and the purposes for, which the Bureau may associate with itself any person for 
assistance and advice under sub -section ( 5) of section 3;  
(d) the number of members of the Bureau who will be members of the Executive Committee 
under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(e) the terms and conditions of service of the Director -General of the Bureau under                  
sub-section ( 2) of section 7;  12 
 (f) the design and the particulars to represent a particular Indian Standard under clause ( c) of   
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(g) the purposes for which laboratories for the purposes of standardisation and quality control 
shall be established by the Bureau under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(h) the purposes for which agents may be ap pointed by the Bureau in India or outside India under 
clause ( l) of sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(i) the times and places at which any article or process may be inspected under clause ( n) of    
sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(j) the additional functions that may be performed by the Bureau under section 10;  
(k) the cases in which,  and the  conditions subject to which , exemption may be granted under 
section 12;  
(l) the form in which, and the time at which, the Bureau shall prepare its budget under section 20 
and its annual report under section 21;  
(m) the manner in which the accounts of the Bureau shall be maintained under section 22;  
(n) the conditions subject to which  inspecting officer may exercise his powers under                
sub-section ( 2) of section 25;  
(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by rules.  
38. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Executive Committee may, with the previ ous approval of 
the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act 
and the rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and  without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the members of the Advisory Committees constituted under section 5;  
(b) the powers and duties that may be exerci sed and discharged by the Director -General of the 
Bureau under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  
(c) the terms and conditions of service of officers and employees of the Bureau under              
sub-section (2) of section 8;  
(d) the manner of grant, renewal, suspension or cancellation of licence under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 15;  
(e) the conditions subject to which a licence may be granted or renewe d and the fees payable 
therefor  under sub -section ( 2) of section 15.  
39. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in  two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anythin g previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
40. Act not to affect operation of certain Acts .—Nothing in this Act shall affect the operat ion of the 
Agricultural Produce  (Grading and Marking) Act, 1937 (1 of 1937) or the Drugs and Cosmetics           
Act, 1940 (23 of 1940), or any other law , for the time being in force,  which deals with any standardis ation 
or quality  control of any article or process.  13 
 41. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided  that no order shall be made under t his section after the expiry of five years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
42. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Indian Standards Institu tion (Certification Marks) Act,              
1952 (36 of 1952), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have done or 
taken (including any rule, regulation, notification, scheme, specific ation, Indian Standard, Standard Mark, 
inspection order or notice made, issued or adopted, or any appointment, or declaration made or any 
licence, permission, authorisation or exemp tion granted or any document or instrument executed or 
direction given or any proceedings taken or any penalty or fine imposed) under the Act hereby repealed 
shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or 
taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(3) The men tion of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of 
repeal.  
 
--------------------------The Child and Adolescent (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION)  ACT, 1986  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
PART II 
PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CHILDREN IN CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS AND PROCESSES  
3. Prohibition of employment of children in  any occupation  and process . 
3A. Prohibition of employment of adolescents in certain hazardous occupations and process es. 
4. Power to amend the Schedule.  
5. Child Labour Technical Advisory Committee.  
PART III  
REGULATION OF CONDITIONS OF WORK OF CHILDREN  
6. Application of Part.  
7. Hours and period of work.  
8. Weekly holidays.  
9. Notice to Inspector.  
10. Disputes as to age.  
11. Maintenance of register.  
12. Display of notice containing abstract of sections 3 and 14.  
13. Health and safety.  
PART IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. Penalties.  
14A. Offences to be Congnizable . 
14B. Child and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund.  
14C. Rehabilitation of rescued child or adolescent . 
14D. Compounding of offences . 
15. Modified application of certain laws in relation to pe nalties.  
16. Procedure relating to offences.  
17. Appointment of Inspectors . 
17A. District Magistrate to implement the provisions.  
17B. Inspection and monitoring.  
18. Power to make rules.  
19. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament or State legislature.  
20. Certain other provisions of law not barred.  
21. Power to remove difficulties . 
22. Repeal and savings.  
23 to 26 [ Repealed .] 
THE SCHEDULE.  2 
 THE CHILD AND ADOLESCENT LABOUR (PROHIB ITION AND REGULATION) ACT, 
1986  
ACT NO. 61 OF 1986  
[23rd December , 1986.]  
1[An Act to prohibit the engagement of children in  all occupations and to prohibit the 
engagement of adolescents in hazardous occupations and processes and the matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called 2[the Child and Adolescent 
Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986 ].  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) The provisions of this Act, other than Part III, shall come into force at once, and Part III shall 
come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint, and di fferent dates may be appointed for different States and for different classes of 
establishments.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
4[(ia)] “appropriate Government ” means, in relation to an establishment under the control of the 
Central Government or a railway administration or a major port or a mine or oilfield, the Central 
Government, and in all othe r cases, the State Government;  
5[(i) “adolescent” means a person w ho has completed his fourteenth year of age but has not 
completed his eighteenth year;]  
6[(ii) “child ” means a person who has not comple ted his fourteenth year of age  or such age as may 
be specified in the Right of Children to Free and Compulsory Education Act, 2009  (35 of 2009) , 
whichever is more ;] 
(iii) “day” means a period of twenty -four hours beginning at mid -night;  
(iv) “establishment ” includes a shop, commercial establishment, workshop, farm, residential 
hotel, restaurant, eating house, theatre or other place of pub lic amusement or entertainment;  
(v) “family ”, in relation to an occupier, means the individual, the wife or husband, as the case 
may be, of such indivi dual, and their children, brothe r or sister of such individual;  
(vi) “occupier ”, in relation to an establishment or a workshop, means the person who has the 
ultimate control over the affairs of  the establishment or workshop;  
(vii) “port authority ” means an y authority administe ring a port;  
(viii) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under section 18;  
(ix) “week ” means a period of seven days beginning at midnight on Saturday night or such other 
night as may be approved in writing for a pa rticular area by the Inspector;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 2, for the long title (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “the Child Labour (Prohibition and Regulation) Act, 1986  (61 of 1986) ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. 26th May, 1993, vide notification No . S.O. 333(E), dated 26th March, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,               
sec. 3( ii). 
4. Clause ( i) renumbered as clause ( ia) thereof by Act 35 of 2016, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e. f 1-9-2016).  
6. Subs. by s . 4, ibid., for clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  3 
 (x) “workshop ” means any premises (including the precincts thereof) wherein any indus trial 
process is carried on, but does not include any premises to which the provisions of section 67 of the 
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), for the tim e being, apply.  
PART II 
PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF CHILDREN IN CERTAIN OCCUPATIONS AND PROCESSES  
1[3. Prohibition of employment of children in any occupation  and process .—(1) No child shall be 
employed or permitted to work in any occupation  or process . 
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply where the child,  — 
(a) helps his family or family enterprise , which is other than any hazardous occupations or 
processes set forth in the Schedule, after his s chool hours or during vacations;  
(b) works as an arti st in an audio -visual entertainment industry, including advertisement, films, 
television serials or any such other entertainment or sports activities except the circus, subject to such 
conditions and safe ty measures, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no su ch work under this clause shall effect the school education of the child. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the expression,  
(a) “family” in relation to a child, means his mother, father,  brother, sister an d father’s sister 
and brother and mother’s sister and brother;  
(b) “family enterprises” means any work, profession, manufacture or business which is 
performed by the members of the family with the engagement of other persons;  
(c) “artist” means  a child who performs or practices any work as a hobby or profession  
directly involving him as an actor, singer, sports person or in such other activity as may be 
prescribed relating to the entertainment or sports activities falling under clause ( b) of                     
sub-section ( 2).] 
2[3A. Prohibition of employment of adolescents in certain hazardous occupations and             
process es.—No adolescent shall be employed or permitted to work in any of the hazardous occupations 
or processes set forth in the Schedule:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, specify the nature of the non -hazardous 
work to which an adolescent may be permitted to work under this Act.]  
4. Power to amend the Schedule. —The Central Government, after giving by notification in the 
Official Gazette, not less than three months ’ notice of its intention so to do, may, by like notification, 
3[add to, or, omit from,  the Schedule  any hazardous occupation or process ] and thereupon the Schedule 
shall be deemed to have be en amended accordingly.  
5. 4[Technical Advisory Committee ].—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, constitute an advisory committee to be called the 4[Technical Advisory Committee ] 
(hereafter in this section referred to as the Committee) to advise the Central Government for the purpose 
of addition of occupations and processes  to the Schedule.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of a Chairman and such other members not exceeding ten, as may be 
appoi nted by the Central Government.  
(3) The Committee shall meet as often as it may consider necessary and shall have power to regulat e 
its own procedure.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 5, for section 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f 1 -9-2016). 
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “ add any occupation or process to the Schedule ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “Child Labour Technical Advisory Committee” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  4 
 (4) The Committee may, if it deems it necessary so to do, constitute one or more sub -committe es and 
may appoint to any such sub -committee, whether generally or for the consideration of any particular 
matter, any person who is not a member of the Committee.  
(5) The term of office  of, the manner of filling casual vacancies in the office of, and the  allowances, if 
any, payable to, the Chairman and other members of the Committee, and the conditions and restrictions 
subject to which the Committee may appoint any person who is not a member of the Committee  as a 
member of any of its sub -committees shall be such as may be prescribed.  
PART III  
REGULATION OF CONDITIONS OF WORK OF 1[ADOLESCENTS]  
6. Application of Part .—The provisions of this Part shall apply to an establishment or a class of 
establishments in which none of the occupations or processes referred to in 2[section 3 A] is carried on.  
7. Hours and period of work .—(1) No 3[adolescent]  shall be required or permitted to work in any 
establishment in excess of such number of hours as may be prescribed for such establishm ent or class of 
establishments.  
(2) The period of work on each day shall be so fixed that no period shall exceed three ho urs and that 
no 3[adolescent]  shall work for more than three hours before he has had an interval for rest for at least one 
hour.  
(3) The period of work of a 3[adolescent]  shall be so arranged that inclusive of his interval for rest, 
under sub -section ( 2), it shall not be spread over more than six hours, including the time spent in waiting 
for work on any day.  
(4) No 3[adolescent]  shall be permitted or required t o work between 7 p.  m and 8 a.m.  
(5) No 3[adolescent] shall be required  or permitted to work ove rtime.  
(6) No 3[adolescent]  shall be required or permitted to work in any establishment on any day on which 
he has already been working in another establishment.  
8. Weekly holidays. —Every 4[adolescent]  employed in an establishment shall be allowed in each 
week, a holiday of one whole day, which day shall be specified by the occupier in a notice permanently 
exhibited in a conspicuous place in the establishment and the day so specified shall not be altere d by the 
occupier more than once in three months.  
9. Notice to Inspector .—(1) Every occupier in relation to an establishment in which a 5[adolescent]  
was employed or permitted to work immediately before the date of commencement of this Act in relation 
to such establishment shall, within a period of thirty days from such commence ment, send to the 
Inspector within whose local limits the establishment is situated, a written notice containing the f ollowing 
particulars, namely: — 
(a) the name and situation of the  establishment;  
(b) the name of the person in actual m anagement of the establishment;  
(c) the address to which communications relating to the establishment should be sent; and  
(d) the nature of the occupation or process carried on in the establishment.  
(2) Every occupier, in relation to an establishment, who employs, or permits to work, any 
5[adolescent]  after the date of commencement of this Act in relation to such establishment, shall, within a 
period of thirty days from the date of such employment, sen d to the Inspector within whose local limits 
the establishment is situated, a written notice containing the particulars as are mentioned in                           
sub-section ( 1). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 9, for “CHILDREN” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 10,  ibid.,  for “section 3” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3.  Subs. by s. 11, ibid.,  for “ch ild” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 12,  ibid.,  for “child” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 13,  ibid.,  for “child” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
 5 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), “date of comme ncement of this Act, in 
relation to an establishment ” means the date of bringing into force of this Act in relation to such 
establishment.  
(3) Nothing in sections 7,  8 and 9 shall apply to any establishment wherein any process is carried on 
by the occupier  with the aid of his family or to any school established by, or receiving assistance or 
recognition from, Government.  
10. Disputes as to age. —If any question arises between an Inspector and an occupier as to the age of 
any 1[adolescent]  who is employed or is permitted to work by him in an establishment, the question shall, 
in the absence of a certificate as to the age of such 1[adolescent]  granted by the prescribed medical 
authority, be referred by the Inspector for decision to the prescribed medical author ity. 
11. Maintenance of register .—There shall be maintained by every occupier in respect of 
2[adolescent]  employed or permitted to work in any establishment, a register to be available for inspection 
by an Inspector at all times during working hours or when work is being carried on in a ny such 
establishment, showing — 
(a) the name and date of birth of every 3[adolescent]  so employed or permitted to work;  
(b) hours and periods of work of any such 3[adolescent]  and the intervals of rest to which he is 
entitled;  
(c) the nature  of work of any such 3[adolescent] ; and  
(d) such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
12. Display of notice containing  abstract of 4[sections 3 A and 14 ].—Every railway administration, 
every port authority and every occupier shall cause to be displayed in a conspicuous and accessible place 
at every station on its railway or within the limits  of a port or at the place of work, as the case may be, a 
notice in the local language and in the English language containing an abstract of 4[sections 3 A and 14 ]. 
13. Health and safety. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for the health and safety of the 5[adolescen t] employed or permitted to work in any 
establishment or class of establishments.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of t he foregoing provisions, the said rules may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) cleanliness in the place of work  and its freedom from nuisance;  
(b) disposal of wastes and effluents;  
(c) ventilat ion and temperature;  
(d) dust  and fume;  
(e) artificial humidification;  
(f) lighting;  
(g) drinking water;  
(h) latrine and urinals;  
(i) spittoons;  
(j) fencing of machinery;  
(k) work at or near machinery in motion;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s . 14, for “child” (w.e.f 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s . 15, ibid., for “children” (w.e.f  1-9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “child” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “section 3 and 14” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “children” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  6 
 (l) employment of 1[adolescent]  on dangerous mach ines; 
(m) instructions , training and supervision in relation to employment of 1[adolescent]  on dangerous 
machines;  
(n) device for cutting off power;  
(o) self -acting machines;  
(p) easing of new machinery;  
(q) floor, stairs and means of access;  
(r) pits, sumps, o penings in floors, etc.;  
(s) excessive weights;  
(t) protection of eyes;  
(u) explosive or inflammable dust, gas, etc.;  
(v) precautions in case of fire;  
(w) maintenance of buildings; and  
(x) safety of buildings and machinery.  
PART IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. Penalties .—2[(1) Whoever employs any child or permits any child to work in contravention of the 
provisions of section 3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to two years, or with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand 
rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that the parents or guardians of such children shall not be punished unless they permit such 
child for commercial purposes in contravention of the pro visions of section 3.  
(1A) Whoever employs any adolescent or permits any adolescent to work in contravention of the 
provisions of section 3A shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to tw o years or with fine which shall not be less than twenty thousand 
rupees but which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that the parents or guardians of such adolescent shall not be punished unless they permit 
such adolescent to work  in contravention of the provisions of section 3A.  
(1B) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and (1A) the parents or guardians of any 
child or adolescent referred to in section 3 or section 3A, shall not be liable for punishment, in case of the 
first offence .] 
3[(2) Whoever, having been convicted of an offence under section 3 or section 3A commits a like 
offence afterwards, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one 
year but which may extend to three years.  
(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the parents or guardian having been 
convicted of an offence under section 3 or section 3A, commits a like offence afterwards, he shall be 
punishable with a fine which may extend to te n thousand rupees .] 
(3) Whoever — 
4*   *  *   *   * 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 17, for “children” (w.e.f. 1-9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 18, ibid.,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) omitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  7 
  (d) fails to comply with or contravenes any other provisions of this Ac t or the rules made 
thereunder,  
shall  be punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to one month or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees or with both.  
1[14A. Offences to be Congnizable. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 197 4), any offence committed by an employer and punishable under section 3 or 
section 3A shall be cognizable.  
14B. Child and Adolescent Labour Rehabilitation Fund. —(1) The appropriate Government shall 
constitute a Fund in every district or for two or more districts to be called the Child and Adolescent 
Labour Rehabilitation Fund to which the amount of the fine realized from the employer of the child and 
adolescent, wit hin the jurisdiction of such district o r districts, shall be credited.  
(2) The appropriate Government shall credit an amount of fifteen thousand rupees to the Fund for 
each child or adolescent for whom the fine amount has been credited under sub -section ( 1).  
(3) The amount credited to the Fund under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be deposited in such banks 
or invested in such manner, as the appropriate Gov ernment may decide.  
(4) The amount deposited or invested, as the case may be under sub -section ( 3), an d the interest 
accrued on it, shall be paid to the child or adolescent in whose favour such amount is credited, in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
Expla nation. —For the purposes of appropriate Government, the Central Government shall include the 
Administ rator or the Lieutenant Governor of a Union territory under article 239A of the Constitution.  
14C. Rehabilitation of rescued child or adolescent .—The child or adolescent, who is employed in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act and rescued, shall be  rehabilitated in accordance with the laws 
for the time being in force.  
14D. Compounding of offence s.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , the District Magistrate may, on the application of the accused person, 
compound any offence committed for the first time by him, under sub -section ( 3) of section 14 or any 
offence committed by an accused person being parent or a guardian, in such manner and on payment of 
such amount to the appropriate Governme nt, as may be prescribed.  
(2) If the accused fails to pay such amount for composition of the offence, then, the proceedings shall 
be continued against such person in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(3) Where any offence is compounded before the  institution of any prosecution, no prosecution shall 
be instituted in relation to such offence, against the offender in relation to whom the offence is so 
compounded.  
(4) Where the composition of any offence is made after the institution of any prosecutio n, such 
composition shall be brought in writing, to the notice of the Court in which the prosecution is pending and 
on the approval of the composition of the offence being given, the person against whom the offence is so 
compounded, shall be discharged .] 
15. Modified application of certain laws in relation to penalties. —(1) Where any person is found 
guilty and convicted of cont ravention of any of the provisions mentioned in sub -section ( 2), he shall be 
liable to penalties as provided in sub -sections ( 1) and  (2) of section 14 of this Act and not under the Acts 
in which those provisions are contained.  
(2) The provisions referred to in sub -section ( 1) are the provisions mentioned below: — 
(a) section 67 of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);  
(b) section 40 of  the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 195 2); 
(c) section 109 of the Merchant Shipp ing Act, 1958 (44 of 1958); and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 19 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  8 
 (d) section 21 of the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (27 of 1961).  
16. Procedure relating to offences .—(1) Any  person, police officer or Inspector may file a 
complaint of the commission of an offence under this Act in any c ourt of competent jurisdiction.  
(2) Every certificate as to the age of a child which has been granted by a prescribed medical authority 
shall, for the purposes of this Act, be conclusive evidence as to the age o f the child to whom it relates.  
(3) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence under this Act.  
17. Appointment of Inspe ctors .—The appropriate Government may appoint Inspectors for the 
purposes of securing compliance with the provisions of this Act and any Inspector so appointed shall be 
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
1[17A. District Magistrate to implement the provisions .—The appropriate Government may confer 
such powers and impose such duties on a District Magistrate as may be necessary, to ensure that the 
provisions of this Act are properly carried out and the Distr ict Magistrate may specify the officer, 
subordinate to him, who shall exercise all or any of the powers, and perform all or any of the duties, so 
conferred or imposed and the local limits within which such powers or duties shall be carried out by th e 
offic er as may be prescribed.  
17B. Inspection and monitoring .—The appropriate Government shall make or cause to be made 
periodic inspection of the places at which the employment of children is prohibited and hazardous 
occupations or processes are carried out at such intervals as it thinks fit, and monitor the issues,  relating to 
the provisions of this Act.]  
18. Power to make rules. —(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules for carrying into eff ect the 
provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
2[(a) the conditions and the safety measures under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) and other 
activities under clause ( b) to Explanation  of sub -section ( 2) of section 3; ] 
3[(b)] the term of office of, the manner of filling casual vacancies of, and the allowances payable 
to, the Chairman and members of the 4[Technical Advisory Committee ] and the conditions  and 
restrictions subject to which a non -member may be appointed to a sub -committee under                         
sub-section ( 5) of section  5; 
5[(c)] number of hours for which a 6[adolescent ] may be required or permitted to work unde r                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 7;  
7[(d)] grant of certificates of age in respect of young persons in employment or seeking 
employment, the medical authorities which may issue such certificate, the form of such certificate, the 
charges which may be made thereunder and the manner in which such cer tificate may be  issued:  
Provided that no charge shall be made for the issue of any such certificate if the application is 
accompanied by evidence of age deemed satisfact ory by the authority concerned;  
8[(e)] the other particulars which a register maintaine d under section 11 should contain.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 20 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Clause ( a) relettered  as clause ( b) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f  1-9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “Child Labour  Technical Advisory Committee” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Clause ( b) relettered as clause ( c) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
6. Subs. by s. 21,  ibid., for “child” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
7. Clause ( c) relettered as clause ( d) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
8. Clause ( d) relettered as clause  (e) thereof by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2016).  9 
 1[(f) the manner of payment of amount to the child or adolescent under sub -section ( 4) of              
section 14B;  
(g) the  manner of composition of the offence and payment of amount to the appropriate 
Government under sub -section ( 1) of section section 14D;  
(h) the powers to be exercised and the duties to be performed by the officer specified and the 
local limits within which  such powers or duties shall be carried out under section 17A. ] 
19. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament or State legislature .—(1) Every rule 
made under this Act by the Central Government and every notification issued under section 4, shall  be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or both 
Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notificati on shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule or notification.  
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the legislature of that State.  
20. Certain other provisions of law not barred. —Subject to the provisions contained in section 15, 
the provisio ns of this Act and the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, 
the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the Plantations Labour Act, 1951 (69 of 1951) and 
the Mines Act, 1952 (35 of 1952).  
21. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient  for removal of 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on 
which this Act receiv es the assent of the President.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall,  as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before the 
Houses of Parliament.  
22. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Employment of Children Act, 1938 (26 of 1938) is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or 
taken under the Act so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
[ Sections 23 to 26.]—Rep.  by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001 (30 of 2001), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule  (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2016, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  10 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3 A) 
(1) Mines.  
(2) Inflammable substances or explosives.  
(3) Hazardous process.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Schedule, “hazardous process” has the meaning assigned to it 
in clause ( cb) of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948) ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. b y Act 35 of 2016, s. 22, for the Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
--------------------------The Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund (Repeal) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE COAL MINES LABOUR WELFARE FUND (REPEAL) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 27 OF 1986  
[23rd May , 1986 .] 
An Act to repeal the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1947 and to provide for certain 
matters incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1.  Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines Labour Welfare 
Fund (Repeal) Act, 1986.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the  Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “the Act” means the Coal Mines Labour Welfare Fund Act, 1947  (32 of 1947);  
(b) “appointed day ” means the date on which this Act comes into force;  
(c) “Housing Board ” means the Coal Mines Labour Housing Board constituted under section 6 of 
the Act.  
3. Repeal of Act 32 of 1947 and dissolution of Housing Board .—On the appointed day, the Coal 
Mines Lab our Welfare Fund Act, 1947 shall stand repealed, and the Coal Mines Labour Housing Board 
shall stand dissolved.  
4. Consequential provisions .—On the dis solution of the Housing Board, — 
(a) all rights and privileges of the Housing Board shall become the rights and privileges, 
respectively, of the Central Government;  
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, including cash balances, reserve funds, investments 
and moneys lying to the credit of the Housing Board and all rights and interests in, or arising o ut of, 
such properties as were immediately before the appointed day, in the ownership, possession, power or 
control of the Housing Board, and all books of account, registers and records and all other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto, shall ves t in the Central Government;  
(c) all the borrowings, liabilities and obligations of the Housing Board of whatever kind and 
subsisting immediately before the appointed day, shall be deemed on and from such day to be the 
borrowings, liabilities and obligatio ns, as the case may be, of the Central Government;  
(d) all contracts entered into, and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for, the 
Housing Board and subsisting immediately before the appointed day shall be deemed, on and from 
such day to  have been entered into or engaged to be done by, with or for , the Central Government;  
(e) all licences and permits granted to the Housing Board and in force immediately before the 
appointed day shall be deemed on and from such day to have been granted to the Central Government 
and shall have effect accordingly.  
5. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of rights in a Government              
company .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 4, the Central Government may, if it is 
satisfied that a Government company is willing to comply, or has complied, with such terms and 
conditions as that Government may think fit to impose, direct, by an order in writing, that the right, title 
and interest of the Housing Board in relation to any property shall , instead of continuing to vest in it, vest 
in the Government company (hereinafter referred to as the Government company) either on the date of 
publication of the direction or on such earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) 
as may be specified in the direction, and on such vesting, the liability or obligation, as the case may be, of 
the Housing Board, in relation to such property shall, instead of continuing to be the liability or obligation 
of the Central Government, become the liability or obligation, as the case may be, of the Government 
company.  
                                                           
1. 1st October , 1986, vide notificat ion No. S.O. 681(E), dated 19th  September , 1986, see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary,  Part II, 
sec. 3 (ii). 2 
 6. Continuation of suits, etc., against Central Government .—(1) if, on the appointed day, any suit 
appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to the Housing Board is  pending by or against 
such Board, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of 
the dissolution of the Housing Board; but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, 
prosecuted and enforced by or  against the Central Government or the Government company, as the case 
may be.  
(2) Where, before the appointed day, any cause of action for any suit or proceeding or any right to 
appeal arose in favour of, or against, the Housing Board, and the institution  of any suit or proceeding on 
such cause of action or the filing of such appeal was not barred before the appointed day, such suit or 
proceeding may be instituted or appeal may be filed by or against the Central Government or the 
Government company, as the  case may be.  
7. Moneys, etc., of the Fund to be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India .—On the appointed 
day, all moneys and cash balances lying in the credit of the housing account and the general welfare 
account of the Coal Mines Labour Housing and General Welfare Fund constituted under section 4 of the 
Act, shall become part of, and be credited to, the Consolidated Fund of India.  
8. Collection and payment of arrears of duty .—Notwithstanding the repeal of the Act, the proceeds 
of duty levied before the appointed d ay under section 3 of the Act, — 
(i) if collected by the collecting agencies but not paid into the Reserve Bank of India; and  
(ii) if not collected by the collecting agencies,  
shall be paid or, as the case may be, collected and paid, into the  Reserve Bank of India for being credited 
to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
--------------------------The Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE COAL MINES NATIONALISATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1986  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. [Repealed .]  
3. [Repealed .]  
4. [Repealed .]  
5. [Repealed .]  
6. [Repealed .]  
7. [Repealed .]  
8. [Repealed .]  
9. [Repealed .]  
10. [Repealed .]  
11. [Repealed .]  
12. [Repealed .]  
13. [Repealed .]  
14. [Repealed .]  
15. [Repealed .]  
16. [Repealed .]  
17. [Repealed .]  
18. [Repealed .]  
19. Validation.  
20. [Repealed .]  
 
  2 
 THE COAL MINES NATIONALISATION LAWS (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 57 OF 1986  
[15th December , 1986.]  
An Act further to amend the Coking Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 and the Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1973.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Coal Mines Nationalisation 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 1986.  
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided, the amendments to the Coking Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (36 of 1972) shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1s t day of May, 
1972 and the amendments to the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973  (26 of 1973),  shall be deemed 
to have come into force on the 1st day May, 1973 and the remaining provisions of this Act shall be 
deemed to have come into force on the 7th day of October, 1986.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
19. Validation .—Notwithstanding any judgment, decree, order or direction of any court to the 
contrary — 
(a) every amount paid to the owner of every coking coal mine or group of coking coal mines 
under section 10, or of every coke oven plant under section 11, of the Coking Coal Act, or to the 
owner of every coal mine or group of coal mine s under section 8 of the Coal Mines Act (hereafter in 
either case referred to as the owner), shall be deemed to include and be  deemed always to have 
included, the amounts required to be paid to the owner in respect of the coal in stock or other assets, 
coke in stock or other assets, referred to in clause ( j), or clause ( b) of section 3 of the Coking Coal Act 
or, as the case may be , coal in stock or other asse ts referred to in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Coal 
Mines Act, on the date immediately before the appointed day as if the provisions of section 10, or 
section 11, of the Coking Coal Act or, as the case may be, section 8 of the Coal Mines Act, as 
amended by this Act, had been in force at all material times, and no such payment shall be called in 
question in any court on the ground that it had not included the value of such coal or coke or other 
assets;  
(b) every statement of acco unts or supplementary statement of accounts prepared by the Central 
Government or the Government company under section 22 of the Coking Coal Act or under section 
19 of the Coal Mines Act, shall be deemed to have been validity prepared as if the provisions o f 
section 22 of the Coking Coal Act or, as the case may be, section 19  of the Coal Mines Act, as 
amended by this Act, had been in force at all material times, and no such statement of accounts or 
supplementary statement of accounts shall be called in quest ion in any court on the ground that it had 
not been prepared in accordance with the normal commercial practice or that any item has or has not 
been included in such statement , 
and accordingly, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be maintained or contin ued in any court, — 
(i) for the recovery of any sum on the ground that the amount paid to the owner under section 
10 or section 11 of the Coking Coal Act or under section 8 of the Coal Mines Act, does not 
include the amounts required to be paid in respect of all coal or coke in stock or other assets 
referred to in clause ( a); or 
(ii) for the recovery of any sum as being the excess of receipts over payments on the ground  
that the statement of accounts or supplementary statement of accounts required to be pr epared 
under section 22 of th e Coking Coal Act or, as the case may be, section 19 of the Coal Mines Act, 
had not been prepared in accordance with the normal commercial practice or that any item has or 
has not been included in such statement.  
                                                           
1. Section 2  to 18  Rep. by Act 30 of 2001, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
 3 
 Explanation .—In this section, — 
(a) “appointed day” means, — 
(i) in relation to the Coking Coal Act, the 1st day of May, 1972; and  
(ii) in relation to the Coal Mines Act, the 1st day of May, 1973;  
(b) “receipts” and “payments” mean  receipts and payments in the statement of accounts 
prepared under section 2 2 of the Coking Coal Act or, as the case may be, section 19 of the Coal 
Mines Act.  
20. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Coal Mines Nationalisation Laws (Amendment) Ordina nce, 1986 
(Ord. 7 of 1986), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Coking Coal Act or the 
Coal Mines Act, as amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to be have been done or taken under 
the Coking Act or, as the case may be, the Coal Mines Act, as amended by this Act.  
--------------------------The Consumer Protection Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Act not in derogation of any other law.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSUMER  PROTECTION  COUNCILS  
4. The Central Consumer Protection Council.  
5. Procedure for meetings of the Central Council.  
6. Objects of the Central Council.  
7. The State Consumer Protection Councils.  
8. Objects of the State Council.  
8A. The District Consumer Protection Council.  
8B.  Objects  of the District Council.  
 
CHAPTER III  
CONSUMER  DISPUTES  REDRESSAL  AGENCIES  
9. Establishment of Consumer Disputes Redressal Agencies.  
10. Composition of the District Forum.  
11. Jurisdiction of the District Forum.  
12. Manner in which complaint shall be made . 
13. Procedure on admission of complaint . 
14. Finding of the District Forum.  
15. Appeal . 
16. Composition of the State Commission . 
17. Jurisdiction of the State Commission.  
17A. Transfer of cases.  
17B. Circuit Benches . 
18. Procedure applicable to State Commissions.  
18A. [ Omitted.]  
19. Appeals.   
19A. Hearing of appeal . 
20. Composition of the National Commission.  
21. Jurisdiction of the National Commission.  
22. Power and p rocedure  applicable to the National Commission.  
22A. Power to set aside ex parte  orders.  
22B. Transfer of cases.  
22C. Circuit Benches.  
22D. Vacancy in the office of the President.  
22E. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of President and Member.  
23. Appeal.  
24. Finality of orders.  2 
 SECTIONS  
24A. Limitation period.  
24B. Administrative control.  
25. Enforcement of orders of the District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission . 
26. Dismissal of frivolous or vexatious complaints.  
27. Penalties.  
27A. Appeal against order passed under section 27 . 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
28A. Service of notice, etc.  
29. Power to remove difficulties.  
29A. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to invalidate orders.  
30. Power to make rules.  
30A. Power of the National Commission to make regulations . 
31. Rules and regulations to be laid befor e each House of Parliament . 
  3 
 THE CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 68 OF 1986  
[24th December , 1986.]  
An Act to provide for the better protection of the interests of consumers and for that purpose to 
make provision for the establishment of consumer councils and other authorities for the 
settlement of consumers ’ disputes and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent,  commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the  Consumer 
Protection Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different States and for di fferent provisions of this Act.  
(4) Save as otherwise expressly provided by the Central Government by notification, this Act shall 
apply to all goods and services.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the conte xt otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “appropriate laboratory ” means a laboratory or organisation — 
(i) recogn ised by the Central Government;  
(ii) recognised  by a State Government, subject to such guidelines as may be pr escribed by the 
Central Govern ment in this behalf; or  
(iii) any such laboratory or organisation established by or under any law for the time being in 
force, which is maintained, financed or aid ed by the Central Government or a State Government 
for carrying out analysis or test of any goods with a view to determining whether such g oods 
suffer from any defect;]  
3[(aa) “branch office ” means — 
(i) any establishment described as a branch by the opposi te party; or  
(ii) any establishment carring on either the same or substantially the same activity as that 
carried on by the hea d office of the establishment;]  
(b) “complainant ” means —  
(i) a consumer; or  
(ii) any  voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956                     
(1 of 1956) or under any other law for the time being in force; or  
(iii) the Central Gove rnment or any State Government,  
who or which makes a complaint;  
                                                           
1. 15th April, 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 390(E), dated 15th April,  1987 in respect of Chapters I,  II and IV , see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st July, 1987, vide notification No . S.O. 568(E), dated 10th June, 1987 in respect of Chapter III, see Gazette of  India,  
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii).   
2. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993 , s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993 ). 
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  4 
 1[(iv) one or more c onsumers, where there are nume rous consu mers having the same interest;]  
 2[(v) in case of dealth of a consumer, his legal heir or representa tive;] 
(c) “complaint ” means any allegation in writ ing made by a complainant that — 
3[(i) an unfair trade practice or a restrictive trade practice h as been adopted by 4[any trader  or 
service provider] ;] 
(ii) 5[the goods bou ght by him or agreed to be bou ght by him] s uffer from one or more 
defects;  
(iii) 6[the services hired or availed of or agreed to be h ired or availed of by him] suffer from 
deficiency in any respect;  
7[(iv) a trader or the service provider, as the case may be, has charged for the goods or for the 
services mentioned in the complaint, a price in excess of the price — 
(a) fixed by or under any law for the time being in force;  
(b) displayed on the goods or any package containing such goods;  
(c) displayed on the price list exhibited by him by or under any law for the time being in 
force;  
(d) agreed between the parties;  
(v) goods which will be hazardous to life and safety when used are being offered for sale to 
the public, — 
(a) in contravention of any standards relating to safety of such goods as required to be 
complied with, by or under any law for the time being in force;  
(b) if the trader cou ld have known with due diligence that the goods so of fered are unsafe 
to the public;  
(vi) services which are hazardous or likely to be hazardous to life and safety of the public 
when used, are being offered by the service provider which such person could have known with 
due diligence to be injurious to life and safety;]   
with a view to obtaining any relie f provided by or under this Act;  
(d) “consumer ” means any person who, — 
(i) buys any goods for a consideration which has been paid or promised or partly paid and 
partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any user of such goods 
other than the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or promised or partly paid or 
partly promised, or under any system of deferred payment wh en such use is made with the 
approval of such person, but does not include a person who obtains such goods for resale or for 
any commercial purpose; or  
(ii) 8[hires or avails of] any services for a conside ration which has been paid or p romised or 
partly pa id and partl y promised, or under any system of deferred payment and includes any 
beneficiary of such services other than the person who 8[hires or avails of] the services for 
consideration paid or promised, or partly paid and partly promised, or under any system of 
deferred payment, when such services are availed of with the approval of the first mentioned 
person  2[but does not include a person who avails of such services for any commercial purpose] .  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Ins. by Ac t 62 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2, for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2,  for “any trader” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Subs. by  Act 50 of 1993, s.  2, for “the goods mentioned in the complaint” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “the services mentioned in the complaint” (w.e.f 18 -6-1993).  
7. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2, for sub -clauses ( iv), (v) and ( vi) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
8. Subs. by 50 of 1993, s. 2, for “hires” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  5 
 1[Explanati on.—For the purposes of this clause,  “commecial purpose ” does not include use 
by a person of goods bought and used by him and services availed by him exclusively for the 
purposes of earning his livelihood by means of self -employment ;] 
(e) “consumer dispute ” means a dispute where the person aga inst whom a complaint has been 
made, denies or disputes the allegati ons contained in the complaint;  
(f) “defect ” means any fault , imperfection or shortcoming in the quality, quantity, potency, purity 
or standard which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being in force or 
2[under any contract, express or implied , or] as is claimed by the trader in any manner whats oever in 
relation to any goods;  
(g) “deficiency ” means any fault , imperfection, shortcoming or inadequacy in the quality, nature 
and manner of performance which is required to be maintained by or under any law for the time being 
in force or has been u ndertaken to be performed by a person in pursuance of a contract or otherw ise in 
relation to any service;  
(h) “District Forum ” means a Consumer Dispute s Redressal Forum estalished under clause ( a) of 
section 9;  
(i) “goods ” means goods as defined in the Sal e of Goods Act, 1930 (3 of 1930);  
 3[(j) “manufacturer” means a person who — 
(i) makes or manufactures any goods or parts thereof; or  
(ii) does not make or manufacture any goods but assembles parts thereof made or 
manufactured by others; or  
(iii) puts  or causes to be put his own mark on any goods made or manufactured by any other 
manufacturer;]  
Explanation .—Where a manufacturer despatches  any goods or part thereof to any branch office 
maintained by him, such branch office shall not be deemed to be the manufacturer even though the 
parts so despatched to it are assembled at such branch office and are sold or distributed from such 
branch offi ce; 
 2[(jj) “member ” includes the President and a member of the National Commission or a State 
Commission or a Distr ict Forum, as the case may be;]  
(k) “National Commission ” means the National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission 
established under clause  (c) of section 9;  
(l) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(m) “person ” includes, — 
(i) a firm whether registered or not;  
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;  
(iii) a co -operative society;  
(iv) every  other association of persons whether registered under the Societies Registration  
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) or not;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the State Government, or as the case may be, 
by the Cen tral Government under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2, for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
 6 
 1[(nn) “regulation” means the regulations made by the Natio nal Commission under this Act;  
 (nnn) “restrictive trade practice” means a trade practice which tends to bring about manipulation 
of price or its conditions of delivery or to affect flow of supplies in  the market relating to goods or 
services in such a manner as to impose on the consumers unjustified costs or restrictions and shall 
include — 
(a) delay beyond the period agreed to by a trader in supply of such goods or in providing the 
services which has l ed or is likely to lead to rise in the price;  
(b) any trade practice which requires a consumer to buy, hire or avail of any goods or, as the 
case may be, services as condition precedent to buying, hiring or availing of other goods or 
services;]  
(o) “service ” means service of any description which is made available to potential 2[users and 
includes , but not limited to, the provision of ] facilities in connection with banking, financing, 
insurance, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other ene rgy, board or lodging or both, 
3[housing construction,] entertainment, amusement or the purveying of news or other information, but 
does not include the rendering of any service free of charge or under a contract of personal service;  
4[(oo) “spurious goods and services” mean such goods and services which are claimed to be 
genuine but they are actually not so;]  
(p) “State Commission ” means a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission established in a 
State under clause ( b) of section 9;  
(q) “trader”, in relation to any goods means a person who sells or distributes any goods for sale 
and includes the manufacturer thereof, and where such goods are sold or distributed in package for m, 
includes the packer thereof;  
5[(r) “unfair trade practice ” means a trade practice which, for the purpose of promoting the sale, 
use or supply of any goods or for the provision of any service, adopts any unfair method or unfair or 
deceptive practice inclu ding any of the following practices, namely: — 
(1) the practi ce of making any statement, whether orally or in writing or by  visible 
representation which, — 
(i) falsely represents that the goods are of a particular standard, quality, quantity, grad e, 
composition, style or model;  
(ii) falsely  represents that the services are of a particular  standard, quality or grade;  
(iii) falsely represents any re -built, second -hand, renovated, reconditi oned or old goods as 
new goods;  
(iv) represents that the goods or services have sponsorship, approval, per formance, 
characteristics, accessories, uses or benefits which such  goods or services do not have;  
(v) represents that the seller or the supplier has a sponsorship or approval or affiliation 
which such se ller or supplier does not have;  
(vi) makes a false o r misleading representation concerning the need for, or the useful ness 
of, any goods or services;  
(vii) gives to th e public any warranty or guara ntee of the performance, efficacy or length 
of life of a product or of any goods that is not based on an a dequate or proper test thereof:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2, for clause ( nn) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “users and include s the provisions of” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2  (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 2, for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  7 
 Provided that where a defence is raised to the effect that such warranty or guarantee is 
based on adequate or proper test, the burden of proof of such defence shall lie on t he person 
raising such defence;  
(viii) makes to the  public a representation in a form that purports to be— 
(i) a warranty or guarantee of a product or of any goods or services; or  
(ii) a promi se to replace, maintain or rep air an article or any part thereof or to repeat 
or continue a service until it has ac hieved a specified result,  
if such purported warranty or guarantee or promise is materially mislea ding or if there is no 
reasona ble prospect that s uch warranty, guarantee or promise will be carried out;  
(ix) materially misleads the public concerning the p rice at which a product or like 
products or goods or services, have been or are, ordinarily sold or provided, and,  for this 
purpose, a representa tion as to price shall be deemed to refer to the price at which the product 
or goods or services has or have be en sold by sellers or provided by suppliers generally in the 
relevant market unless it is clearly specified to be the price at which the product has been sold 
or services have been provided by the person by whom or on whose beh alf the representation 
is mad e; 
(x) gives false or misleading facts disparaging  the goods, services or trade of another 
person.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( 1), a statement that is — 
(a) expressed on an article offered or displ ayed for sale, or on its wrapper or 
container;  or 
(b) expressed on anything attached to, inserted in, or accompanying, an article 
offered or displayed for sale, or on anything on which the article is mounted for display 
or sale; or  
(c) contained  in or on anything that is sold, sent, delivered, transmitted or in any 
other manner whatsoever made available to a member of the public,  
shall be deemed to be a statement made to the public by, and only by, the person who had caused the 
statement to be s o expressed, made or contained;  
(2) permits the publication of any advertisement whether in any newspaper or otherwise, for 
the sale or supply at a bargain price, of goods or services that are not intended to be offered for 
sale or supply at the bargain pr ice, or for a  period that is, and in quanti ties that are, reasonable, 
having regard to the nature of the market in which the business is carried on, the nature and size 
of business, and t he nature of the advertisement.  
Explanation .—For the purpose  of claus e (2), “bargaining price ” means — 
(a) a price that is stated in any advertisement to be a bargain price, by reference to an 
ordinary price or otherwise, or  
(b) a price that a person who reads, hears or sees the adver tisement, would reasonably 
understand to be a bargain price having regard to the prices at which the product advertised or 
like product s are ordinarily sold;  
(3) permits — 
(a) the offering of gifts, prizes or other items with the intention of not providing them as 
offered or creating impression that something is being given or  offered free of charge when it  
is fully or partly covered by the amount charged  in the transaction as a whole;  
(b) the conduct of any contest, lottery, game of chance or skill, for the purpose of 
promoting, directly or indi rectly, the sale, use or supply of any pr oduct or any business 
interest;  8 
 1[(3A) withholding from the participants of any scheme offering gifts, prizes or other items 
free of charge, on its closure the information about final results of the scheme.  
Explanat ion.—For the purposes of this sub -clause, the participants of a scheme shall be 
deemed to have been informed of the final results of the scheme where such results are within a 
reasonable time published, prominently in the same newspapers in which the schem e was 
originally advertised ]; 
(4) permits the sale or supply of goods intended to be used, or are of a kind likely to be used, 
by consumers, knowing or having reason to believe that the goods do not comply with the 
standards prescribed by competent authority relating to performance, composition contents, 
design, constructions, finishing or packaging as are necessary to prevent or re duce the risk of 
injury  to the person using the goods;  
(5) permits the hoarding or destruction of goods, or refuses to sell the goods or to make them 
available for sale or to provide any service, if such hoarding or destruction or refusal raises or 
tends t o raise or is intended to raise, the cost of those or o ther similar goods or services ]; 
 1[(6) manufacture of spurious goods or offering such goods for sale or adopting deceptive 
practices in the provision of services. ] 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any  other Act or provision thereof which is not in force in any area to 
which this Act applies shall be construed to have a reference to the corresponding Act or provision 
thereof in force in such area.  
3. Act not in derogation of any other law. —The provision s of this Act shall be in addition to and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSUMER  PROTECTION  COUNCILS  
4. The Central Consumer Protection Council .—(1) 2[The Central  Government shall] , by 
notification, establish with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a Council to be 
known as the Central Consumer Protection Council (hereinafter refer red to as the Central Council).  
(2) The Central Council shall consist of the follo wing members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in charge of 3[consumer affairs] in the Central Government,  who shall be its 
Chairman, and  
(b) such number of other official or non -official members representing such interests as may be 
prescribed.  
5. Procedure for meetings of the Central Council .—(1) The Central Council shall meet as and 
when necessary, but 4[at least one meeting] of the Co uncil shall be held every year.  
(2) The Central Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairman may think fit and shal l 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be prescribed.  
6. Objects of the Central Council. —The objects of the Central Council shall be to promote and 
protect the ri ghts of the consumers such as, — 
(a) the right to be protected against the marketing of goods 5[and services] which are hazardous to 
to life and property ; 
(b) the right to be informed about the quality, quantity, potency, purity , standard and price of 
goods  5[or services,  as the case may be ,] so as to protect the consumer against unfair trade practices;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “The Central Government may” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 3, for “the Depar tment of Food and Civil Supplies”  (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “not less than three meetings” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
5. Ins. by s. 5 , ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  9 
 (c) the right to be assured, wherever possible, access to a variety of goods 1[and s ervices] at 
competitive prices;  
(d) the right to be heard and to be assured that consumers ’ interests will receive due consi deration 
at appropriate forums;  
(e) the right to seek redressal a gainst unfair trade practices 1[or restrictive trade practices] or 
unscrupulous  exploitation of consumers; and  
(f) the right to consumer education.  
7. The Sta te Consumer Protection Councils .—(1) 2[The State Government shall ], by notification, 
establish with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a Council to be known as the 
Consumer Protection Council for .......................( hereinafter ref erred to as the State Council).  
3[(2) The State Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister incharge of consumer affairs in the State Govern ment who shall be its Chairman;  
(b) such number of other official or no n-official members representing such interests as may be 
presc ribed by the State Governments ; 
4[(c) such number of other official or non -official members, not exceeding ten, as may be 
nominated by the Central Government. ] 
(3) The State Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two mee tings shall be held 
every year.  
(4) The State Council shall meet at such time and place as the Chairman may think fit and shall 
observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be pre scribed by the State 
Government .] 
8. Objects of the State Council. —The objects of every State Council shall be to promote and protect 
within the State the rights of the consumers laid down in clauses ( a) to ( f) of section 6.  
5[8A.The District Consumer Protection Council .—(1) The State Government shall establish for 
every district, by notification, a council to be known as the District Consumer Protection Council with 
effect from such date as it may specify in such notification.  
(2) The District Consumer  Protection Council (herein after referred to as the District Council) shall 
consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Collector of the district (by whatever name called), who shall be its Chairman; and  
(b) such  number of other official and non -official members representing such interests as may 
be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) The District Council shall meet as and when necessary but not less than two meetings shall be 
held every year.  
(4) The District  Council shall meet as such time and place within the district as the Chairman may 
think fit and shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business as may be pres cribed 
by the State Government.  
8B. Objects of the District Council .—The objects of every District Council shall be to promote and 
protect within the district the rights of the consumers laid down in clauses ( a) to ( f) of section 6.]  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 5 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 4, for “The State Government may” ( w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by  Act 50 of 1993 , s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003).  
5. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
 10 
 CHAPTER III  
CONSUMER  DISPUTE  REDRESSAL  AGENCIES  
9. Establishment of Consumer Disputes Redressal Agencies .—There shall be established for the 
purposes of this Act, t he following agencies, namely: — 
(a) a Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum to be known as the “District Forum ” established by the 
State Gover nment 1*** in each distric t of the State  by notification:  
2[Provided that the State Government may, if it deems fit, establish more than one  District Forum 
in a district.]  
(b) a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission to be known as the “State Commission ” 
estab lished by the State Government 1*** in the State by notification; and  
(c) a National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission established by the Central Government 
by notification.  
10. Comp osition of the District Forum. —3[(1) Each D istrict Forum shall consist of — 
(a) a person who is, or has been , or is qualified to be a District Jud ge, who shall be its President;  
4[(b) two other members, one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have the fol lowing 
qualifications, namely: — 
(i) be not less than thirty -five years of age,  
(ii) possesss a bachelor ’s degree from a recogni sed university,  
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate knowledge and 
experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems relating to economics, law, 
commerce, accountancy, i ndustry, public affairs or administration:  
Provided that a persons shall be disqualified for appoint ment as a member, if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the 
opinion of the State Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has bee n removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body 
corporate owned or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the State Government, such financial or other interest as is 
likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member; or  
(f) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the State Government; ]] 
5[(1A) Every appointment under sub -section ( 1) shall be made by the State Government on the 
recommendation of a selection committee consist ing of the following, namely: — 
(i) Presi dent of the State Commission      —Chairman,  
(ii) Secretary, Law Dep artment of the State    —Member,  
(iii) Secretary , incharge of t he Department dealing  
      with cunsumer affairs in the State                   —Member :]  
6[Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason of absence or otherwise, 
unable to act as Chairman of the Selection Committee, the State Government may refer the matter to the 
Chief Justice of the High Court for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Court to act as Chairman.]  
                                                           
1. The words “with the prior approval of the Central Government” omitted by Act 50 of 1993, s. 7  (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Ins. by  s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 6, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 8 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).   
6. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 11 
 1[(2) Every member of the District Forum shall hold office for a term of five years or up to the age of 
sixty -five years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a member shall be eligible for re -appointment for another term of five years or up to the 
age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, subject to the condition that he fulfils the qualifications and 
other conditions for appointment mentione d in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and such re -appointment is 
also made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee:  
Provided further that a member may resign his office in writing under his hand addressed to the State 
Government and on s uch resignation being accepted, his office shall become vacant and may be filled by 
appointment of a person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in relation to 
the category of the member who is required to be appointed under th e provisions of sub -section ( 1A) in 
place of the person who has resigned:  
Provided also that a person appointed as the President or as a member, before the commencement of 
the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002) , shall continue to hold s uch office as 
President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his term.]  
(3) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service of the members of the District Forum shall be such as may b e prescribed by the State 
Government:  
2[Provided that the appointment of a member on whole -time basis shall be made by the State 
Government on the recommendation of the President of the State Commission taking into consideration 
such factors as may be pres cribed including the work load of the District Forum.]  
11. Juri sdiction of the District Forum. —(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the District 
Forum shall have jurisdiction to entertain complaints where the value of the goods or services and the 
compensation, if any, claimed 3[does  not exceed rupees twenty  lakhs].  
(2) A complaint shall b e instituted in a District Forum within the local  limits of whose jurisdiction, —  
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time 
of the institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides or 4[carries o n business or has a 
branch office or ] personally work s for gain; or  
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the institution of the 
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or 5[carries on business or has a branch office] , or 
personally works for gain, provided that in such case either the permission of the District Forum is 
given, or the opposite parties who do not reside, or 6[carry on business  or have a branch office] , or 
personally work for gain, as the  case may be, ac quiesce in such institution; or  
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises.  
7[12. Manner in  which complaint shall be made. —(1) A complaint in relation to any goods sold or 
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or any service provided or agreed to be provided may be filed 
with a District Forum by — 
(a) the consumer to whom such goods are sold or delivered or agreed to be sol d or delivered or 
such service provided or agreed to be provided;  
(b) any recognised consumer association whether the consumer to whom the goods sold or 
delivered or agreed to be sold or delivered or service provided or agreed to be provided is a member 
of such association or not;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 62 of 2002,  s. 6, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 6 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by  s. 7, ibid., for “does not exceed rupees five lakhs ” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ) 
4. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 9, for “carries on business or” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “carries on business” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
6. Subs. by s. 9, ibid.,  for “carry on business” (w.e.f 18 -6-1993).  
7. Subs. by  Act 62 of 2002, s. 8,  for section 12 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
. 12 
 (c) one or more consumers, where there are numerous consumers having the same interest, with 
the permission of the District Forum, on behalf of, or for the benefit of, all consumers so interested; or  
(d) the Central  Government  or the State Government, as the case may be, either in its individual 
capacity or as a representative of interests of the consumers in general.  
(2) Every complaint filed under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied with such amount of fee and 
payable in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of a complaint made under sub -section ( 1), the District Forum may, by order, allow the 
complaint to be proceeded with or rejected:  
Provided that a complaint shall not be rejected under this sub -section unless an opportunity of being 
heard has been given to the complainant:  
Provided further that the admissibility of the complaint shall ordinarily be decided within twenty -one 
days from the date on which the complaint was received.  
(4) Where a complaint is allowed to  be proceeded with under sub -section ( 3), the District Forum may 
proceed with the complaint in the manner provided under this Act:  
Provided that where a complaint has been admitted by the District Forum, it shall not be transferred to 
any other court or tr ibunal or any authority set up by or under any other law for the time being in force.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “recognised consumer association ” means any 
voluntary consumer association registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1 956) or any other law 
for the time being in force. ] 
13. 1[Procedure on admission  of complaint ].—(1) The District Forum shall, 2[on admission of a 
complaint ], if it relates to any goods, — 
3[(a) refer a copy of the admitted complaint, within twenty -one days from the date of its 
admission to the opposite party mentioned in the complaint directing him to give his version of the 
case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may be 
granted by the District Forum;]  
(b) where the opposite party on receipt of a complaint referred to him under clause ( a) denies or 
disputes the allegations contained  in the complaint, or omits or fails to take any action to represent his 
case within the time given by the District Forum, the D istrict Forum shall proceed to settle the 
consumer dispute in the manner specified in clauses ( c) to ( g); 
(c) where the complaint alleges a defect in the goods which cannot be determined without proper 
analysis or test of the goods, the District Forum shal l obtain a sample of the goods from the 
complainant, seal it and authenticate it in the manner prescribed and refer the sample so sealed to the 
appropriate laboratory along with a direction that such laboratory make an analysis or test, whichever 
may be ne cessary, with a view to finding out whether such goods suffer from any defect alleged in the 
complaint or from any other defect and to report its findings thereon to the District Forum within a 
period of forty -five days of the receipt of the reference or w ithin such extended period as may be  
granted by the District Forum;  
(d) before any sample of the goods is referred to any appropriate laboratory under clause ( c), the 
District Forum may require the complainant to deposit to the credit of the Forum such fee s as may be 
specified, for payment to the appropriate laboratory for carrying out the necessary analysis or test in 
relation to the goods in question;  
(e) the District Forum shall remit the amount deposited to its credit under clause ( d) to the 
appropriate  laboratory to enable it to carry out the analysis or test mentioned in clause ( c) and on 
receipt of the report from the appropriate laboratory, the District Forum shall forward a copy of the 
report along with such remarks as the District Forum may feel ap propri ate to the opposite party;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002,  s. 9, for “Procedure on receipt of complaint.” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “on receipt of a complaint” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 13 
 (f) if any of the parties disputes the correctness of the findings of the appropriate laboratory, or 
disputes the correctness of the methods of analysis or test adopted by the appropriate laboratory, the 
District Forum shal l require the opposite party or the complainant to submit in writing his objections 
in regard to the report made  by the appropriate laboratory;  
(g) the District Forum shall thereafter give a reasonable opportunity to the complainant as well as 
the opposite  party of being heard as to the correctness or otherwise of the report made by the 
appropriate laboratory and also as to the objection made in relation thereto under clause ( f) and issue 
an appr opriate order under section 14.  
(2) The District Forum shall, if the 1[complaint s admitted]  by it under section 12 relates to goods in 
respect of which the procedure specified in sub -section ( 1) cannot be followed, or if the compl aint relates 
to any services, — 
(a) refer a copy of such complaint to the opposite party directing him to give his version of 
the case within a period of thirty days or such extended period not exceeding fifteen days as may 
be granted by the District Forum;  
(b) where the opposite party, on receipt of a copy of the complaint, referred to him un der 
clause ( a) denies or disputes the allegations contained in the complaint, or omits or fails to take 
any  action to represent his case within the time given by the District Forum, the District Forum 
shall proceed to  settle the consumer dispute, — 
(i) on the basis of evidence brought to its notice by the complainant and the opposite 
party, where the opposite party denies or disputes the allegations  contained in the complaint, 
or 
(ii) 2[ex parte  on the basis of evidence] brought to its notice by the compla inant where the 
opposite party omits or fails to take any action to represent his case with in the time given by 
the Forum.  
3[(c) where the complainant fails to appear on the date of hearing before the District Forum, 
the District Forum may either dismiss t he complaint for default or decide it on merits. ] 
(3) No proceedings complying with the procedure laid down in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be 
called in question in any court on the ground that the principles of natural justi ce have not been complied 
with.  
 3[(3A) Every complaint shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to 
decide the complaint within a period of three months from the date of receipt of notice by opposite party 
where the complaint does not require analysis  or testing of commodities and within five months, if it 
requires analysis or testing of commodities:  
Provided that no adjournment shall be ordinarily granted by the District Forum unless sufficient cause 
is shown and the reasons for grant of adjournment have been recorded in writing by the Forum:  
Provided further that the District Forum shall make such orders as to the costs occasioned by the 
adjournment as may be provided in the regulations made under this Act:  
Provided also that in the event of a complaint being disposed of after the period so specified, the 
District Forum shall record in writing, the reasons for the same at the time of disposing of the said 
complaint.  
(3B) Where during the pendency of any proceeding before the District Forum, it a ppears to it 
necessary, it may pass such interim order as is just and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case. ] 
(4) For the purposes of this section, the District Forum shall have the same powers as are vested in a 
civil court under the Code of C ivil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) wh ile trying a suit in respect of the 
following matters, namely: — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 9, for “complaint received” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by s.  9, ibid., for “on the basis of evidence” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 14 
 (i) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any defendant or witness and examining the 
witness on oath;  
(ii) the discovery and production of any docum ent or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(iii) the recep tion of evidence on affidavits;  
(iv) the requisitioning of the report of the concerned analysis or test from the appropriate 
laboratory or from any other relevant source;  
(v) issuing  of any commission for the examination of any witness; and  
(vi) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(5) Every proceeding before the District Forum shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and  228 of the Indian Pe nal Code (45 of 1860) , and the District Forum shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195, and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal  
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
1[(6) Where the complainant is  a consumer referred to in sub -clause ( iv) of clause ( b) of                         
sub-section ( 1) of section 2, the pro visions of rule 8 of Order I of the First Schedule to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) sha ll apply subject to the modifi cation that every reference therein to a s uit 
or decree shall be construed as a reference to a complaint or the order of the District Forum thereon.]  
 2[(7) In the event of death of a complainant who is a consumer or of the opposite party against whom 
the complaint has been filed, the provisions of Order XXII of the First Scheduled to the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to the 
plaintiff and the defendant shall be construed as reference to a complainant or the opposite p arty, as the 
case may be. ] 
14. Finding of the District Forum .—(1) If, after the proceeding conducted under section 13, the 
District Forum is satisfied that the goods complained against suffer from any of the defects specified in 
the complaint or that any o f the allegations contained in the complaint about the services are proved, it 
shall issue an order to the opposite party directing him to 3[do] one or more of  the following things, 
namely: — 
(a) to remove the defect pointed out by the appropriate laboratory from the goods in question;  
(b) to replace the goods with new goods of similar description which shall be free from any 
defect;  
(c) to return to the complainant the price, or, as the case may b e, the charges paid by the 
complainant;  
(d) to pay such amount as may be awarded by it as compensation to the consumer for any loss or 
injury suffered by the consumer due to the negl igence of the opposite party:  
4[Provided that the District Forum shall ha ve the power to grant punitive damages in such 
circumstances as it deems fit;]  
5[(e) to 6[remove the defects  in goods]  or deficiencies  in the services in question;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 11 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 9 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 12, for “take” (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
4. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993 , s. 12 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
6. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 10, for “remove the defects” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 15 
 (f) to discontinue the unfair  trade practice or the restric tive trade practice or not to repeat them;  
(g) not to offe r the hazardous goods for sale;  
(h) to withdraw the hazardous goo ds from being offered for sale;  
1[(ha) to cease manufacture of hazardous goods and to desist from offering services which are 
hazardous in nature;  
(hb) to pay such  sum as may be determined by it, if it is of the opinion that loss or injury has been 
suffered by a large number of consumers who are not identifiable conveniently:  
Provided that the minimum amount of sum so payable shall not be less than five per cent. of  the 
value of such defective goods sold or services provided, as the case may be, to such consumers:  
Provided further that the amount so obtained shall be  credited in favour of such person and 
utilized in such  manner as may be prescribed;  
(hc) to issue cor rective advertisement to neutralize the effect of misleading advertisement at the 
cost of the opposite party responsible for issuing such misleading advertisement;]  
(i) to provide for adequate costs to parties.]  
  2[(2) Every  proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be conducted by the President of the 
District Forum and at least one m ember thereof sitting together:  
3[Provided that where a member, for any reason, is unable to conduct a proceeding till it is completed, 
the President and the  other member shall continue the proceeding from the stage at which it was last heard 
by the previous member.]  
(2A) Every order made by the District Forum under sub -section ( 1) shall be signed by its President 
and the member or members  who conducted the proceeding:  
Provided that where the proceeding is conducted by the President and one member and they differ on 
any point or points, they shall state the point or points on which they differ and refer the same to the other 
member for hea ring on such point or points and the opinion of the majority shall be th e order of the 
District Forum.]  
(3) Subject to the foregoing provisions, the procedure relating to the conduct of the meetings of the 
District Forum, its sittings and other matters sha ll be such as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
15. Appeal .—Any person aggrieved by an order made by the District Forum may prefer an appeal 
against such order to the State Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of the order, in 
such form a nd manner as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the State Commis sion may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it wit hin that period:  
4[Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in ter ms of an order 
of the District Forum, shall be entertained by the State Commission unless the appellant has deposited in 
the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of that amount or twenty -five thousand rupees, whichever is less.]  
16. Composition of the State C ommission .—(1) Each Sta te Commission shall consist of — 
(a) a person who is or has been a Judge of a High Court, appointed by the State Government , who 
shall be its P resident:  
5[Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made except after consultation with the 
Chief Justice of the High Court;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 34 of 1991, s. 2, for the sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -6-1991).  
3. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 10, for the proviso (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid.  (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  16 
  1[(b) not less than two, and not more than such number of members, as may be prescribed, and 
one of whom shall be a woman, who shall have the following qualifications, namely: — 
(i) be not less than t hirty -five years of age;  
(ii) possess a bachelor’s degree from a recognised university; and  
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing, and have adequate knowledge and 
experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems relating to economics, law, commerce, 
accountancy, industry, public affairs or administration:  
Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the  members shall be from amongst persons having a  
judicial background.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, the expression “persons having a judicial background” 
shall mean persons having knowledge and experience for at least a period of ten years as a presiding 
officer at the district level court or any tribunal at equivalent level : 
Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment as a member, if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
State Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarge d insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body corporate 
owned or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the State G overnment, such financial or other interest, as is likely to 
affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member; or  
(f) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the State Government .] 
2[(1A) Every  appointment under sub -section ( 1) shall be made by the State Government on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee consisting of the following members, namely: — 
(i) President of the State Commission     — Chairman;  
(ii) Secretary of the Law Department  
of the State    — Member;  
(iii) Secretary incharge of                            
the Departm ent dealing with Consumer 
Affairs in the State  — Member:  
Provided that where the President of the State Commission is, by reason of absence or otherwise, 
unable to act as Chairman of the Selection Committee, the State Government may refer the matter to the 
Chief Justice of the High Court for nominating a sitting Judge of that High Court to act as Chairman.  
(1B) (i) The  jurisdiction, powers and authority of the State Commission may be exercised by Benches 
thereof.  
(ii) A Bench may be constituted by the President with one or more members as the President may 
deem fit.  
(iii) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be decided according to 
the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are equally divided, they shall state 
the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall eith er hear the 
point or points himself or refer  the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more or the other 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 12, for clause ( b) and the proviso (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 17 
 members and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the  majority of the 
members who have heard the case, includi ng those who first heard it.]  
(2) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of 
service 1*** of, the members of the State Commission shall be such as may be presc ribed by the State 
Government :  
2[Provided that the appointment of a member on whole -time basis shall be made by the State 
Government on the recommendation of the President of the State Commission taking into consideration 
such factors as may be prescribed including the work load of the State Commi ssion.]  
3[(3) Every member of the State Commission shall hold office for a term of five years or up to the age 
of sixty -seven years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a member shall be eligible for re -appointment for another term of five years or up to the 
age of sixty -seven years, whichever is earlier, subject to the condition that he fulfils the qualifications and 
other conditions for appointment mention ed in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and such re -appointment is 
made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee:  
Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the State Commission shall also be eligible 
for re -appointment in the manner provided in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of this section:  
Provided also that a member may resign his office in writing under his hand addressed to the State 
Government and on such resignation being accepted, his office shall become vacant and m ay be filled by 
appointment of a person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in relation to 
the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the provisions of sub -section ( 1A) in 
place of the person who has resi gned.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), a person appointed as the President or as a 
member, before the commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002) , 
shall continue to hold such office as President or m ember, as the case may be, till the completion of his 
term.]  
17. Jurisdiction of the State Commission .—4[(1)] Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
State Commi ssion shall have jurisdiction — 
(a) to entertain — 
(i) complaints  where the value of the goods or services and compensation, if any, claimed 
5[exceeds rupees twenty  lakhs but does not exceed rupees one crore ]; and 
(ii) appeals against the orders of any Distr ict Forum within the State; and  
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending 
before or has been decided by any District Forum within the State, where it appears to the State 
Commission that such District Forum has exercised a jurisdiction  not vested in it by law, or has failed 
to exercise a jurisdiction so vested or has acted in exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with material 
irregularity.  
6[(2) A complaint shall be instituted in a State Commission within the limits of whose juris diction, — 
(a) the opposite party or each of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time 
of the institution of the complaint, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or has a 
branch office or personally works for gain; or 
(b) any of the opposite parties, where there are more than one, at the time of the institution of the 
complaint, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business or has a branch office or personally 
works for gain, provided that in such case eit her the permission of the State Commission is given or 
the opposite parties who do not reside or carry on business or have a branch office or personally 
works for gain, as the case may be, acquiesce in such institution; or  
                                                           
1. The brackets and  words “(including tenure of office)” omitted by  Act 50 of 1993, s. 13 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 12 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
3. Subs . by s. 12, ibid.,  for sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. S. 17 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 13 , ibid (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “exceeds rupees five lakhs but does not exceed rupees twenty lakhs” (w.e.f. 15-3-2003 ). 
6. Ins. by s. 13 , ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 18 
 (c) the cause of action, wholly o r in part, arises.]  
1[17A. Transfer of cases .—On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, the State 
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, transfer any complaint pending before the District 
Forum to another District Forum within th e State if the i nterest of justice so requires.  
17B. Circuit Benches .—The State Commission shall ordinarily function in the State Capital but may 
perform its functions at such other place as the State Government may, in consultation with the State 
Commission, notify in the Official Gazette, from time to time.]  
18. Procedure applicable to State Commissions .—2[The provisions of sections 12, 13 and 14 and 
the rules made thereunder] for  the disposal of complaints by the District Forum shall, with such 
modifications as may be necessary, be applicable to the disposal of disputes by the State Commission.  
18A.  [Vacancy in the office of the President .]—Omitted by the Consumer Protection (Amendment) 
Act, 2002  (62 of 2002 ), s. 15 (w.e.f. 15-3-2003).  
19. Appeals. —Any person aggrieved by an order made by the State Commission in exercise of its 
powers conferred by sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of section 17 may prefer an appeal against such order to 
the National Commission within a period of thirty days from the date of the order in such form and 
mann er as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the National Commission may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for n ot filing it within  that period:  
3[Provided further that no appeal by a person, who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order 
of the State Commission, shall be entertained by the National Commission unless the appellant has 
deposited in the prescribed manner fifty p er cent. of the amount or rupees thirty -five thousand, whichever 
is less.]  
4[19A. Hearing of appeal .—An appeal filed before the State Commission or the National 
Commission shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour  shall be made to  finally dispose 
of the appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of its admission:  
Provided that no adjournment shall be ordinarily granted by the State Commission or the National 
Commission, as the case may be, unless sufficien t cause is shown and the reasons for grant of 
adjournment have been recorded in writing by such Commission:  
Provided further that the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall 
make such orders as to the costs occasioned by the adjournment as may be provided in the regulations 
made under this Act:  
Provided also that in the event of an appeal being disposed of after the period so specified, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall record in writin g the reasons for the 
same at the time of disposing of the said appeal.]  
20. Composition of the National Commission .—(1) The Natio nal Commission shall consist of — 
(a) a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, to be appointed by the Central 
Government , who shall be its President:  
5[Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made except after consultation wi th the 
Chief Justice of India;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 15, for “The procedure specified in sections 12, 13 and 14 and under the rules made thereunder ”                       
(w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
3. Ins. by  Act 62 of 2002,  s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003).  
5. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 16 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  19 
 1[(b) not less than four, and not more than such number of members, as may be prescribed, and 
one of whom shall  be a woman,  who shall  have  the following  qualifications, namely: — 
(i) be not less than thirty -five years of age;  
(ii) possess  a bachelor’s degree from a recognised university; and  
(iii) be persons of ability, integrity and standing and have adequate knowledge and 
experience of at least ten years in dealing with problems relating to economics, law, commerce, 
accountancy, industry , public affairs or administration:  
Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members shall be from amongst the persons having 
a judicial background.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “persons having judicial background”  
shall mean persons having knowledge and experience for at least a period of ten years as a presiding 
officer at the district level court or any tribunal at equivalent level:  
Provided further that a person shall be disqualified for appointment, if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body corporate 
owned or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member; or  
(f) has such other disqualifications as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided also that every appointment under this clause shall be made by the Central Government on 
the recommendation of a  Selection Committee consisting of the following, namely: — 
 (a) a person who is a Judge of the 
Supreme Court , to be nominated by 
the Chief Justice of India     —Chairman ; 
(b) the Secretary in the Department 
of Legal Affairs in the Government of 
India  —Member ; 
 (c) Secretary of the Department 
dealing with Consumer Affairs in the 
Government of India  —Member.]  
2[(1A) (i) The jurisdiction, powers and authority of the National Commission may be exercised by 
Benches thereof.  
(ii) A Bench may be constituted  by the President with one or more members as the President may 
deem fit.  
(iii) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the points shall be decided according to 
the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the members are e qually divided, they shall state 
the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the President who shall either hear the 
point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more or the other 
members and  such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the 
members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 2 of 2002, s. 18, for clause ( b) and the proviso (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 20 
  (2) The salary or honorarium and other allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of  
service 1*** of the members of the National Commission shall be such as may be prescr ibed by the 
Central Government.  
2[(3) Every member of the National Commission shall hold office for a term of five years or up to the 
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a member shall be eligible for re -appointment for another term of five years or up to the 
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier, subject to the condition that he fulfils the qualifications and 
other conditions for appointment me ntioned in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and such re -appointment is 
made on the basis of the recommendation of the Selection Committee:  
Provided further that a person appointed as a President of the National Commission shall also be 
eligible for re -appoint ment in the manner provided in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1): 
Provided also that a member may resign his office in writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government and on such resignation being accepted, his office shall become vacant and may be filled by 
appointment of a person possessing any of the qualifications mentioned in sub -section ( 1) in relation to 
the category of the member who is required to be appointed under the provisions of sub -section ( 1A) in 
place of the person who has resigned.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), a person appointed as a President or as a 
member before the commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002)  
shall continue to hold such office as President or member, as the case may be, till the completion of his 
term.]  
21. Jurisdiction of the National Commission. —Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
National Commi ssion shall have jurisdiction — 
(a) to entertain — 
(i) complaints  where the value of the goods or services and compensation, if any, claimed 
exceeds 3[rupees one crore ]; and  
(ii) appeals against the orders of any State Commission; and  
(b) to call for the records and pass appropriate orders in any consumer dispute which is pending 
before or has been decided by any State Commission where it appears to the National Commission 
that such State Commission has exercised a jurisdiction not vested in it by law, or has failed to 
exercise a jurisdiction so vested, or has acte d in the exercise of its jurisdiction illegally or with 
material irregularity.  
4[22. Power and procedure applicable to the National Commission. —(1) The provisions of 
sections 12, 13 and 14 and the rules made thereunder for the disposal of complaints by the  District Forum 
shall, with such modifications as may be considered necessary by the Commission, be applicable to the 
disposal of disputes by the National Commission.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the National Commission shall 
have the power to review any order made by it, when there is an error a pparent on the face of record.  
22A. Power to set aside ex parte  orders. —Where an order is passed by the National Commission  ex 
parte  against the opposite party or a complainant, as the case may be, the aggrieved party may apply to 
the Commission to set aside the said or der in the interest of justice.  
22B. Transfer of cases. —On the application of the complainant or of its own motion, th e National 
Commission may, at any stage of the proceeding, in the interest of justice, transfer any complaint pending 
                                                           
1. The brackets and words “ (including tenure of office)” omitted by Act 50 of 1993, s. 16 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
2. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 18 , for sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ).  
3. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “rupees twenty lakhs” (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 20, ibid.,  for section 22 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
 21 
 before the District Forum of one State to a District Forum of another State or before one State 
Commission to another State Commission.  
22C. Circuit Benches. —The National Commission shall ordinarily function at New Delhi and 
perform its functions at such other place as the Central Government may, in consultation with the 
National Commission, notify in the Official Gazette, from time to time.  
22D. Vacancy in the office of the President. —When the office of President of a District Forum, 
State Commission, or of the National Commission, as the case may be, is vacant or a person occupying 
such office is, by reason of absence or otherwise, unable to perform the duties of his office, these shall be 
performed by the senior -most member of the District Forum, the State Commission or of the National 
Commission, as the case may be:  
Provided that where a retired Judge of a High Court is a member of the Na tional Commission, such 
member or where the number of such members is more than one, the senior -most person among st such 
members, shall preside over the National Commission in the absence of President of that Commission.]  
1[22E. Qualifications, terms and c onditions of service of President and Member .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications,  appointment, term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and the  other terms and conditions of service of the President and 
other members of the  National Commission appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter 
VI of  the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:  
Provided that the President and member appointed befor e the commencement of  Part XIV of Chapter 
VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the  provisions of this Act, and the rules 
made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184  of the Finance Act , 2017 had not come into force. ] 
23. App eal.—Any person, aggrieved by an order made by the National Commission in exercise of its 
power s conferred by sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of section 21, may prefer an appeal against such order to 
the Supreme Court within a period of thirty d ays from the date of the order:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that perio d: 
2[Provided further that no appeal by a pe rson who is required to pay any amount in terms of an order 
of the National Commission shall be entertained by the Supreme Court unless that person has deposited in 
the prescribed manner fifty per cent. of that amount or rupees fifty thousand, whichever is  less.]  
24. Finality of orders .—Every order of a District Forum, the State Commission or the National 
Commission shall, if no appeal has been preferred against such order under the provisions of this Act, be 
final.  
3[24A. Limitation period .—(1) The District Forum, the State Commission or the National 
Commission shall not admit a complaint unless it is filed within two years from the date on which the 
cause of action has arisen.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a compla int may be entertained after the 
period specified in sub -section ( 1), if the complainant satisfies the District Forum, the State Comm ission 
or the National Commission, as the case may be, that he had sufficient cause for not filing the complaint 
as this such period:  
Provided that no such complaint shall be entertained unless the National Commission, the State 
Commission or the District Forum, as the case may be, records its reasons for condoning such delay.  
24B. Administrative control .—(1) The National Commissi on shall have administrative co ntrol over 
all the State Commissions in t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) calling for periodical returns regarding the institutio n, disposal, pendency of cases;  
(ii) issuance of instructions regarding adoption of uniform procedure in the hearing of matters, 
prior service of copies of documents produced by one party to the opposite parties, furni shing of 
English translation of judgments written in any language, speed y grant of copies of documents;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by 7 of 2017, s. 177 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Ins. by 62 of 2002, s. 21 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003).  
3. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 19 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  22 
 (iii) generally overseeing the functioning of the State Commissions or the District Fora to ensure 
that the objects and purposes of the Act are best ser ved without in any way interfe ring with their 
quasi -judicial freedo m. 
(2) The State Commission shall have administrative control o ver all  the District Fora within its 
jurisdiction in all matters refer red to in sub -section ( 1).] 
1[25. Enforcement of orders of the District Forum, the State Commission or the National 
Commission .—(1) Where an interim order made under this Act is not complied with, the District Forum 
or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, may order the property of the 
person, not complying with such order to be attached.  
(2) No attach ment made under sub -section ( 1) shall remain in force for more than three months at the 
end of which, if the  non-compliance continues, the property attached may be sold and out of the proceeds 
thereof, the District Forum or the State Commission or the Nati onal Commission may award such 
damages as it thinks fit to the complainant and shall pay the balance, if any, to the party entitled thereto.  
(3) Where any amount is due from any person under an order made by a District Forum, State 
Commission or the Nation al Commission, as the case may be, the person entitled to the amount may 
make an application to the District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case 
may be, and such District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commiss ion may issue a 
certificate for the said amount to the Collector of the district (by whatever name called) and the Collector 
shall proceed to recover the amount in the same manner as arrears of land revenue.]  
2[26. Dismissal of frivolous or vexatious compl aints. —Where a complaint instituted before the 
District Forum, the State Commission or, as the case may be, the National C ommission is found to be 
frivo lous or vexatious, it shall, for reasons to be recorded in writing, dismiss the complaint and make an 
order that the complainant shall pay to the opposite party such cost, not exceeding ten thousand rupees, as 
may be specified in the order.]  
27. Penalties .—3[(1)] Where a trader or a person against whom a complaint is made 4[or the 
complainant] fails or omi ts to comply with any order made by the District Forum, the State Commission 
or the National Commission, as the case may be, such trader or person 4[or complainant] shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one month but  which may extend to 
three years, or with fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees but which may extend to ten  
thousand rupees, or with both:  
5*   *   *   *   *. 
6[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, shall have the 
power of a Judicial Magistrate of the first class for the trial of offences under this Act, and on such 
conferment of powers, the Distric t Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the 
case may be, on whom the powers are so conferred, shall be deemed to be a Judicial Magistrate of the 
first class for the purpose of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) All  offences under this Act may be tried summarily by the District Forum or the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be.]  
7[27A. Appeal against order passed under section 27 .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (2 of 1974), an appeal under section 27, both on facts and on law, 
shall lie from — 
(a) the order made by the District Forum to the State Commission;  
(b) the order made by the State Commission to the National Commission; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 22, for section 25 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Subs. by  Act 50 of 1993, s. 20, for section 26  (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
3. S. 27 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof b y Act 62 of 2002, s. 23 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Ins. by Act 50 of 1993, s. 21 (w.e.f. 18 -6-1993).  
5. Proviso o mitted by Act 62 of 2002, s. 23 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
6. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
7. Ins. by s. 24,  ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 23 
 (c) the order made by the National Commission to the Supreme Court.  
(2) Except as aforesaid, no appeal shall lie to any court from any order of a District Forum or a State 
Commission or the National Commission.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferr ed within a period of thirty days from the date of 
an order of a District Forum or a State Commission or, as the case may be, the National Commission:  
Provided that the State Commission or the National Commission or the Supreme Court, as the case 
may be, m ay entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if, it is satisfied that the 
appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of thirty days.]  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the members of the District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission or any 
officer or person acting under the direction of the District Forum, the State Commiss ion or the National 
Commission for executing any order made by it or in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done by such member, officer or person under this Act or under any rule or order made 
thereunder.  
1[28A. Service of no tice, etc.—(1) All notices, required by this Act to be served, shall be served in 
the manner hereinafter mentioned in sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The service of notices may be made by delivering or transmitting a copy thereof by registered post 
acknowledgment due  addressed to opposite party against whom complaint is made or to the complainant 
by speed post or by such courier service as are approved by the District Forum, the State Commission or 
the National Commission, as the case may be, or by any other means of transmission of documents 
(including FAX message).  
(3) When an acknowledgment or any other receipt purporting to be signed by the opposite party or his 
agent or by the complainant is received by the District Forum, the State Commission or the National 
Comm ission, as the case may be, or postal article containing the notice is received back by such District 
Forum, State Commission or the National Commission, with an endorsement purporting to have been 
made by a postal employee or by any person authorised by t he courier service to the effect that the 
opposite party or his agent or complainant had refused to take delivery of the postal article containing the 
notice or had refused to accept the notice by any other means specified in sub -section ( 2) when tendered 
or transmitted to him, the District Forum or the State Commission or the National Commission, as the 
case may be, shall declare that the notice had been duly served on the opposite party or to the 
complainant:  
Provided that where the notice was properly addressed, pre -paid and duly sent by registered post 
acknowledgment due, a declaration referred to in this sub -section shall be made notwithstanding the fact 
that the acknowledgment has been lost or mislaid, or for any other reason, has not been received b y the 
District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, within thirty days 
from the date of issue of notice.  
(4) All notices required to be served on an opposite party or to complainant shall be deemed to be 
sufficiently served, if addressed in the case of the opposite party to the place where business or profession 
is carried and in case of complainant, the place where such person actually and voluntarily resides.]  
29. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing the 
difficu lty: 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 25 (w.e.f. 15-3-2003 ). 24 
 Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
1[(3) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the Consumer Protection 
(Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002) , the Central Government may, by order, do anything not 
inconsistent with such provisions for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of the Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 2002  (62 of 2002) . 
(4) Every order made under sub -section ( 3) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
2[29A. Vacancies or defects in appointment not to invalidate orders .—No act or proceeding of the 
District Forum, the State Commission or the National Commission shall be invalid by reason only of the 
existence of any vacancy amongst its members or any def ect in the constitution thereof.]  
3[30. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions contained in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, clause ( b) of                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 4, sub -section ( 2) of section 5, sub -section ( 2) of section 12, clause ( vi) of                   
sub-section ( 4) of section 13, clause ( hb) of sub -section ( 1) of section 14, section 19, clause ( b) of               
sub-section ( 1) and sub -section  (2) of section 20, section 22 and section 23 of this Act.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions contained 
in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) and sub -section ( 4) of section 7, clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) and                      
sub-section ( 4) of section 8A, clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 3) of section 10, clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 13, clause ( hb) of sub -section ( 1) and subsection ( 3) of section 14, section 15 
and clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) of section 16 of this Act.]  
 4[30A. Power of the National Commission to make regulations .—(1) The National Commission 
may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, by notification, make regulations not  
inconsistent with this Act to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the 
purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regu lations may 
make provisions for the cost of adjournment of any proceeding before the District Forum, the State 
Commission or the National Commission, as the case may be, which a party may be ordered to pay.]  
5[31. Rules and regulations to be laid before ea ch House of Parliament .—(1) Every rule and every 
regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of 
Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
regulation or both Houses agree that  the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validi ty of anything previously done 
under that rule or regulation.  
(2) Every rule made by a State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 26 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
2. Ins. by A ct 34 of 1991, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -6-1991).  
3. Subs. by Act 62 of 2002, s. 27, for section 30 (w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 28, ibid. ((w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 29 , ibid., for section 31  ((w.e.f. 15 -3-2003 ). 
 
--------------------------The Delhi Apartment Ownership Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI APARTMENT OWNERSHIP  ACT, 1986  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Application.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER  II 
OWNERSHIP, HERITABILITY AND TRASFERABILITY OF APARTMENTS  
4. Ownership of apartment s. 
5. Apartment to be heritable and transferable.  
6. Ownership of apartment subject to conditions.  
7. Compliance with the covenants and bye -laws.  
8.  Right of re -entry.  
9. Purchasers or persons taking lease of apartments from apartment owners to execute an 
undertaking.  
10. Benamidar of the apartment to be deemed to be the real owner.  
11. Certain works prohibited.  
12. Encumbrances against apartments.  
CHAPTER III 
DEED OF APARTMENT AND ITS REGISTRATION  
13. Contents of Deed of Apar tment.  
14. Registration of Deed of Apartment.  
CHAPTER IV 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS AND BYE -LAWS FOR THE REGULATION OF THE AFFAIRS                 
OF SUCH ASSOCIATION  
15. Association of Apartment Owners and bye -laws relating thereto.  
16. Insurance.  
17. Disposition of property, destruction or damage.  
18. Action . 
CHAPTER V  
COMMON PROFITS, COMMON EXPENSES AND OTHER MATTERS  
19. Common profits, common expenses and other matters.  
20. Apartment owner not to be exempt from liability for contribution by waiver of the use of the 
common areas and facilities.  2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Common expenses to be a charge on the apartment.  
22. Separate assessments.  
23. Joint and several liability of vendor, etc., for unpaid common expenses.  
CHAPTER  VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to be binding on apartment owners, tenants , etc. 
25. Power to exempt stamp duty, registration fee and court fees and power to refund.  
26. Removal of doubts.  
27. Power to make rules.  
  3 
 THE DELHI APARTMENT OWNERSHIP ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 58 OF 1986  
[23rd December , 1986.] 
An Act to provide for the ownership of an individual apartment in a multi -storeyed  building and 
of an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant to such apartment and 
to make such apartment and interest heritable and transferable and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto . 
WHEREAS  with a view to securing that the ownership and control of the material resources of the 
community are so distributed as to sub -serve the common good, it is expedient to provide for the 
ownership of an individual apartment in a multi -storeyed building and of an undivided interest in the 
common areas and facilities appurtenant to such apartment, and to make such apartment and interest 
heritable and transferable and to provide for matters connected t herewith or incidental thereto;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Apartment 
Ownership Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Delhi.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date  as the Administrator may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Application .—The provisions of this Act shall apply to every apartment in a multi -storeyed  
building which was constructed mainly for residential or commercial or such other purposes as may be 
prescribed, by — 
(a) any group housing co -operative society; or  
(b) any other person or authority,  
before  or after the commencement of this Act and on a free hold land , or a lease hold land , if the lease for 
such land is for a period of thirty years or more:  
Provided that , where a building constructed, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, 
on any land contains only two or three apartments, the owner of such building may, by a declaration duly 
executed and registered under the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908 ), indicate his 
intention to make the provisions of this Act applicable to such building, and on such declaration being 
made, such owner shall execute and register a Deed of Apartment in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act, as if such owner were the p romoter in relation to such building.  
3. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of the Union territory of Delhi appointed by the 
President under article 239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “allottee ”, in relation to an apartment, means the person to whom such apartment has been 
allotted, sold or otherwise transferred by the promoter;  
(c) “apartment ” means a part of any property, intended for any type of independent use, including 
one or more rooms or enclosed spaces located on one or more floors or any  part or  parts thereof, in a     
multi -storeyed building to be used for residence or office or for the practice of any profession, or for 
the carrying on of any occupation, trade or business or f or such other type of independent use as may 
be pr escribed, and with a direct exi t to a public street, road or highway, or to a common area leading 
to such street, road or highway, and includes any garage or room (whether or not adjacent to the     
multi -storeyed building in which such apartment is located) provided by the promoter for use by the 4 
 owner of such apartment for parking any vehicle or, as the case may be, for the residence of any 
domestic aide employed in such apartment;  
(d) “apartment number ” means the number, letter or combination thereof, designating an 
apartment;  
(e) “apartment owner ” means the person or person s owning an apartment and an undivided 
interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant to such apartment in the percentage specified 
in the Deed of Apartment;  
(f) “Association of Apartment Owners ”,— 
(i) in relation to a multi -storey ed building not falling within s ub-clause ( ii), means all the 
owners of the apartments therein;  
(ii) in the case of the multi -storeyed buildings in any area, designated as a block, pocket or 
otherwise, means all the owners of the apartments in such block, po cket or other designated area,  
acting as a group in accordance with the bye -laws;  
(g) “authority ” includes any authority constituted or established b y or under any law for the time 
being in force;  
(h) “Board ” means the Board of Management of an Association of Apartment Owners elected by 
its members under the bye -laws;  
(i) “bye-laws” means the bye -laws made under this Act;  
(j) “common areas and facilities ”, in relation  to a multi -storeyed building, means — 
(i) the land on which such building is located and all easements, rights and appurtenances 
belonging to the land and the building;  
(ii) the foundations, columns, girders, beams, supports, main walls, roofs, halls, corridors, 
lobbies, stairs, stairways, fire -escapes and entrances and exits of the building;  
(iii) the basements , cellars, yards, gardens, parking areas, shopping centers, schools and 
storage spaces;  
(iv) the premises for the lodging of janitors or persons employed for the management of the 
property;  
(v) installations of central services, such as, power, light, gas, hot and cold water, heating, 
refrigeration, air conditioning, incinerating and sewerage;  
(vi) the elevators, tanks, pumps, motors, fans, compressors, ducts and in general all apparatus 
and installations existing for common use;  
(vii) such other community and commercial facilities as may be prescribed; and  
(viii) all other parts of the property necessa ry or convenient to its existence, maintenance and 
safety, or normally in common use;  
(k) “common expenses ” means— 
(i) all sums lawfully assessed against the apartment owners by the Association of Apartment 
Owners for meeting the expenses of administration, maintenance, repair or replacement of the 
common areas and facilities;  
(ii) expenses declared as common expenses by the provisions of this Act or by the bye -laws, 
or agreed upon by the Association of Apartment Owners;  
(l) “common profits ” means the balance of all income, rents, profits and revenues from the 
common areas and facilities remaining after the deduction of the co mmon expenses;  
(m) “competent authority ” means,— 
(i) a Secretary in the Delhi Administration, or  5 
 (ii) the Vice -Chairman of the Delhi Development Authority,  or 
(iii) the Land and Development Officer of the Central Government,  
who may be authorised  by the Administrator, by notification in the Official Gazette, to perform the 
functions of the competent authority under this Act;  
(n) “Deed of Apartment ” means the Deed of Apartment referred to in section 13;  
(o) “Delhi ” means the Union territory of Delh i; 
(p) “joint family ” means a Hindu undivided family, and in the case of other persons, a group or 
unit, the members of which are by custom, joint in possession or residence;  
(q) “limited common areas  and facilities”  means those common areas and facilities which are 
designated in writing by the promoter before the allotment, sale or other transfer of any apartment as 
reserved for use of certain apartment or apartments to the exclusion of the other apartments;  
(r) “Manager” means the Manager of an Association of Apartment Owners appointed under the 
bye-laws;  
(s) “multi -storeyed building ” means a building constructed on any land, containing four or more 
apartments, or two or more buildings in any area designated as a block, pocket or otherwise, each 
containing two or more apartments, with a total of four or more apartments in all such buil dings, and 
includes a building containing two or three apartments in respect of which a declaration has been 
made under the proviso to section 2;  
(t) “owner ”, in relation to an apartment, includes, for the purpose s of this Act, a lessee of the land 
on whic h the building containing such apartment has been constructed, where the lease of such land is 
for a period of thirty years or more;  
(u) “person ” includes a firm and a joint family, and also includes a group housing co -operative 
society;  
(v) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(w) “promoter ” means the authority, person or co -operative society, as the case may be, by which, 
or by whom, any multi -storeyed building has been constructed;  
(x) “propert y” means the land, the multi -storeyed building, all improvement and structures 
thereon, and all easements, rights and appurtenances belonging thereto, and all articles of personal 
property intended for use in connection therewith.  
CHAPTER  II 
OWNERSHIP, HERITABILITY AND TRASFERABILITY OF APARTMENTS  
4. Ownership of apartment s.—(1) Every person to whom any apartment is allotted, sold or 
otherwise transferred by the promoter, on or after the commencement of this Act, shall, save as otherwise 
provided in section 6, and subject to the other pro visions of this Act, be entitled to the exclusive 
ownership and possession of the apartment so allotted, sold or otherwise transferred to him.  
(2) Every person to whom any apartment was allotted, sold or otherwise transferred by the promoter 
before the com mencement of this Act shall, save as otherwise provided under section 6 and subject to the 
other provisions of this Act, be entitled, on and from such commencement, to the exclusive ownership 
and possession of the apartment so allotted, sold or otherwise t ransferred to him.  
(3) Every person who becomes entitled to the exclusive ownership and possession of an apartment 
under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled to such percentage of undivided interest in the 
common areas and facilities as may  be specified in the Deed of Apartment and such percentage shall be 
computed by taking, as a basis, the value of the apartment in relation to the value of the property.  
(4) (a) The percentage of the undivided interest of each apartment owner in the common areas and 
facilities shall have a permanent character, and shall not be altered without the written cons ent of all the 
apartment owners.  6 
 (b) The percentage of the undivided interest in the common areas and facilities shall not be separated 
from the apartme nt to which it appertains and shall be deemed to be conveyed or encumbered with the 
apartment, even though such interest is not expressly mentioned in the conveyance or other instrument.  
(5) The common areas and facilities shall remain undivided and no apa rtment owner or any other 
person shall bring any action for partition or division of any part thereof, and any covenant to the contrary 
shall be void.  
(6) Each apartment owner may use the common areas and facilities in accordance with the purposes 
for whic h they are intended without hindering or encroaching upon the lawful rights of the other 
apartment owners.  
(7) The necessary work relating to maintenance, repair and replacement of the common areas and 
facilities and the making of any additions or improvem ents thereto, shall be carried out only in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the bye -laws.  
(8) The Association of Apartment Owners shall have the irrevocable right, to be exercised by the 
Board or Manager, to have access to each apartment from  time to time during reasonable hours for the 
maintenance, repairs or replacement of any of the common areas or facilities therein, or accessible 
therefrom, or for making emergency repairs therein necessary to prevent damage to the common areas 
and facilit ies or to any other apartment or apartments.  
5. Apartment to be heritable and transferable .—Subject to the provisions of section 6, each 
apartment, together with the undivided interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant to such 
apartment, shall, for all purpose s constitute as a heritable and transferable immovable property within the 
meaning of any law for the time being in force, and accordingly, an apartment owner may transfer his 
apartment and the percentage of undivided interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant to such 
apartment by way of sale, mortgage, lease, gift, e xchange or in any other manner w hatsoever in the same 
manner, to the same extent and subject to the same rights, privileges, obligations, liabilities, 
investi gations, legal proceedings, remedy and to penalty, forfeiture or punishment as any other 
immovable property or make a bequest of the same under the law applicable to the transfer and 
succession of immovable property:  
Provided that where the allotment, sale  or other transfer of any apartment has been made by any 
group housing co -operative society in favour of any member thereof, the transferability of such apartment 
and all other matters shall be regulated by the law applicable to such group housing co -opera tive society.  
6. Ownership of apartment subject to conditions .—Where any allotment, sale or other transfer of 
any apartment has been made, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, in pursuance of any 
promise of payment, or part payment, of the  consideration thereof, the allottee or transferee, as the case 
may be, shall not become entitled to the ownership and possession of that apartment on to a percentage of 
undivided interest in the common areas and facilities apurtenant to such apartment, un til full payment has 
been made of the consideration thereof together with interest, if any due thereon, and where any such 
allottee or transferee has been inducted into the possession of such apartment or any part thereof in 
pursuance of such allotment or transfer, he shall, until the full payment of the consideration has been 
made, continue to remain in possession thereof on the same terms and conditions on which he was so 
inducted into possession of such apartment of part thereof.  
7. Compl iance with the covenants and bye -laws .—Each apartment owner shall comply strictly with 
the bye -laws and with the covenants, conditions and restrictions set forth in the Deed of Apartment, and 
failure to comply with any of them shall be a ground for action to recover sums  due for damages, or for 
injunctive relief, or both, by the Manager or Board on behalf of the Association of Apartment Owners, or, 
in a proper case, by an aggrieved apartment owner.  
8.  Right of re -entry .—(1) Where any land is given on lease by a person (h ereafter in this section 
referred to a s the lessor) to another person  (hereafter in this section referred to as the lessee, which term 
shall include a person in whose favour a sub -lease of such land has been granted), and any multi -storeyed   7 
 building has been constructed on such lease -hold land by the lessee or by any other person authorised by 
him or claiming through him, such lessee shall grant in respect of the land as many sub -lease s as there are 
apartments in such multi -storeyed  building and shall execute separate deeds of sub -lease in respect of 
such land in favour of each apartment owner, — 
(a) in the case of a multi -storeyed building constructed before the commencement of this Act, 
within three months from such commencement, or  
(b) in the case of a multi -storeyed building constructed after the commencement of this Act, 
within three months from the date on which the possession of any apartment in such multi -storeyed 
building is delivered to him:  
Provident that no sub -lease in respect of any land shall be granted except on the same terms and 
conditions on which the lease in respect of the land has been granted by the lessor and no additional terms 
and conditions shall be imposed by the lessee except with the previous approval of  the lessor.  
(2) Where the lessee has any reason to suspect that there had been any breach of the terms and 
conditions of the sub -lease referred to in sub -section ( 1), he may himself inspect the land on which the 
multi -storeyed building containing the conc erned apartment has been constructed, or may authorise one or 
more persons to inspect such land and make a report as to whether there had been any breach of the terms 
and conditions of any sub -lease in respect of such land and, if so, the nature and extent  of such breach, 
and for this purpose, i t shall be lawful for the lessee or any person authorised by him to enter into, and to 
be in, the land in relation to which such breach has been or is suspected to have been committed.  
(3) Where the lessee or any per son authorised by him makes an inspection of the land referred to in 
sub-section ( 1), he shall record in writing his finding s on such inspection [a true copy of which shall be 
furnished to the apartment owner by whom such breach of the terms and conditions  of sub -lease in 
respect of the land appurtenant to the apartment owned by him has been committed (hereinafter referred 
to as the defaulting apartment owner)] and where such finding s indicate that there has been any breach of 
the terms and conditions of th e sub -lease in respect of such land, the lessee may, by a notice in writing , 
require the defaulting apartment owner to refrain from committing any breach of the terms and conditions 
of the sub -lease in respect of such land, or to pay in lieu thereof such c omposition fees as may be 
specified in the notice in accordance with such scales of composition fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The defaulting apartment owner who is aggrieved by any notice served on him by the lessee under 
sub-section ( 3) may, within thirty days from the date of service of such notice, prefer an appeal to the 
Court of the District Judge having jurisdiction (hereinafter referred to as the District Court), either 
challenging the finding of the lessee or any person authorise d by him or disputing the amount of 
composition fees as specified in the notice, and the District Court may, after giving the parties a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard, confirm, alter or reverse those findings or may confirm, reduce or 
increase the a mount of composition fees or set aside the notice.  
(5) Where, on the breach of any terms and conditions of any sub -lease in respect of any land, any 
composition fees become payable, the defaulting apartment owner shall be deemed to have been guilty of 
such breach and in default of payment thereof it shall be lawful for the lessee to recover the amount of the 
composition fees from the defaulting apartment owner as an arrear of land revenue.  
(6) Where any composition fees are paid whether in pursuance of the notice served under              
sub-section ( 3) or in accordance with the decision of the District Court or a higher court on appeal, no 
further act ion shall be taken by the lessee  for the breach of the terms and c onditions of the sub -lease in  
respect of the land in relation to which payment of such composition fees has been made.  
(7) If the defaulting apartment owner omits or fails to refrain from committing any breach of the 
terms and conditions of the sub -lease in respect of the land or, as the case may  be, omits or fails to pay the 
composition fees in lieu thereof — 
(i) in accordance with the notice issued by the lessee under sub -section ( 3), or 
(ii) where the findings of the lessee or the person authorised  to inspect the land about any breach 
of the terms and conditions of any sub -lease in respect of the land or the amount of composition fees  8 
 specified in the notice issued by the lessee are altered by the District Court on appeal or by any higher 
court on f urther appeal, in accordance with the decision of the District Court or such higher court, as 
the case may be,  
the lessee shall be entitled, — 
(a) where no appeal has been preferred under sub -section ( 4), within sixty days from the date of 
service of the no tice under sub -section ( 3), or 
(b) where an appeal has been preferred under sub -section ( 4), within sixty days from the date on 
which the appeal is finally disposed of by the District Court or, where any further appeal is preferred 
to a higher court, by such higher court,  
to exercise the right of re -entry in respect of the undivided interest of the lessee in the land appurtenant to 
the apartment owned by the defaulting apartment owner, and where such right of re -entry cannot be 
exercised except by the eje ctment of the defaulting apartment owner from his apartment, such right of   
re-entry shall include a right to eject the defaulting apartment owner from the concerned apartment:  
Provided that no such ejectment shall be made unless the defaulting apartment owner has been paid 
by the lessee such amount as compensation for such ejectment as may be determined in accordance with 
the prescribed scales of compensation.  
(8) No appeal preferred under sub -section ( 4) shall be admitted, unless twenty -five per cent.  of the 
composition fees specified in the notice served on the defaulting apartment owner has been deposited to 
the credit of the District Court in savings bank account to be opened by the District Court in any branch of 
an approved bank:  
Provided that the Di strict Court may, on sufficient cause being shown, either remit or reduce the 
amount of such dep osit, and the interest accruing  on such deposit, shall enure to the credit of defaulting 
apartment owner by whom such deposit has been made:  
Provided further th at the amount of such deposit together with the interest due thereon shall be 
distributed by the District Court in accordance with the decision in such appeal, or where any further 
appeal has been preferred against such decision, in accordance with the dec ision in such further appeal.  
(9) The defaulting apartment owner, who is aggrieved by the amount offered to be paid to him under 
the proviso to sub -section ( 7) as compensation for ejectment from his apartment may, within thirty days 
from the date of such o ffer, prefer an appeal to the District Court and the District Court may, after giving 
the parties a reasonable opportunity of being heard, maintain increase or reduce the amount of 
compensation.  
(10) On the ejectment of the defaulting apartment owner from the apartment under sub -section ( 7), 
the lessee by whom such ejectment has been made may a fresh allotment of the concerned apartment to 
any other person on such terms and conditions as he may think fit:  
Provided that the consideration for such fresh allot ment shall not be more than the amount which has 
been paid to the defaulting apartment owner as compensation.  
(11) Where any lessee omits or fails to take any action either in accordance with the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) or  sub-section ( 7), the lessor may, in the first instance, require the 
lessee by a notice in writing to take action against the defaulting apartment owner under sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 3) or, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 7), within a period of ninety days from the date 
of service of such notice, and in the event of the omission or failure of the lessee to do so within such 
period, the lessor may himself take action as contained in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) or              
sub-section ( 7), and the provisions of sub -section ( 4) to sub -section ( 6) and sub -section ( 8) to sub -section 
(10), shall , as far as may be, apply to any action taken by him as if such action had been taken by the 
lessee.  
(12) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby decl ared that no work in any apartment by the owner 
thereof shall be deemed to be a breach of the terms of the sub -lease in respect of the land on which the 
multi -storeyed building containing such apartment has been constructed unless the work is prohibited by  
section 11.  9 
 Explanation. —In this se ction, “approved bank ” means the State Bank of India constituted under 
section 3 of th e State Bank of India Act, 1955  (23 of 1955 ), or a subsidiary bank constituted under  
section 3 of the State Bank of Ind ia (Subsidiary  Banks) Act, 1959  (38 of 1959 ), or a corresponding new 
bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings)       
Act, 1970  (5 of 1970 ) or a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking C ompanies 
(Acquisition and Tran sfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 1980 ). 
9. Purchasers or persons taking lease of apartments from apartment owners to execute an 
undertaking .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Transfer of Property Act, 1882  (4 of 1882), or 
in any other law for the time being in the force, any person acquiring any apartment from any apartment 
owner by gift, exchange, purchase or otherwise, or taking lease of an apartment from an apartment owner 
for a period of thirty years or more, shall, — 
(a) in respect of the said apartment, be subject to the provisions of this Act; and  
(b) execute and r egister an instrument in such f orm, in such manner and within such period as 
may be prescribed giving an undertaking to comply with the covenants, condit ions and restrictions, 
subject to which such apartment is owned by the apartment owner aforesaid.  
10. Benamidar of the apartment to be deemed to be the real owner .—If any apartment is acquired 
by any person, whether by allotment, sale or otherwise with the  consideration thereof paid or provided by 
another person, the acquirer shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Transfer of Property        
Act, 1882  (4 of 18 82), or in the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 18 82) or in any other law for the time being 
in force, be deemed to be the real owner of such apartment, and no court shall entertain any claim of the 
person paying or providing such consideration for title to such apartment on the ground that the 
acquisition o f the apartment was made on behalf of such person or on behalf of someone through whom 
such person claims.  
11. Certain works prohibited .—No apartment owner shall do any work which would be prejudicial 
to the soundness or safety of the property or reduce th e value thereof or impair any easement or 
hereditament or shall add any material structure or excavate any additional basement or cellar without 
first obtaining the consent of all the other apartment owners.  
Explanation. —In this section, reference to apart ment owners shall be construed, in relation to a   
multi -storeyed building in any block, pocket or other designated area, the apartment owners of the 
concerned multi -storeyed building in such block, pocket or other designated area.  
12. Encumbrances against  apartments .—(1) The owner of each apartment may create any 
encumbrance, only against the apartment owned by him and the percentage of the undivided interest in 
the common areas and facilities appurtenant to such apartment in the same manner and to the sam e extent 
as may be created in relation to any other separate parcel of property subject to individual ownership:  
Provided that where any such encumbrance is created, the apartment in relation to which such 
encumbrance has been created shall not be partitio ned or sub -divided.  
(2) No labour performed or material furnished with the consent, or at the request, of an apartment 
owner or his agent or his contractor or sub -contractor, shall be the basis for a charge or any encumbrance 
under the provisions of the  Transfer of Property Act, 1882  (4 of  1882), against the apartment or property 
of any other apartment owner not expressly consenting to, or requesting the same, except that such 
express consent shall be deemed to be given by the other apartment owner in the case of emergency 
repairs thereto.  
(3) The labour performed and material furnished for the common areas and facilities, if duly 
authorised by the Association of Apartment Owners in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the 
bye-laws, shall be deemed  to be performed or furnished with the express consent of each apartment owner 
and shall be the basis for a charge or encumbrance under the Act aforesaid against each of the apartments 
and shall be subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4). 
(4) In the e vent of a charge or any encumbrance against two or more apartments becoming effective, 
the apartment owners of the separate apartments may remove their apartments and the percentage of 10 
 undivided interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant to su ch apartments from the charge or 
encumbrance on payment of the fractional or proportional amounts attributable to each of the apartments 
affected and on such payment, the apartment and the percentage of undivided interest in the common 
areas and facilities  appurtenant thereto shall be free of the charge or encumbrance so removed:  
Provided that such partial payment shall not prevent the person having a charge or any of the 
encumbrances from proceeding to enforce the rights in relation to the amount not so pa id, against any 
other apartment and the percentage of undivided interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant to 
such apartment.  
(5) On any such payment, discharge on other satisfaction, referred to in sub -section ( 4), the apartment 
and the percentage of undivided interest in the common areas and facilities appurtenant thereto shall be 
free and clear of the charge or encumbrance, so paid, satisfied or discharged.  
CHAPTER III 
DEED OF APARTMENT AND ITS REGISTRATION  
13. Contents of Deed of Apartment .—(1) Whenever any allotment, sale or other transfer of any 
apartment is made, the promoter shall, — 
(a) in the case of an allotment, sale or other transfer made after the commencement of this Act, 
within three months from the date of such allotment, sale or other transfer, or  
(b) in the case of any allotment, sale or other transfer made before the commencement of this Act, 
within six months from the date of such commencement,  
execute a Deed of Apartment containing the following particulars,  namely:— 
(i) the name of the allottee,  
(ii) description of the land on which the building and the common areas and facilities are located, 
and whether the land is free -hold or lease -hold, and  if lease -hold, the period of such lease,  
(iii) a set of floor p lans of the multi -storeyed building showing the lay -out and location, number 
of apartments and bearing a verified statement of an architect certifying that it is an accurate copy of 
the portions of the plans of the building as filed with, and approved by, the local authority within the 
jurisdiction of which the building is located,  
(iv) description of the multi -storeyed building, stating the number of storeys and basements, the 
number of apartments in that building and the principal mater ials of which it is  constructed,  
(v) the apartment  number, or statement of the location of the apartment, its approximate area, 
number and dimension of rooms, and immediate common area to which it has access, and any other 
data necessary for its proper identification,  
(vi) description of the common areas and facilities and the percentage of undivided interest 
appertaining to the apartment in the common areas and facilities,  
(vii) description of the limited common areas and facilities, if any, stating to which apartments 
their use is reserved,  
(viii) value of the property and of each apartment, and a statement that the apartment and such 
percentage of undivided interest are not encumbered in any number whatsoever on the date of 
execution of the Deed of Apartment,  
(ix) statemen t of the purposes for which the building and each of t he apartments are intended and 
restricted as to use,  
(x) the name of the person to receive service of process, together with the particulars of the 
residence or place of business  of such person,  
(xi) provision as to the percentage of votes by the apartment owners which shall be determinative 
of whether to rebuild, repair, restore, or sell the property in the event of damage or destruction of all 
or any part of the property:  11 
 Provided that the competent authority may,  if it is satisfied that the promoter was prevented by 
sufficient cause from executing the Deed of Apartment in relation to any apartment within the period of 
three months, or six months as the case may be, permit the promoter to execute such  Deed of Apartment 
within such further period, not exceeding six months, as it may specify.  
(2) The promoter shall — 
(a) file in the office of the competent authority; and  
(b) deliver to the concerned allottee or transferee, as the case may be,  
a certified copy of each Deed of Apartment as registered under section 14.  
(3) Whenever may transfer of any apartment is made by the owner thereof, whether by sale, lease, 
mortgage, exchange, gift or otherwise, the transferor shall deliver to the transferee  the certified copy of 
the Deed of Apartment delivered to him under sub -section ( 2) after making an endorsement thereon as to 
the name, address and other particulars of the transferee, to enable the transferee to get the endorsement 
on the certified copy o f the Deed of Apartment registered in accordance with the provisions of section 14.  
(4) Whenever any succession takes place to any apartment or part thereof, the successor shall, within 
a period of six months from the date of such succession, make an appli cation to the competent authority 
for recording such succession on the certified copy of the Deed of Apartment in relation to the concerned 
apartment, and , if there is any dispute as to the succession to the apartment, the competent authority shall 
decide be same, and for this purpose, such authority shall have the powers of a civil court, while trying a 
suit, and its decision shall have effect of a decree and shall be appealable as if it were a decree passed by 
the principal civil court of original jurisdi ction.  
(5) Whenever any succession to an apartment has been recorded by the competent authority under 
sub-section ( 4), such authority shall send a true copy of such record, to the concerned Registrar for 
registration thereof in accordance with the provisio ns of section 14.  
(6) For  the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this section shall be in 
addition to and  not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law, for the time being in force, relating 
to the transfer of immovable  property.  
14. Registration of Deed of Apartment .—(1) Every Deed of Apartment and every endorsement 
thereon relating to the transfer of the apartment shall be deemed to be a document which is compulsorily 
registrable u nder the Registration Act, 1908 ( 16 of  1908 ) and shall be registered with the Registrar 
accordingly, and the words and expressions used in this section but not defined in this Act, shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in the Registration Act, 1908.  
(2) In all registration offi ces, a book called “Register of Deeds or Apartments under the Delhi 
Apartment Ownership Act, 1986 ” and an index relating thereto shall be kept in such form and shall 
contain such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) Whenever any endorsement on a Deed of A partment is registered, the concerned Registrar shall 
forward a certified copy thereof to the competent authority to enable that authority to make necessary 
entries in the certified copy of the concerned Deed of Apartment filed with it under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 13.  
(4) Any person acquiring any apartment shall be deemed to have notice of the contents of the Deed of 
Apartment and the endorsement, if any, thereon as from the date of its registration under this section.  
CHAPTER IV 
ASSOCIATION OF APARTMENT OWNERS AND BYE -LAWS FOR THE REGULATION OF THE AFFAIRS OF      
SUCH ASSOCIATION  
15. Association of Apartment Owners and bye -laws relating thereto .—(1) There shall be an 
Association of Apartment Owners for the administration of the affairs in relati on to the apartments and 
the property appertaining thereto and for the management of common areas and facilities:  12 
 Provided that where any area has been demarcated for the construction of multi -storeyed buildings, 
whether such area is called a block or pock et or by any other name, there shall be a single Association of 
Apartment Owners in such demarcated area.  
(2) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, frame model bye -laws in 
accordance with which the property referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be administered by the Association 
of Apartment Owners and every such Association shall, at its first meeting, make its bye -laws in 
accordance with the model bye -laws so framed, and in making its bye -laws the Association of Apartment 
Owners shall not make any departure from, variation of , addition to, or omission from, the model        
bye-laws aforesaid except with the prior approval of the Administrator and no such approval shall be 
given if, in the opinion of the Administrator, such  departure, variation, addition or omission will have the 
effect of altering the b asic structure of the model bye -laws framed by him.  
(3) The model bye -laws framed under sub -section ( 2) shall provide for the following, among other 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in  which the Association of Apart ment  Owners is to be formed;  
(b) the election, from among apartment owners, of a Board of Management by the members of 
the Association of Apartment Owners;  
(c) the number of apartment owners constituting the Board, the composition of the Board and that 
one-third of members of the Board shall retire annually;  
(d) the powers and duties of the Board;  
(e) the honorarium, if any, of the members of the Board;  
(f) the method of removal from office of the members of the Boar d; 
(g) the powers of the Board to engage the service of a Manager;  
(h) delegation of powers and duties of the Board to such Manager;  
(i) method  of calling meetings of the Association of Apartment Owners and the number of 
members of such Association who shall constitute a quorum for such meetings;  
(j) election of a President of the Association of Apartment Owners from among the apartment 
owners, w ho, shall preside over the meetings of the Board and of the Association of Apartment 
Owners;  
(k) election of a Secretary to the Association of Apartment Owners from among the apartment 
owners, who shall be an ex officio  member of the Board and shall keep t wo separate minutes books, 
one for the Association of Apartment Owners and the other for the Board, pages of each of which 
shall be consecutively numbered and authenticated by the President of the Association of Apartment 
Owners, and shall record, in the r espective minutes books, the resolutions adopted by the Association 
of Apartment Owners or the Board, as the case may be;  
(l) election  of a Treasurer from among the apartment owners, who shall keep the financial records 
of the Association of Apartment Owners as also of the Board;  
(m) maintenance, repair and replacement of the common areas and facilities and payment 
therefor ; 
(n) manner o f collecting from the apartment owners or any other occupant of apartments, share of 
the common expenses;  
(o) resignation and removal of persons employed for the maintenance, repair and replacement of 
the common areas and facilities;  
(p) restrictions with regard to the use and maintenance of the apartments and the use of the 
common areas and facilities, as may be necessary to prevent unreasonable interference in the use of 
each apartment and of the common areas and facilities by the several apartment owners ; 13 
 (q) any matter which may be required by the Administrator to be provided for in the bye -laws for 
the proper or better administration of the property;  
(r) such other matters as are required to be, or may be, provided for in the bye -laws.  
(4) The  bye-laws framed under sub -section ( 2) may also contain provisions, not inconsistent with   
this Act,— 
(a) enabling the Board to retain certain areas of the building for commercial purposes and to grant 
lease of the areas so retained, and to apply the proc eeds of such lease for the reduction of the common 
expenses for maintaining the building, common areas and facilities, and if any surplus is left after 
meeting such expenses, to distribute such surplus to the apartment owners as income;  
(b) relating to the  audit of the accounts of the Association of Apartment Owners and of the Board, 
and of the administration of the property;  
(c) specifying the times at which  and the manner in which annual general meetings and special 
general meetings of the Association of Apartment Owners shall be held and conducted;  
(d) specifying the time at which and the manner in which, the annual report relating to the 
activities of the Association of Apartment Owners shall be submitted;  
(e) specifying the manner in which the income de rived and expenditure incurred by the 
Association of Apartment Owners shall be dealt with, or as the case may be, accounted for.  
16. Insurance .—(1) The Board or Manager — 
(a) shall  have, if requested so to do by a mortgagee having a first mortgage covering an 
apartment, the authority to, and  
(b) shall, if required so to do by the bye -laws or by a majority of the apartment  owners,  
obtain  insurance for the property against loss or damage by fire or other hazards under such terms and for 
such amounts as shall be so requested or required.  
(2) Such insurance coverage shall be written on the property in the name of such Board or Manager as 
trustee for each of the apartment owners in the percentages specified in the bye -laws.  
(3) The premia payable in respect of every such insurance shall be common expenses.  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) to ( 3) shall be without prejudice to the right of  each of the 
apartment owner to insure his own apartment for his benefit.  
17. Disposition of property, destruction or damage .—If within sixty days of the date of damage or 
destruction to all, or part of any p roperty, or within such further  time as the competent authority may, 
having regard to the circumstances of the case, allow , the Association of Apartment Owners does not 
determine to repair, reconstruct or re -build such property, then, and in that event, — 
(a) the property shall be deemed  to be owned in common by the apartment owners;  
(b) the undivided interest in the property owned in common, which shall appertain to each 
apartment owner, shall be the percentage of the undivided interest previously owned by such owner in 
the common areas and facilities;  
(c) any incumbrances affecting any of the apartments shall be deemed to be transferred in 
accordance with the existing priority to the percentage of the undivided interest of the apartment 
owner in the property;  
(d) the property shall be su bject to an action for partition at the suit of any apartment owner in 
which event , the net proceeds of sale together with the net proceeds of the insurance on the property, 
if any, shall be considered as one fund and shall be divided amongst all the apart ment owners in the 
percentage equal to the percentage of undivided interest owned by each apartment owner in the 
property after paying out, all the respective shares of the apartment owners to the extent sufficient for 
the purpose and all charges on the un divided interest in the property owned by each apartment owner.  14 
 18. Action .—(1) Without prejudice to the rights of any apartment owner, action may be brought by 
the Board of Manager, in either case in the discretion of the Board on behalf of two or more of  the 
apartment owners as their respective interest may appear, with respect to any cause of action relating to 
the common areas and facilities or more than one apartment.  
(2) The service of process on two or more apartment owners in any action relating to the common 
areas and facilities or more than one apartment may be made on the person, designated in the bye -laws to 
receive service of process.  
CHAPTER V  
COMMON PROFITS, COMMON EXPENSES AND OTHER MATTERS  
19. Common profits, common expenses and other matters .—(1) The common profits of the 
property shall be distributed among , and the common expenses shall be charged to, the apartment owners 
according to the percentage of the undivided interest of the apartment owners in the common areas and 
facilities.  
(2) Where the apartment owner is not in the occupation of the apartment owned by him, the common 
expenses payable by such apartment owner may be recovered from the person in the occupation of the 
apartment.  
20. Apartment owner not to be exempt from liabili ty for contribution by waiver of the use of the 
common areas and facilities .—No apartment owner may exempt himself from liability for his 
contribution towards the common expenses by waiver of the use of enjoyment of any of the common 
areas and facilities, or by the abandonment of his apartment.  
21. Common expenses to be a charge on the apartment .—All sums assessed by the Association of 
Apartment Owners, but unpaid for the share of the common expenses chargeable to any apartment, shall 
constitute a charge on  such apartment prior to all other charges except only — 
(i) the charge, if any, on the apartment for payment of Government and municipal taxes; and  
(ii) all the sums unpaid on a first mortgage of the apartment.  
22. Separate assessments .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything to the contrary contained in any law 
relating to local authorities, each apartment and its percentage of undivided interest in the common areas 
and facilities appurtenant to such apartment (including an apartment in respect of which the provision s of 
this Act were applied under the proviso to section 2 ) shall be deemed to be separate property for the 
purpose of assessment of tax on lands and buildings leviable under such law and shall be assessed and 
taxed accordingly; and for this purpose a local  authority shall make suitable regulations to carry out the 
provisions of this section.  
(2) Neither the multi -storeyed building nor the property nor the common areas and facilities referred 
to in sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to be separate properties for the purpose of the levy of such taxes.  
23. Joint and several liability of vendor, etc., for unpaid common expenses .—(1) Upon the sale, 
bequest or other transfer of an apartment, the purchaser of the apartment or the grantee or legatee or the 
transferee , as the case may be, shall be jointly and severally liable with the vendor or the transferor for 
all unpaid assessments against the vendor or transferor for his share of the common expenses up to the 
time of the sale, bequest or other transfer, without pr ejudice to the right of the purchaser, grantee, legatee 
or transferee to recover from the vendor or the transferor any amount paid by the purchaser, grantee,  
legatee or transferee therefor . 
(2) Any purchaser, grantee, legatee or transferee referred to in s ub-section ( 1) shall be entitled to a 
statement from the Board or Manager setting forth the amount of the unpaid assessment against the 
vendor or transferor, as the case may be, and such purchaser, grantee, legatee or transferee shall not be 
liable for, nor shall the apartment be sold subject to a charge for any unpaid share of common expenses 
against such apartment accrued prior to such sale, bequest or other transfer, in excess of the amount set 
forth in the statement.  
  15 
 CHAPTER  VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to be binding on apartment owners, tenants , etc.—(1) The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being 
in force or in any contract, undertaking or other instrument and all apartment owners, tenants of owners, 
employees of owners and tenants, or any other person who may, in any manner, use the property or any 
part thereof to which this Act applies, shall be subject to the provisions of this Act and the bye -laws and 
the rules made thereunder:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect the right, title or interest acquired by 
any allottee or other person in common areas and facilities from any promoter on or before the 28th day 
of February, 1986.  
(2) All agreements, divisions and determinations lawfully made by the Association of Apartment 
Owners in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the bye -laws shall be deemed to be binding on 
all apartment owners.  
25. Power to exempt stamp duty, regist ration fee and court fees and power to refund .—(1) The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, reduce or remit, whether prospectively 
or retrospectively from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, — 
(a) the stamp duty with which, under any law relating to stamp duty for the time being in force, 
instruments or documents executed by or on behalf of a promoter, apartment owner or Association of 
Apartment Owners relating to any of the purpose s of this Act are res pectively chargeable;  
(b) any fee payable by or on behalf of any promoter, apartment owner or Association of 
Apartment Owners in relation to instruments or documents referred to in clause ( a) under any law 
relating to registration of documents or to court fees, for the time being in force,  
and which the Central Government is competent to levy.  
(2) The Central Government may refund the amount of any duty or fee paid in pursuance of any law 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) in such circumstances, to such extent and subject to such terms and 
conditions, if any, as that Government may, by order, determine.  
26. Removal of doubts .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of  the 
Transfer of Property Act, 1882  (4 of 1882 ), shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, apply to the transfer of any apartment, together with its undivided interest in the common 
areas and facilities appurtenant thereto, made by the owner of such apartment, whethe r such transfer is 
made by sale, lease, mortgage, exchange, gift or otherwise, as they apply to the transfer of any immovable 
property.  
27. Power to make rule s.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry ou t the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, name ly:— 
(a) the purposes, other than the purposes specified in section 2, for which any multi -storeyed 
building may be utilised;  
(b) the type of independent uses, other than the uses specified in clause ( c) of section 3, which 
may be made of an apartment;  
(c) the  community and commercial facilities which may be included in common areas and 
facilities under sub -clause ( vii) of clause ( j) of section 3;  
(d) the scales of composition fees which may be paid under section 8 for the breach of the terms 
and conditions of any lease or sub -lease;  
(e) the scales in accordance with which compensation, to be paid for the ejectment of an 
apartment owner from his apartment, shall be determined as required by sub -section ( 7) of section 8;  16 
 (f) the form and manner in which, and the period within which, an instrument referred to in  
clause ( b) of section 9, shall be executed and registered;  
(g) the form in which the Register of Deeds of Apartments under the Delhi Apartment Ownership 
Act, 1986 and the index relating thereto shall be ke pt and the particulars which such Register shall 
contain as required by sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, or both House s agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, how ever, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
--------------------------The Delhi Fire Prevention and Fire Safety Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE SAFETY ACT, 1986  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Inspection of buildings, premises, etc . 
4. Measures for fire prevention and fire safety . 
5. Power to seal buildings or premises . 
6. Provision regarding certain buildings and premises.  
7. Default powers of the Chief Fire Officer . 
8. Appeals . 
9. Bar of jurisdiction of courts . 
10. Penalties . 
11. Offences by companies . 
12. Sanction of prosecution . 
13. Jurisdiction . 
14. Protection of action taken  in good faith . 
15. Officer to be public servant . 
16. Power to make rules.  
 
  2 
 THE DELHI FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE SAFETY ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 56 OF 1986  
[12th Decembe r, 1986 .] 
An Act to make more effective provision for the fire prevention and fire safety measures in  
certain buildings and premises in the Union Territory of Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Fire Prevention 
and Fire Safety Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the Union Territory of Delhi.  
(3) It sha ll come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may,  by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of Delhi appointed by the President under article 
239 of the Constitution;  
(b) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 347A of the 
Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957);  
(c) “building” means a house, outhouse, stable, latrine, urinal, shed, hut, wall (other than a 
boundary wall) or any other structure, wh ether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or other 
material;  
(d) “building bye -laws”, means the bye -laws made under section 282 of the Can tonments              
Act, 1924 (2 of 1924) or the bye -laws made under section 481 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation  
Act, 1957 (66 of 1957)  or the bye -laws made under section 188, sub -section ( 3) of section 189 and              
sub-section ( 1) of section 190 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Punjab Act III of 1911), as in force 
in New Delhi or the regulations made unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 57 of the Delhi Development 
Act, 1957 (61 of 1957), relating, to buildings;  
(e) “Chief Fire Officer ” means the Chief Fire Officer appointed by the Municipal Corporation of 
Delhi established under the Delhi Municipal Corporation  Act, 1957 (66 of 1957);  
(f) “Delhi” mean the Union Territory of Delhi;  
(g) “fire prevention and fire safety measures ” means such measures as are necessary in 
accordance with the building bye -laws for the prevention, control and fighting of fire and for ensuring 
the safety of life and property in case of fire;  
(h) “local authority ” means the Delhi Cantonment Board establi shed under the Cantonments Act, 
1924 (2 of 1924), the Delhi Development Authority established under the Delhi Development Act, 
1957 (61 of 1957), the Delhi Municipal Corporation established under the Delhi Municipal 
Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957), the New Delhi Municipal Committee established under the 
Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Punjab Act III of 1911), as in force in New Delhi or any other authority 
under any other law, which may be notified in this behalf by the Administrator with the prior 
approval of the Central Government;  
(i) “nominated authority ” means an Officer not below the rank of a Station Officer nominated by 
the Chief Fire Officer, and includes an officer nominated by a local authority or a railway 
administration as a nominated authority f or the purposes of this Act;  
  
                                                           
1. 2nd March , 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 151(E), date d 27th January , 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (j) “occupier” includes— 
(i) any person who for the time being is paying or the liable to pay to the owner the rent or 
any portion of the rent of the land or building in respect of which such rent is paid or is payable;  
(ii) an owner in occupation of, or otherwise using his land or building;  
(iii) a rent -free tenant of any land or building;  
(iv) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; and  
(v) any person who is liable to pay to the owner damages for the use and occupa tion of any land 
or building;  
(k) “owner” includes a person who for the time being is receiving or is entitled to receive, the rent 
of any land or building whether on his own account or on account of himself and others or as an 
agent, trustee, guardian or receiver or any other person or who shoul d so receive the rent or be 
entitled to receive it if the land or building or part thereof were let to a tenant and also includes — 
(i) the custodian of evacuee property in respect of evacuee property vested in him under the 
Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 (31 of 1950);  
(ii) the Director of Estates of the Government of India, the Secretary of the Delhi 
Development Authority, cons tituted under the Delhi Development Act, 1957 (61 of 1957), the 
general manager of a railway and the head of a Government department, in respect of properties 
under their respective control;  
(l) “premises” means any land or any building or  part of a buildi ng appurtenant  thereto which is 
used for storing explosives, explosive substances and dangerously inflammable substances.  
Explanation .—In this clause, “explosive”, “explosive substances ” and “dangerously inflammable 
substances ” shall have the meanings, res pectively, assigned to them in the Explosives Act, 1884          
(4 of 1884), the  Explosive Substances Act, 1908  (5 of 1908), and the Inflammable Substances Act, 
1952 (20 of 1952).  
3. Inspection of buildings, premises, etc. —(1) The nominated authority may,  after giving three 
hours’ notice to the occupier, or, if there be no occupier, to the owner of any building having such 
height as may be specified by rules framed under this Act, or premises, enter and inspect the said 
building or premises at any time bet ween sunrise and sunset where such inspection appears necessary 
for ascertaining the adequacy or contravention of fire prevention and fire safety measures:  
Provided that the nominated  authority may enter into and inspect any building or premises at any 
time if it appears to it to be expedient and necessary to do so in order to ensure safety of life and 
property.  
(2) The nominated authority shall be provided with all possible assistance by the owner or 
occupier, as the case may be, of the building or premise s for carrying out the inspection under              
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) When any building or premises used as a human dwelling is entered under sub -section ( 1), 
due regard shall be paid to the social and religious sentiments of the occupiers; and , before any 
apartment in the actual occupancy of any women , who, according to the custom does not appear in 
public, is entered under sub -section ( 1), notice shall be given to her that she is at liberty to withdraw, 
and every reasonable facility shall be af forded to her for withdrawing.  
4. Measures for fire prevention and fire safety .—(1) The nominated authority shall, after the 
completion of the inspection of the building or premises under section 3 , record its views on the 
deviations from , or the contraventions of, the building bye -laws with regard to the fire prevention and 
fire safety measures and the inadequacy of such measures provided therein with reference to the 
height of the building or the nature of activities carried on in such bu ilding or premises and issue a 
notice to the owner or occupier of such building or premises directing him to undertake such 
measures as may be specified in the notice.  4 
 (2) The nominated authority shall also give a report of any inspection made by it under section 3 
to the Chief Fire Officer.  
5. Power to seal buildings or premises .—(1) Where, on receipt of a report  from the nominated 
authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 4, it appears to the Chief Fire Officer that the condition of 
any building or premi ses is dangerous to life or property, he shall, without prejudice to any action 
taken under section 7, by order, require the persons in possession or occupation of such building or 
premises to remove themselves from such building or premises forthwith.  
(2) If an order made by the Chief Fire Officer under sub -section ( 1) is not complied with, the 
Chief Fire Officer may direct any police officer having jurisdiction in the area to remove such persons 
from the building or premises and such officer shall comply with such directions.  
(3) After the removal of the persons under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as case may be, the 
Chief Fire Officer shall seal the building or premises.  
(4) No person shall remove such seal except under an order made by the Chief Fi re Officer.  
6. Provision regarding certain buildings and premises .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Chief Fire Officer may enter and inspect 
any building, the construction of which was completed on or  before the 6th day of June, 1983 (being 
the date on which the curren t building bye -laws had come in to force) or any building which was 
under construction on such date if such inspection appears necessary for ascertaining the adequacy of 
fire prevention an d fire safety measures in such building.  
(2) The entry and inspection under sub -section ( 1) shall be done by the Chief Fire Officer in the 
manner laid down in section 3.  
(3) The Chief Fire Officer shall, after inspection of the building or premises under                      
sub-section ( 1), and after taking into consideration — 
(i) the provisions of the building bye -laws in accordance with which the plan of the said 
building or premises was sanctioned;  
(ii) the  conditions imposed, if any, by the local authority at the time of the sanction of the 
plan of the said building or premises; and  
(iii) the minimum standards for fire prevention and fire safety measures specified such 
building or premises as may be specifi ed by rules framed under this Act,  
issue a notice to the owner or occupier of such building or premises stating therein the inadequacy in 
regard to the fire prevention and fire safety measures in it and direct the owner or occupier to undertake 
measures fo r rectifying the said inadequacy within such period as he may consider just and reasonable.  
7. Default powers of the Chief Fire Officer .—(1) The Chief Fire Officer shall, in the event of          
non-compliance of any notice issued under section 4 or section 6, take such steps as may be necessary for 
the compliance of such notice.  
(2) All expenses incurred by the Chief Fire Officer in relation to any steps taken by him under              
sub-section ( 1) shall be payable by the owner or occupier on dema nd and shall, if not paid within ten days 
after such demand, be recover able as arrears of land revenue.  
8. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any notice or order of the nominated authority or the 
Chief Fire Officer may prefer an appeal against such notice or order to the Appellate Tribunal within 
thirty days from the date of the notice or order appealed against:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that ther e was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the Administrator against the order of the Appellate Tribunal confirming, 
modifying or annulling a notice or an order issued or made under this Act within thirty days f rom the date 
of the order of the Appellate Tribunal:  5 
 Provided that the Administrator may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if he is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal or the Administrator shall be made in such form and shall be 
accompanied by a copy of the notice or order appealed against and by such fees as may be specified by 
rules framed under this Act.  
(4) The provisions of section 3 47C of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957), and 
the rules made thereunder, shall, so far as may be, apply to the disposal of an appeal under this section as 
they apply to the disposal of an appeal under that Act.  
9. Bar of jurisdiction o f courts .—No court shall entertain any suit, application or other proceeding 
in respect of any notice or order under this Act and no such notice or order shall be called in question 
otherwise than by preferring an appeal under this Act.  
10. Penalties .—Whoe ver contravenes any provision of this Act shall, without prejudice to any other 
action taken against him under section 7, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to six months, or with fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees, or with both and where the offence 
is a continuing one , with a further fine which may extend to  three  thousand rupees for every day after the 
first during which such offence continues.  
11. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been co mmitted by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was c ommitted, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company , as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and sha ll be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exerci sed 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the conse nt or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liabl e to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm , means a partner in the firm.  
12. Sanction of prosecution .—No court shall proceed to the trial of an offence under this Act, except 
on the complaint of, or upon information received from the nominated authority.  
13. Jurisdiction .—No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate shall try an offence 
punishable under this Act.  
14. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to b e done under this Act or 
any rules made thereunder.  
15. Officer to be public servant .—Every officer acting under the provisions of this Act shall be 
deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
16. Power to make rules .—(1) The Administrator may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the height of the building under sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  6 
 (b) the minimum standards for fire prevention and fire safety measures for the purposes of            
clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 3) of section 6;  
(c) the  form in which an appeal shall be made and the fees that shall accompany such appeal 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 8;  
(d) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, provided by rules.  
(3) The Central Government shall cause every rule made unde r this Act to be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
 
--------------------------The Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Inspectors . 
4. Powers of Inspectors . 
5. Powers of Inspectors where employment of dock workers are dangerous . 
6. Facilities to be afforded to an Inspector . 
7. Restrictions on disclosure of information . 
8. Appeal.  
9. Advisory Committee . 
10. Power of appropriate Government to direct inquiry into cases of accidents or diseases . 
11. Obligations of dock workers . 
12. Power to exempt . 
13. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
14. Penalties . 
15. Determination of the persons responsible for the offence in certain cases . 
16. Power of court to make orders . 
17. Provisions relating to jurisdiction . 
18. Provision regarding fine . 
19. General provision for punishment for other offences.  
20. Power to make rules . 
21. Power to make regulations.  
22. General provision relating to rules and regulations . 
23. Amendment of Act 9 of 1948 . 
24. Repeal . 
25. Savings . 
  2 
 THE DOCK WORKERS (SAFETY, HEALTH AND WELFARE) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 54 OF 1986  
[7th December , 1986 .] 
An Act to provide for the safety, health and welfare of dock workers and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Dock 
Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official  Gazette, appoint.  
(4) It shall not apply to any ship of war of any nationality.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, in relation to any major port, the Central Government, and, 
in relation to any ot her port, the State Government;  
(b) “cargo” includes anything carried or to be carried in a ship or other vessel;  
(c) “Chief Inspector ” means the Chief Inspector of Do ck Safety, appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 3;  
(d) ”dock work ” means any work in or within the vicinity of any port in connection with, or 
required for, or incidental to, the loading, unloading, movement or storage of cargoes into or from 
ship or  other vessel, port, dock, storage place or landing place, and includes — 
(i) work in connection with the preparation of ships or other vessels for receipt or discharge of 
cargoes or leaving port; and  
(ii) chipping, painting or cleaning of any hold, tank, structure or lifting machinery or any other 
storage area in board the ship or in the docks;  
(e) “dock worker ” means a person employed or to be employed directly or by or through any 
agency (including a contractor) with or without knowledge of the principal  employer, whether for 
remuneration or not, on dock work;  
(f)“employer ”, in relation to a dock worker, means the person by whom he is employed or is to be 
employed on dock work,  whether for remuneration or not;  
(g) “principal employer ”, in relation to a do ck worker employed or to be employed by or through 
any agency (including a contractor), means the person in connection with those work he is employed 
or is to be employed by such agency;  
(h) “regulation ” means a regulation made under this Act.  
 3. Inspectors .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
appoint such person as it thinks fit to be the Chief Inspector of Dock Safety and such persons as it thinks 
fit to be Inspectors subordinate to the Chief Inspector for  the purposes of this Act at such ports as may be 
specified in the notification.  
(2) The Chief Inspector shall also exercise the powers of an Inspector.  
(3) The Chief Inspector and all Inspectors shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
                                                           
1.15th April , 1987 , vide notification No. G.S.R. 399(E),  dated 15th April, 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,            
sec. 3 (i). 3 
 4. Powers of Inspectors .—An Inspector may, at any p ort for which he is appointed, — 
(a) enter, with such assistance (if any), as he thinks fit, any ship, dock, warehouse or other 
premises, where any dock work is being ca rried on, or where he has reason to believe that any dock 
work is being carried on;  
(b) make examination of the ship, dock, lifting machinery, cargo gear, stagings, transport 
equipment, warehouses or other  premises, used or to be used, for any dock work;  
(c) require the production of any register, muster roll or other document relating to the 
employment of dock workers and  examine such document;  
(d) take on the spot or otherwise such evidence of any person which he may deem necessary:  
Provided that no perso n shall be compelled under this section to answer any question or give any 
evidence tending to incriminate himself;  
(e) take copies of registers, records or other documents or portions thereof as he may consider 
relevant in respect of any  offence which he has reason to believe has been committed or for the 
purpose of any inquiry;  
(f) take photograph, sketch, sample, measure or record as he may consider necessary for the 
purpose of any examination or  inquiry;  
(g) hold an inquiry into the causes of an y accide nt which he has reason t o believe was the result 
of the collapse or failure of lifting machinery, transport equipment, staging or non -compliance with 
any of the provisions of this Act or the regulations;  
(h) issue show cause notice relating to the safety, health and welfare provisions arising under this 
Act or the regulations;  
(i) prosecute, conduct or defend before any court any complaint or other proceedings arising 
under this Act or the regulations;  
(j) exercise such other powers as may be conferred upon  him by the regulations.  
5. Powers of Inspectors where employment of dock workers are dangerous .—(1) If it appears to 
an Inspector that any place at which any dock work is being carried on is in such a condition that it is 
dangerous to life, safety or health, of dock workers, he may, in writing, serve on the owner or on the 
person in charge of such place an order prohibiting any dock work in such place until measures have been 
taken to remove the cause of the danger to his satisfaction.  
(2) An Inspector  serving an order under sub -section ( 1) shall endorse a copy to the Chief In spector 
who may modify or cancel  the order without waiting for an appeal.  
6. Facilities to be afforded to an Inspector .—The owner or the person in charge of the place at 
which any dock work is being carried on, shall afford the Chief Inspector or the Inspector all reasonable 
facilities for making any entry, inspection, survey, measurement, examination or inquiry under this Act or 
the regulations.  
7. Restrictions on disclosure of information .—(1) All copies of, and extracts from, registers or 
other records in relation to any dock work and all other information required by the Chief Inspector or an 
Inspector or by any one assisting him, in the course of the inspection or investigati on carried out for the 
purposes of this Act or the regulations shall be regarded as confidential and shall not be disclosed to any 
person or authority unless such disclosure is for the purpose of any action or proceeding under this Act or 
the regulations o r under any other law or unless the Chief Inspector or the Inspector considers such 
disclosure necessary to ensure the health, safety or welfare of any dock worker.  
(2) The Chief Inspector or the Inspector shall not disclose the source of any complaint bri nging to his 
notice a defect or breach of any legal provisions and if any visit or inspection is to be made in connection 
with such a complaint, he shall give no intimation to the employer that the visit is made in consequence of 
receipt of such a complain t: 4 
 Provided that the restrictions imposed under this sub -section shall not apply to any case where the 
complainant himself has expressed his willingness to have the source of complaint disclosed.  
(3) If the Chief Inspector or an Inspector or any other pers on referred to in sub -section ( 1) discloses, 
contrary to the provisions of this section, any information as aforesaid, the shall he punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one yea r, or with fine, or with both.  
8. Appeal .—Any person aggrieved by an order under section 5 may, within fifteen days from the date 
on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the Chief Inspector or where such order is 
by the Chief Inspector, to such authority as may be specified by the regulations and the Chief Inspector on 
such authority shall, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, dispose of the appeal  as 
expeditiously as possible:  
Provided that the Chief Inspector or such authority may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the 
said period of fifteen days if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing 
the appeal in time:  
Provided further that an order under section 5 shall be complied with, pending the decision of the 
Chief Inspector or such authority.  
9. Advisory Committee .—(1) The appropriate Government may constitute an Advisory Committee 
to advise upon such matters arising out of the administration of this Act and the regulations as that 
Government may refer to it fo r advice.  
(2) The members of the Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the appropriate Government and 
shall be of such number and chosen in such manner as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act:  
Provided that the Advisory Committee shall include an equal number of members representing — 
(i) the appropriate Government,  
(ii) the dock workers, and  
(iii) the employers of dock  workers and shipping companies.  
(3) The Chairman of the Advisory Committee sh all be one of the members appointed to represent the 
appropriate Government, nominated in this behalf by that Government.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all members of the 
Advisory Committee.  
(5) The term of office of the members of the Adviso ry Committee and the manner of f illing vacancies 
among , and the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by, the members shall be such 
as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
10. Power of  appropriate Government to direct inquiry into cases of accidents or diseases .—(1) 
The appropriate Government may, if it considers it expedient to do so, appoint a competent person to 
inquire into the causes of any accident occurring in connection with any  dock work or into any cases 
where a disease specified by regulations as a disease connected with dock work has been or is suspected 
to have been contracted by dock workers and may also appoint one or more persons possessing legal or 
special knowledge to a ct as assessors in such inquiry.  
(2) The person appointed to hold an inquiry under this section shall have all the powers of a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the purposes of enforcing the attendance of 
witness es and com pelling the production of documents and material objec ts and may also, so far as may 
be necessary for the purposes of the inquiry, exercise any of the powers of an Inspector under this Act; 
and every person required by the person making the inquiry to furnish any information shall be deemed to 
be legally bound so to do within the meaning of section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3) The person holding the inquiry under this section shall make a report to the appropriate 
Government stating th e causes of the accident or, as the case may be, disease and any attendant 
circumstances and adding any observations which he or any of the assessors may think fit to make.  5 
 (4) The procedure to be followed at inquiries under this section shall be such as t he appropriate 
Government may prescribe by rules under section 20.  
11. Obligations of dock workers .—(1) No dock worker shall — 
(a) wilfully interfere with, or misuse, any appliance, convenience or other thing provided in 
connection with any dock work for th e purpose of securing the health, safety and welfare of dock 
workers;  
(b) wilfully and without reasonable cause do anything likely to endanger himself or others; and  
(c) wilfully neglect to make use of any appliance, convenience or other thing provided in 
connection with any dock work for the purpose of securing the health, safety and welfare of dock 
workers.  
(2) If any dock worker contravenes any of the provisions of sub -section (1), he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupees, or with both.  
12. Power to exempt .—The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
exempt from all or any of the provisions of this Act and of the regu lations, or such conditions, if any, as it 
thinks fit— 
(a) any port or place, dock, wharf, quay or similar premises, if that Government is satisfied that 
dock work is only occasionally carried on or the traffic is small and confined to small ships and 
fishing vessels at such port, dock, wharf, quay or similar premises; or  
(b) any specified ship or class of ships, if that Government is satisfied, having regard to the 
features of such ship or ships, the nature, quantum and periodicity of dock work carried thereon and 
all other relevant factors, that it is necessary so to do:  
Provided that the appropriate Government shall not grant exemption under this section unless it is 
satisfied that such exemption will not adversely affect the health, safety and welfare of dock worker s. 
13. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
14. Penalties .—(1) Whoever, — 
(a) wilfully obstructs  an Inspector in exercise of any power conferred by or under this Act or fails 
to produce on demand by an Inspector any register or other documents kept in pursuance of the 
regulations or otherwise in connection with any dock work or conceals or prevents o r attempts to 
prevent any person from appearing before, or being examined by, an Inspector; or  
(b) unless duly authorised or in case of necessity, removes any fencing, gangway, gear, ladder,  
life-saving means or appliance, light, mark, stage or other thing  required to be provided by, or under, 
the regulations; or  
(c) having in case of necessity removed any such fencing, gangway, gear, ladder, life -saving 
means or appliance, light, mark, stage or other thing, omits to restore it at the end of the period for 
which its removal was necessary,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to five thousands rupees, or with both.  
(2) If any person, being a person whose duty is to comply with any of the regulations, contravenes 
such regulations and such contravention results — 
(a) in any fatal accident to a dock worker, or  
(b) an accident which incapacitates a dock worker from earning his full wages for more than a 
fortnight,  
such person shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with 
fine which shall not be less than two thousand rupees in a case falling under clause ( a) and five hundred 6 
 rupees in a case falling under clause ( b) but which may extend, in either case, to five thousand rupees, or 
with both, and the court may order the whole or part of th e fine to be paid to the depende nt of the  
deceased dock worker or, as the case may be, to the injured dock worker.  
Explanation .—The provisions of this sub -section shall be in addition to any provi sions which may be 
made under sub -section ( 4) of section 21.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sectio n 11, if any dock worker contravenes any provision of this Act 
or the regulations imposing any duty or liability on dock workers, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with tine which may extend to two 
hundred rupees, or with both.  
(4) If any person who has been convicted for an offence punishable under any of the provisions of 
this Act or the regulations is again convicted for an offence committed within two year of the previous 
conviction and involving a contravention of the same provision, he shall be punishable for each 
subsequent conviction with double the im prisonment to which he would have been liable for the first 
contravention of such provision.  
15. Determination of the persons responsible for the offence in certain cases .—If the person 
committing an offence made punishable by this Act or the regulations or any abetment thereof is a firm or 
other association of individuals or a company or a local authority, all or any of the partners or members or 
directors thereof as well as the firm, association of individuals, company or local authority shall be 
deemed to be guilty of the offence or abetment and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that where a firm, associati on or company has given notices in writing to the Chief Inspector 
and the Inspector of the port where any dock work is being carried that it has nominated, — 
(a) in the case of a firm, any of its partners;  
(b) in the case of an association, any of its membe rs; 
(c) in the case of a company, any of its directors,  
who is resident, in each case in any place to which this Act extends and who is in each case either in fact 
in charge of the management of, or holds the largest number of shares in, such firm, associa tion or 
company, to assume the responsibility of the person in charge of any dock work for the purposes of this 
Act, such partner, member or director, as the case may be, shall, so long as he continues to so reside and 
be in charge or hold the largest numb er of shares as aforesaid , be deemed to b e the person in charge of 
such dock work for the purposes of this Act unless a notice in writing cancelling his nomination or stating 
that he has ceased to be a partner, member or director, as the case may be, is re ceived by the Chief 
Inspector.  
16. Power of court to make orders .—(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence punishable 
under this Act the court may, in addition to awarding him any punishment, by order in writing, require 
him within a period specified in the order (which may be extended by the court from time to time o n 
application made in this behalf) to take such measures as may be so specified for remedying the matters in 
respect of which offence was committed.  
(2) Where an order is made under sub -section ( 1), the person shall not be liable under this Act in 
respect of the continuance of the offence during the period, or extended period, if any, but if on the expiry 
of such period or extended period the order of the court has not been fully complied with, the person shal l 
be deemed to have committed a further offence and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day after 
such expiry on which the order has not been complied with, or with both.  
17. Provisions relating to  jurisdiction .—(1) No court inferior to that of a metropolitan magistrate or 
a magistrate of the first class shall try any offence under this Act or the regulations.  
(2) No prosecution for any offence under this Act or the regulations shall be instituted e xcept by or 
with the previous sanction of an Inspector.  7 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no 
court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act or the regulations unless c omplaint thereof has 
been made — 
(a) in the case of an  offence punishable with fine, — 
(i) within six months from the date of the offence; or  
(ii) where the commission of the offence was not known to the Inspector, within six months from 
the first day on  which the offence comes to the knowledge of the Inspector; or  
(iii) where it is not known by whom the offence was committed, within six months from the first 
day on which the identity of the offender is known to the Inspector; or  
(b) in the case of an offence  punishable with impr isonment, — 
(i) within one year from the date of the offence; or  
(ii) where the commission of the offence was not known to the Inspector, within one year from 
the first day on which the offence comes to the knowledge of the Inspector; or  
(iii) where it is n ot known by whom the offence was committed, within six months from the first 
day on which the identity of the offender is known to the Inspector.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, in the case of a continuing offence a fresh period of 
limitatio n shall begin to run at every movement of the time during which the offence continues.  
18. Provision regarding fine .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 29 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), it shall be lawful for a metropolitan magistrate or a magistrate of 
the first class to pass a sentence of fine exceeding five thousand rupees authorised by this Act or the 
regulations on any person convicted of any offence thereunder.  
19. General provision for punis hment for other offences .—Any person who contravenes any 
provision of this Act shall, if no other penalty is provided for such contravention under this Act, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
20. Power to make rules .—The appro priate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules consistent with this Act for all or any of the following purposes, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which an Inspector is to exercise the powers conferred upon him under this Act;  
(b) the inspection of premises of ships where any dock work is carried on;  
(c) the manner of services of orders made under this Act;  
(d) the term of office and other conditions of service of members of the Advisory Committee, the 
manner of filling vacancies among, and the procedure to be followed in, the discharge of their 
functions under sub -section ( 5) of section 9;  
(e) the procedure at inquiries under section 10; and  
(f) any other matter  which is to be provided for by rules under this Act.  
21. Power to mak e regulations .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act for providing for the safety, health and welfare 
of dock workers.  
(2) Such regulations may provide for all or any of t he following purposes, namely: — 
(a) providing for the general requirement relating to the construction, equipping and maintenance 
for the safety of working places on shore, ship, dock, structure and other places at which any dock 
work is carried on;  
(b) provi ding for the safety of any regular approaches over a dock, wharf, quay or other places 
which dock workers have to  use for going for work and for fencing of such places and projects;  8 
 (c) providing for the efficient lighting of all areas of dock, ship, any o ther vessel, dock structure 
or working places where any dock work is carried on and of a ll approaches to such places to which 
dock workers are required to go in the course of their employment;  
(d) providing and maintaining adequate ventilation and suitable  temperature in every building or 
an enclosure on ship  where dock workers are employed;  
(e) providing for the fire and explosion prevention and protection;  
(f) providing for safe means of access to ships, holds, staging s, equipment, lifting appliances and 
other working places;  
(g) providing for the safety of workers engaged in the opening and closing of hatches, protection 
of ways and other openings in the docks which may be dangerous to them;  
(h) providing for the safely of workers on dock s from the risk of falling overb oard being struck 
by cargo during loading or unloading operations;  
(i) providing for the construction, maintenance and use of lifting and other cargo handling 
appliances and services, such as, pallets containing or supporting loads and prov ision of safety 
appliances on them, if necessary;  
(j) providing for the safety of workers employed in freight container terminals or other terminals 
for handling unitised cargo;  
(k) providing for the fencing of machinery, live electrical conductors, steam pipes and hazardous 
openings;  
(l) providing for the construction, maintenance and use of staging;  
(m) providing for the rigging and use of ship ’s derricks;  
(n) providing for the testing, examination, inspection and certification as appropriate of loose 
gears including chains and ropes and of slings  and other lifting  devices used in the dock work;  
(o) providing for the precautions to be taken to facilitate escape of workers when employed in a 
hold, bin, hopper or the like or between decks of a hold while han dling coal or other bulk cargo;  
(p) providing for the measures to be taken in order to prevent dangerous methods of working in 
the stacking, unstacking,  stowing and un stowing of cargo or handling in connection therewith;  
(q) providing  for the handling of dangerous substances and working in dangerous or harmful 
environments and the precautions to be taken in connection with such handling;  
(r) providing for the work in connection wi th cleaning, chipping, painting  operations and 
precautions to be taken in connection with such work;  
(s) providing for the employment of persons for handling cargo, handling appliances, power 
operated hatch covers or other power operated ship ’s equipment, such as, door in the hull of a ship, 
ramp, retraceable car deck or similar equipment or to give signals to the drivers of such machinery;  
(t) providing for the transport of dock workers;  
(u) providing for the precautions to be taken to protect dock workers against harmful effects of 
excessive noise, vibrations and air pollution at the work place;  
(v) providing for protective equipment or protective clothing;  
(w) providing for the sanitary, washing and welfare facilities;  
(x) providing for — 
(i) the medical supervision;  
(ii) the ambulance rooms, first aid and rescue facilities and arrangements for the removal of 
dock workers to the nearest place of treatment;  9 
 (iii) the safety and health organisation; and  
(iv) the training of dock workers and for the obligations and rights of the dock workers for 
their safety and health at the work place;  
(y) providing for the investigation of occupational accidents, dangerous occurrences and diseases, 
specifying such diseases and the forms of notices, the persons and authorities to whom, they are to be  
furnished, the particulars to b e contained in them and the time within which they are to be submitted; 
and 
(z) providing for the submission of statement of accidents, man -days lost, volume of cargo 
handled and particulars of dock workers.  
(3) The reg ulation s made under this section may, — 
(a) provide for the circumstances in which and the conditions subject to which, exemptions from 
any of the regulations made under this section may be given specifying the authorities who may grant 
such exemptions and regulating their procedure; and  
(b) make special provision to meet the special requirement of any particular port or ports.  
(4) In making a regulation under this section the appropriate Government may direct that a breach 
thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees, or with both, and, if the breach is continued after conviction, 
with a further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for each day on which the breach is so 
continued.  
22. General provision relating to rules and regulations .—(1) The power to make rules and 
regulations conferred by sections 20 and 21 is subject to the condition of the rules and regulations being 
made after previous publications . 
(2) The date to be specified in accordance with clause ( 3) of section 23 of the General  Clauses Act, 
1897 (10 of 1897)  as that after which a draft of rules or regulations proposed to be made will be taken 
under consideration, shall not be less than forty -five days from the date on which the draft of the proposed 
rules or regulations is published for general information.  
(3) Every rule and every regulation made under this Act by the Central Government shall be laid, as 
soon as may be after it is made, befo re each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period 
of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, 
before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive  sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that the rule 
or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effe ct, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation, as the case may 
be. 
(4) Every rule and every regulation, made under this Act by a State Government shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it  is made, before the State Legislature.  
23. Amendment of Act 9 of 1948 .—In the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948, in 
section 3, in sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) in clause ( g), the words “and welfare ” shall be omitted:  
(b) clause ( h) shall be omitted.  
24. Repeal .—The Indian D ock Labourers Act, 1934 (19 of 1 934), is here by repealed.  
25. Saving s.—The Indian Dock Labourers  Regulations, 1948 made under section 5 of the Indian 
Dock Labourers  Act, 1934 (19 of 1934)  so repealed and the Dock Workers (Safety, Health and Welfare) 
Scheme 1961 made under section 4 of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 
1948)  shall be deemed to be regulation framed under this Act and shall be in force unless they are altered 
or repealed under this Act.  
--------------------------The Environment (Protection) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) ACT, 1986  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
GENERAL POWERS OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT  
3. Power of Central Government to take measures to protect and improve environment.  
4. Appointment of officers and their powers and functions.  
5. Power to give directions.  
6. Rules to regulate environmental pollution.  
CHAPTER III  
PREVENTION, CONTROL AND ABATEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUCTION  
7. Persons carrying on industry, operations, etc., not to allow emission or discharge of 
environmental pollutants in excess of the standards.  
8. Persons handling hazardous substances to comply with procedural safeguards.  
9. Furnishing of information to a uthorities and agencies in certain cases.  
10. Powers of entry and inspection.  
11. Power to take sample and procedure to be followed in connection therewith.  
12. Environmental laboratories.  
13. Government Analysts.  
14. Reports of Government Analysts.  
15. Penalty for contravention of the provisions of the Act and the rules, orders and directions.  
16. Offences by companies.  
17. Offences by Government Departments.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
19. Cognizance of offences.  
20. Information, reports or returns.  
21. Member s, officers and employees of the authority constituted under Section 3 to be public 
servants.  
22. Bar of jurisdiction.  
23. Power to delegate.  
24. Effect of other laws.  
25. Power to make rules.  
26. Rules made under this Act to be laid before Parliament.   2 
 THE ENVIRONMENT (PROTECTION) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 29 OF 1986  
[23rd May , 1986. ] 
An Act to provide for the protection and improvement of environment and for matters connected 
therewith . 
WHEREAS  decisions were taken at the United Nations Conference on the Human Environment held at 
Stockholm in June, 1972, in which India participated, to take appropriate steps for the protection and 
improvement of human environment;  
AND WHEREAS  it is considered ne cessary further to implement the decisions aforesaid in so far as 
they relate to the protection and improvement of environment and the prevention of hazards to human 
beings, other living creatures, plants and property;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Th irty-seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Environment 
(Protection) Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force  on such date1 as the Central Governme nt may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,  appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for 
different areas.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “environment ” includes water, air and land and the inter -relationship which exists among and 
between water, air and land, and human being s, other living creatures, plants, micro -organism and 
property;  
(b) “environmental pollutant ” means any solid, liquid or gaseous substance present in such 
concentration as may be, or tend to be, injurious to environment;  
(c) “environmental pollution ” means the presence in the environment of any environmental 
pollutant;  
(d) “handling”, in relation to any substance, means the manufacture, processing, treatment, 
package, storage, transportation , use, collection, destruction, conversion, offering for sale, transfer or 
the like of such substance;  
(e) “hazardous substance ” means any substance or preparation which, by reason of its chemical or 
physico -chemical properties or handling, is liable to cause harm to human beings, other living 
creatures, plants, micro -organism, property or the environment;  
(f) “occupier”, in relati on to any factory or premises, means a person who has control over the 
affairs of the factory or the premises and includes , in relation to any substance , the person in 
possession of the substance;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act. 
  
                                                           
1. 19th November , 1986, vide notificat ion No. G.S.R . 1198 (E), dated 12th November , 1986, see Gazette of Indi a,       
     Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 (i). 3 
 CHAPTER II  
GENERAL POWERS OF THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
3. Power of Central Government to take measures to protect and improve            
environment .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government shall have the power to 
take all such measures as it deems necessary or expedient for the purpose of protecting and improving the 
quality of the environment and preventing, controlling and abating environmental pollution.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such 
measures may include measures with respect to all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) co-ordination of actions by the State Governments, officers and other authorities — 
(a) under this Act, or the rules made thereunder; or  
(b) under any other law for the time being in force which is relatable to the objects of this 
Act; 
(ii) planning and execution of a nation -wide programme for the prevention, control and 
abatement of environmental pollution;  
(iii) laying down  standards for the quality of environment in its various aspects;  
(iv) laying down standards for emission or discharge of environmental pollutants from various 
sources whatsoever:  
Provided that different standards for emission or discharge may be laid down  under this clause 
from different sources having regard to the quality or composition of the emission or discharge of 
environmental pollutants from such sources;  
(v) restriction of areas in which any industries, operations or processes or class of industri es, 
operations or processes shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject to certain safeguards;  
(vi) laying down procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents which may cause 
environmental pollution and reme dial measures for such ac cidents;  
(vii) laying down procedures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous substances;  
(viii) examination of such manufacturing processes, materials and substances as are likely to 
cause environmental pollution;  
(ix) carrying out and sponsoring inv estigations and research relating to problems of 
environmental pollution;  
(x) inspection of any premises, plant, equipment, machinery, manufacturing or other processes, 
materials or substances and giving, by order, of such directions to such authorities, o fficers or persons 
as it may consider necessary to take steps for the prevention, control and abatement of environmental 
pollution;  
(xi) establishment or recognition of environmental laboratories and institutes to carry out the 
functions entrusted to such environmental laboratories and institutes under this Act;  
(xii) collection and dissemination of information in respect of matters relating to environmental 
pollution;  
(xiii) preparation of manuals, codes or guides relating to the prevention, control and abatement of 
environmental pollution;  
(xiv) such other matters as the Central Government deems necessa ry or expedient for the purpose  
of securing the effective implementation of the provisions of this Act.  4 
 (3) The Central Government may, if it considers it  necessary or expedient so to do for the purposes of 
this Act, by order, published in the Official Gazette, constitute an authority or authorities by such name or 
names as may be specified in the order for the purpose of exercising and performing such of t he powers 
and functions (including the power to issue directions under s ection 5) of the Central Government under 
this Act and for taking measures with respect to such of the matters referred to in sub -section ( 2) as may 
be mentioned in the order and subject to the supervision and control of the Central Government and the 
provisions of such order, such authority or authorities may exercise the powers or perform the functions 
or take the measures so mentioned in the order as if such authority or authori ties had been empowered by 
this Act to exercise those powers or perform those functions or take such measures.  
4. Appointment of officers and their powers and functions .—(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 3) of s ection 3, the Central Government may appoint officers with such 
designations as it thinks fit for the purposes of this Act and may entrust to them such of the powers and 
functions under this Act as it may deem fit.  
(2) The officers appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be subje ct to the general control and direction 
of the Central Government or, if so directed by that Government, also of the authority or authorities, if 
any, constituted under sub -section ( 3) of s ection 3 or of any other authority or officer.  
5. Power to give directions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law but subject to the 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, in the exercise of its powers and performance of its 
functions under this Act, issue directions in writing  to any person, officer or any authority and such 
person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
Explanation .—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue directions 
under this section includes the  power to direct — 
(a) the closu re, prohibition or regulation of  any industry, operation or process; or  
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water or any other service.  
6. Rules to regulate environmental pollution .—(1) The Central Governme nt may, by notification in 
the O fficial Gazette, make rules in respect of all or any of the matters referred to in section 3.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the standards of quality of air, water or soil for various areas and purposes;  
(b) the maximum allowable limits of concentration of various environmental pollutants (including 
noise) for different areas;  
(c) the proced ures and safeguards for the handling of hazardous substances;  
(d) the prohibition and restrictions on the handling of hazardous substances in different areas;  
(e) the prohibition and restriction s on the location of industries and the carrying on of processes 
and operations in different areas;  
(f) the procedures and safeguards for the prevention of accidents which may cause environmental 
pollution and for providing for remedial measures for such ac cidents.  
CHAPTER III  
PREVENTION, CONTROL AND ABATEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL POLLUCTION  
7. Persons carrying on industry, operation , etc., not to allow emission or discharge of 
environmental pollutants in excess of the standards .—No person carrying on any industry, operation 
or process shall discharge or emit or permit to be discharged or emitted any environmental pollutant in 
excess or such standards as may be prescribed.  
8. Persons handling hazardous substances to comply with procedural safeguards .—No per son 
shall handle or cause to be handled any hazardous substance  except in accordance with such procedure 
and after complying with such safeguards as may be prescribed.  5 
 9. Furnishing of information to authorities and agencies in certain cases .—(1) Where the  
discharge of any environmental pollutant in excess of the prescribed standards occurs or is apprehended 
to occur due to any accident or other unforeseen act or event, the person responsible for such discharge 
and the person in charge of the place at which  such discharge occurs or is apprehended to occur shall be 
bound to prevent or mitigate the environmental pollution caused as a result of such disc harge and shall 
also forthwith — 
(a) intimate the fact of such occurrence or apprehension of such occurrence; and 
(b) be bound, if called upon, to render all assistance,  
to such authorities or agencies as may be prescribed.  
(2) On receipt of information with respect to the fact or apprehension of any occurrence of the nature 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), whether  through intimation under that sub -section or otherwise, the 
authorities or agencies referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, as early as practicable, cause such remedial 
measures to be taken as are necessary to prevent or mitigate the environmental pollution . 
(3) The expenses, if any, incurred by any authority or agency with respect to the remedial measures 
referred to in sub -section ( 2), together with interest (at such reasonable rate as the Government may, by 
order, fix) from the date when a demand for the expenses is made until it is paid, may be recovered by 
such authority or agency from the person concerned as arrears of land revenue or of public demand.  
10. Powers of entry and inspection .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, any person 
empowered by the Central Government in this behalf shall have a right to enter, at all reasonable times 
with such assistance as he considers necessary, any place — 
(a) for the purpose of performing any of the functions of the Central Government entrusted to  
him; 
(b) for the purpose of determining whether and if so in what manner, any such functions are to be 
performed or whether any provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any notice, order, 
direction or authorisation served, made, given or granted under this Act is being or has been complied 
with;  
(c) for the purpose of examining and testing any equipment, industrial plant, record, register, 
document or any other material object or for conducting a search of any building in which he has 
reason to believe that an offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder has been or is being or is 
about to be committed and for seizing any such equipment, industrial plant, record, register, 
document or other material object if he has reasons to believ e that it may furnish evidence of the 
commission of an offence punishable under this Act or the rules made thereunder or that such seizure 
is necessary to prevent or mitigate environmental pollution.  
(2) Every person carrying on any industry, operation or process or h andling any hazardous substance  
shall be bound to render all assistance to the person empowered by the Central Government under       
sub-section ( 1) for carrying out the functions under that sub -section and if he fails to do so without any 
reasonable cause or excuse, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act.  
(3) If any person wilfully delays or obstructs any person empowered by the Central Government 
under sub -section ( 1) in the performance of his functions, he shall be guilty of an offence under this Act.  
(4) the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or, in relation to the State of 
Jammu and Kashmir, or any area in which that Code is not in force, the provisions of any corresponding 
law in force in that Stat e or area shall, so far as may be, apply to any search or seizure under this section 
as they apply to any search or seizure made under the autho rity of a warrant issued under s ection 94 of the 
said Code or, as the case may be, under the corresponding provi sion of the said law.  
11. Power to take sample and procedure to be followed in connection therewith .—(1) The 
Central Government or any officer empowered by it in this behalf, shall have power to take, for the 
purpose of analysis, samples of air, water, soi l or other substance from any factory, premises or other 
place in such manner as may be prescribed.  6 
 (2) The result of any analysis of a sample taken under sub -section ( 1) shall not be admissible in 
evidence in any legal proceeding unless the provisions of sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) are complied with.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the person taking the sampl e under sub -section ( 1) 
shall,— 
(a) serve on the occupier or his agent or person in charge of the place, a notice, then and there, in 
such form as may be prescribed, of his intention to have it so analysed;  
(b) in the presence of the occupier or his agent or person, collect a sample for analysis;  
(c) cause the sample to be placed in a container or containers which shall be marked and sea led 
and shall also be signed both by the person taking the sample and the occupier or his agent or person;  
(d) send without delay, the container or the containers to the laboratory established or recognised 
by the Central Government under section 12.  
(4) When a sample is taken for analysis under sub -section ( 1) and the person taking the sample serves 
on the occupier or his agent or person, a notice under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3), then,— 
(a) in a case where the occupier, his agent or person wilfully absents himself, the person taking 
the sample shall collect the sample for analysis to be placed in a container or containers which shall 
be marked and sealed and shall also be signed by the person taking the sample, and  
(b) in a case where the occupier or  his agent or person present at the time of taking the sample 
refuses to sign the marked and sealed container or containers of the sample as required under      
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3), the marked and sealed container or containers shall be signed by  the 
person taking the samples,  
and the container or containers shall be sent without delay by the person taking the sample for analysis to 
the laboratory established or recognised under section 12 and such person sha ll inform the Government 
Analys t appoin ted or recognised under section 13 in writing, about the wilful absence of the occupier or 
his agent or person, or, as the case may be, his refusal to sign the container or containers.  
12. Environmental laboratories .—(1) The Central Government may, by notific ation in the Official 
Gazette,— 
(a) establish one or more environmental laboratories;  
(b) recognise one or more laboratories or institutes as environmental laboratories to ca rry out the 
functions entrusted  to an environmental laboratory under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules specifying — 
(a) the functions of the environmental laboratory;  
(b) the procedure for the submission to the said laboratory of samples of air, water, soil or other 
substance for analysis or tests, the form of the laboratory report thereon and the fees payable for such 
report;  
(c) such other matters as may be necessary or expedient to enable that laboratory to carry out its 
functions.  
13. Government Analysts .—The Central Government may , by notification in the O fficial Gazette, 
appoint or recognise such persons as it thinks fit and having the  prescribed qualifications to b e 
Government Analysts for the purpose of analysis of samples of air, water, soil or other substance sent for 
analysis to any environmental laboratory established or recognised under sub -section ( 1) of s ection 12.  
14. Reports of Government Analysts .—Any document purporting to be a  report signed by a 
Governmen t Analyst may be used as evidence of the facts stated therein in any proceeding under this Act.  7 
 15. Penalty for contravention of the provisions of the Act and the rules, orders and  
directions .—(1) Whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, or the 
rules made or orders or directions issued thereunder, shall, in respect of each such failure or 
contravention, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or with fine 
which may extend to one lak h rupees, or with both, and in case the failure or contravention continues, 
with additional fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day during which such failure or 
contravention continues after the conviction for the first such failure or contravention.  
(2) If the failure or contravention referred to in sub -section ( 1) continues beyond a period of one year 
after the date of conviction, the offender shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years.  
16. Offence s by companies .—(1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as  well as the company, shall  
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding  anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has bee n 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, sec retary or other officer shall also deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of th is section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate , and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
17. Offences by Government Departments .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by any Department of Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the Department liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has be en 
committed by a Department of Government and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head 
of the Department, such officer shall also  be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be  
proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or any officer or other employee of the Government or any authority 
constituted under this Act or any member, officer or other employee of such authority in respect of 
anything which is done or intended to be done in good faith in pursuance of t his Act or the rules made or 
orders or directions issued thereunder.  8 
 19. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except on 
a complaint made by, — 
(a) the Central Government or any authority or officer authorised in this behalf by that 
Government; or  
(b) any person who has given notice of not less than sixty days, in the manner prescribed, of the 
alleged offence and of his intention to make a complaint, to the Central Government or the authority 
or officer authoris ed as aforesaid.  
20. Information, reports or returns .—The Central Government may, in relation to its functions 
under this Act, from time to time, require any person, officer, State Government or other authority to 
furnish to it or any prescribed authority or officer any reports, returns, statistics, accounts and other 
information and such person, officer, State Government or other authority shall be bound to do so.  
21. Members, officers and employees of t he authority constituted under s ection 3 to be public  
servants .—All the members of the authori ty, constituted, if any, under s ection 3 and all officers and other 
employees of such authority when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any pr ovisions of this Act or 
the rul es made or orders or directions i ssued thereunder shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of Section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
22. Bar of jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in 
respect of anything done, action taken or order or direction issued by the Central Government or any 
other authority or officer in pursuance of any power conferred by or in relation to its or his functions 
under this Act.  
23. Power to delegate .—Without prejudice to the provisions o f sub -section ( 3) of s ection 3, the 
Central Governme nt may, by notification in the O fficial Gazette, delegate, subject to such conditions and 
limitations as may be specified in the notification, such of its powers and functions under this Act [except 
the power to constitute an authority under sub -section ( 3) of s ection 3 and to make rules under s ection 25] 
as it may deem necessary or expedient, to any officer, State Government or other authority.  
24. Effect of other laws .—(1) Subject to the provisions of s ub-section ( 2), the provisions of this Act 
and the rules or orders made therein shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith 
contained in any enactment other than this Act.  
(2) Where any act or omission constitutes an offence punishabl e under this Act and also under any 
other Act then the offender found guilty of such offence shall be liable to be punished under the other Act 
and not under this Act.  
25. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the O fficial  Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the standards in excess of which environmental pollutants shall not be discharged or emitted 
under s ection 7;  
(b) the procedure in accordance with and the safeguards in compliance with which hazardous 
substances shall be handled or cause to be handled un der section 8;  
(c) the authorities or agencies to which intimation of the fact of occurrence or apprehension of 
occurrence of the discharge of any environmental pollutant in excess of the prescribed standards shall 
be given and to whom all assistance shall  be bound to be rendered under sub -section ( 1) of s ection 9;  
(d) the manner in which samples of air, water, soil or other substance for the purpose of analysis 
shall be taken under sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(e) the form in which notice of intention to  have a sample analysed shall be se rved under       
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 11;  9 
 (f) the functions of the environmental laboratories, the procedure for the submission to such 
laboratories of samples of air, water, soil and other substances for analysis or test; the form of 
laboratory report; the fees payable for such report and other matters to enable such laboratories to 
carry out their functions under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 12;  
(g) the qualifications of Government Analyst appointed or recognised for the purpose of analysis 
of samples of air, water, soil or other substances under s ection 13;  
(h) the manner in which notice of the offence and of the intention to make a complaint to the 
Central Government shall be given under clause ( b) of section 19;  
(i) the authority or officer to whom any reports, returns, statistics accounts and other inform ation 
shall be furnished under s ection 20;  
(j) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
26. Rules made under this Act to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under t hat rule.  
 
--------------------------The Indecent Representation of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN (PROHIBITION) ACT, 1986  
__________   
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Prohibition of advertisements containing indecent representation of women . 
4. Prohibition of publication or sending by post of books, pamphlets, etc., containing indecent 
representation of women . 
5. Powers to enter and search . 
6. Penalty . 
7. Offences by companies  
8. Offences to be cognizable and bailable . 
9. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
10. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE INDECENT REPRESENTATION OF WOMEN (PROHIBITION) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 60 OF 1986  
[23rd December , 1986 .] 
An Act to prohibit indecent representation of women through advertisements or in publications, 
writings, paintings, figures or in any other manner and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Indecent Representation 
of Women (Prohibition) Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “advertisement ” includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or other document and also 
includes any visible representation made by means of any light, sound, smoke or gas;  
(b) “distribution ” includes distribution by way of samples whether free or otherwise;  
(c) “indecent representation of women ” means the depiction in any manner of the figure of a 
woman, her form or body or any part thereof in such a way as to have the effect of being indecent, or 
derogatory to, or denigrating , women, or is likely to deprave, corrupt or injure the public morality or 
morals;  
(d) “label” means any written, marked, stamped, printed or graphic matter, affixed to, or 
appearing upon, any package;  
(e) “package” includes a box, carton, tin or other container;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
3. Prohibition of advertisements containing indecent representation of women .—No person shall 
publish, or cause to be published, or arrange or take part in the publication or exhibition of, any 
advertisement which contains indecent representation of women in any form.  
4. Prohibition of publication or sending by post of books, pamphlets, etc., containing indecent 
representation of women .—No person shall produce or cause to be produced, sell, let to hire, distribute, 
circulate or send by post any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, 
representation or figure which contains indecent representation of w omen in any form:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to — 
(a) any book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photog raph, representation 
or figure— 
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the 
ground that such book, pamphlet, paper, slide, film, writing, drawing, painting, photograph, 
representation or figure is in the interest of science, literature, art, or learning or other objects of 
general concern; or  
(ii) which is kept or used bona fide  for religious purposes;  
  
                                                           
1. 2nd October, 1987, vide notification No  G.S.R. 821(E), dated 25th Septembe r, 1987,  see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,         
Part II,  sec. 3( i). 3 
 (b) any representation sculptured, engraved, painted or otherwise represented on or in — 
(i) any ancient monument within the meaning of the Ancient Monument and Archaeological 
Sites and Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 19 58); or  
(ii) any temple, or on any car used for the conveyance of idols, or kept or used for any 
religious purpose;  
(c) any film in respect of which the provisions of Part II of the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 
1952), will be applicable.  
5. Powers to enter and search .—(1) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, any Gazetted 
Officer authorised by the State Government may, within the local limits of the area  for which he is so 
authorised, — 
(a) enter and search at all reasonable times, with such assis tance, if any, as he considers 
necessary, any place in which he has reason to believe that an offence under this Act has been or is 
being committed;  
(b) seize any advertisement or any book, pamphlet, paper, slide film, writing, drawing, painting, 
photograph, representation or figure which he has reason to believe contravenes any of the provisions 
of this Act;  
(c) examine any record, register, document or any other material object found in any place 
mentioned in clause ( a) and seize the same if he h as reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of 
the commission of an offence punishable under this Act:  
Provided that no entry under this sub -section shall be made into a private dwelling house without a 
warrant:  
Provided further that the power of sei zure under this sub -section may be exercised in respect of any 
document, article or thing which contains any such advertisement, including the contents, if any, of such 
document, article or thing, if the advertisement cannot be separated by reason of its b eing embossed or 
otherwise from such document, article or thing without affecting the integrity, utility or saleable value 
thereof.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to any search or seiz ure under this Act as they apply to any search or seizure made under the authority of 
a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.  
(3) Where any person seizes anything under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), he shall, as 
soon as may be, i nform the nearest Magistrate and take his orders as to the custody thereof.  
6. Penalty .—Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3 or section 4 shall be  punishable 
on first conviction  with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, and 
with fine which may extend two thousand rupees , and in the event of a second or subsequent conviction 
with imprisonment for a term of not less than six months but which may extend to five years and also 
with a fine not less than ten thousand rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
7. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person, who, at the time the offen ce was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offe nce. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on th e part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 4 
 officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sec tion,— 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm . 
8. Offences to be cognizable and bailable .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence punishable under this Act shall be bailable.  
(2) An offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.  
9. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution  or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or any State Government or any officer of the Central Government or any 
State Government for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
10. Power to make r ules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the seizure of advertisements or other articles shall be made, and the 
manner in which the seizure list shall be prepared and delivered to the person from whose custody 
any advertisement or other articl e has been seized;  
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Par liament, while it is in session  for a total period of thirty days, which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making an y modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without  prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
--------------------------The Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE MERCHAN T SHIPPING (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1986  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed .]  
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .]  
5. Saving.  
 
  2 
 THE MERCHAN T SHIPPING (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1986  
[14th August , 1986.]  
An Act further to amend the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Act, 1986.  
2. [Omission of section 80.]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001  (30 of 2001),  s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
3. [Amendment of section 86.]—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid.  (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
4. [Amendment of section 87A.]—Rep. by  s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid.  (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
5. Saving. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the amendments made in the 
principal Act by this Act shall not apply to, or in relation to, any certificate of service granted un der 
section 80 or recognised under section 86 of the principal Act before the commencement of this Act and 
the principal Act shall apply in relation to such certificates as if this Act had not been enacted.  
 
--------------------------The Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE MUSLIM WOMEN (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS ON DIVORCE) ACT, 1986  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Mahr  or other properties of Muslim woman to be given to her at the time of divorce . 
4. Order for payment of maintenance . 
5. Option to be governed by the provisions of sections 125 to 128 of Act 2 of 1974 . 
6. Power to make rules . 
7. Transitional provisions . 
 
  2 
 THE MUSLIM WOMEN (PROTECTION OF RIGHTS ON DIVORCE) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1986  
[19th May , 1986.]  
An Act to protect the rights of Muslim women who have been divorced by, or have obtained divorce 
from, their husbands and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh year of the  Republic of Indi a as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Muslim Women (Protection o f Rights on 
Divorce) Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “divorced woman ” means a Muslim woman who was married according to Muslim law, and 
has been divorced by, or has obtained divorce from, her husband  in accordance with Muslim law;  
(b) “iddat  period” means, in  the case of a divorced woman, — 
(i) three menstrual courses after the date of divorce, if she is subject to menstruation;  
(ii) three lunar months after her divorce, if she is n ot subject to menstruation; and  
(iii) if she is enceinte at the time of her div orce, the period between the divorce and the 
delivery of her child or the termination of her p regnancy, whichever is earlier;  
(c) “Magistrate ” means a Magistrate of the First class exercising jurisdiction under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 19 74) in the area wh ere the divorced woman resides;  
(d) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
3. Mahr  or other properties of Muslim woman to be given to her at the time of divorce .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law  for the time being in force, a divor ced woman shall 
be entitled to — 
(a) a reasonable and fair provision and maintenance to be made and paid to her within the idda 
tperiod by her former husband;  
(b) where she herself maintains the children born to her befo re or after her divorce, a reasonable 
and fair provision and maintenance to be made and paid by her former husband for a period of two 
years from the respective d ates of birth of such children;  
(c) an amount equal to the sum of  mahr  or dower agreed to be paid to her at the time of her 
marriage or at any time thereaft er according to Muslim law; and  
(d) all the properties given to her before or at the time of marriage or after her marriage by her 
relatives or friends or the husband or any relatives of the h usband or his friends.  
(2) Where a reasonable and fair provision and maintenance or the amount of mahr  or dower due has 
not been made or paid or the properties referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) have not been delivered 
to a divorced wom an on her divorce, she or any o ne duly authori sed by her may, on her behalf, make an 
application to a Magistrate for an order for payment of such provision and maintenance, mahr  or dower or 
the delivery of properties,  as the case may be.  
(3) Where an application has been made under sub -section ( 2) by a divorced woman, the Magistrat e 
may, if he is satisfied that — 
(a) her husband having sufficient means, has failed or neglected to make or pay her within the 
iddat  period a reasonable and fair provision and maintenan ce for her and the children; or  
(b) the amount equal to the sum of mahr  or dower has not been paid or that the properties referred 
to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) have not been delivered to her,  3 
 make an order, within one month o f the date of the filing of the application, directing her former husband 
to pay such reasonable and fair provision and maintenance to the divorced woman as he may determine as 
it and proper having regard to the needs of the divorced woman, the standard of  life enjoyed by her during 
her marriage and the means of her former husband or, as the case may be, for the payment of such mahr  
or dower or the delivery of such properties referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1)  the divorced 
woman:  
Provided that if  the Magistrate finds it impracticable to dispose of the application within the said 
period, he may, for reasons to be recorded by him, dispose of the app lication after the said period.  
(4) If any person against whom an order has been made under sub -sectio n (3) fails without sufficient 
cause to comply with the order, the Magistrate may issue a warrant for levying the amount of 
maintenance or  mahr  or dower due in the manner provided for levying fines under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an d may sentence such person, for the whole or part of any amount 
remaining unpaid after the execution of the warrant, to imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year or until payment if sooner made, subject to such person being heard in defence and the said sentence 
being imposed according to the provisions of the said Code.  
4. Order for payment of maintenance. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, where a Magistrate is satisfied that a 
divorced woman has not re -married and is not able to maintain herself after the iddat  perio d, he may 
make an order directing such of her relatives as would be entitled to inherit her property on her death 
according to Muslim law to pay such reasonable and fair maintenance to her as he may determine fit and 
proper, having regard to the needs of t he divorced woman, the standard of life enjoyed by her during her 
marriage and the means of such relatives and such maintenance shall be payable by such relatives in the 
proportions in which they would inherit he property and at such periods as he may spec ify in his order:  
Provided that where such divorced woman has children, the Magistrate shall order only such children 
to pay maintenance to her, and in the event of any such children being unable to pay such maintenance, 
the Magistrate shall  order the par ents of such divo rced w oman to pay maintenance to her:  
Provided further that if any of the parents is unable to pay his or her share of the maintenance ordered 
by the Magistrate on the ground of his or her not having the means to pay the same, the Magistra te may, 
on proof of such inability being furnished to him, order that the share of such relatives in the maintenance 
ordered by him be paid by such of the other relatives as may appear to the Magistrate to have the means 
of paying the same in such proporti ons as the Mag istrate may think fit to order.  
(2) Where a divorced woman is unable to maintain herself and she has no relatives as mentioned in 
sub-section ( 1) or such relatives or any one of them have not enough means to pay the maintenance 
ordered by the  Magistrate or the other relatives have not the means to pay the shares of those relatives 
whose shares have been ordered by the Magistrate to be paid by such other relatives under the second 
proviso to sub -section ( 1), the Magistrate may, by order, direct  the State Wakf Board established under          
section 9 of the Wakf Act, 1954 (29 of 1954), or under any other law for the time being in force in a State, 
functioning in the area in which the woman resides, to pay such maintenance as determined by him u nder 
sub-section ( 1) or, as the case may be, to pay the shares of such of the relatives who are unable to pay, at 
such periods as he may specify in his order.  
5. Option to be governed by the provisions of sections 125 to 128 of Act 2 of 1974 .—If on the date 
of the first hearing of the application under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, a divorced woman and her former 
husband declare, by affidavit or any othe r decl aration in writing in such form as may be prescribed, either 
jointly or separately, that they wo uld prefer to be governed by the provisions of sections 125 to 128 of the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), and file such affidavit or declaration in the court hearing 
the application, the Magistrate shall dispose o f such application accordingl y. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “date of the first hearing of the application ” means the 
date fixed in the summons for the attendance of the respondent to the application.  
6. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  4 
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the foregoing power, suc h rules may provide for — 
(a) the form of the affidavit or other declaration in writi ng to be file d under section 5;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Magistrate in disposing of applications under this Act, 
including the serving of notices to the parties to such applications, dates of hearing of such 
applications and other matters;  
(c) any other matter which is requi red to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under t hat rule.  
7. Transitional provisions. —Every application by a divorced woman under section 125 or under 
section 127 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) pending before a Magistrate on the 
commencement of this Act, shall , notwithstanding anyt hing cont ained in that Code and subject to the 
provisions of section 5 of this Act, be dispose d of by such Magistrate in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act.  
--------------------------The National Security Guard Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD ACT, 1986  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Persons subject to this Act.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF THE  SECURITY  GUARD  AND CONDITIONS OR SERVCE OF THE  MEMBERS OF THE  
SECURITY  GUARD  
4. Constitution of the Security Guard.  
5. Control, direction, etc . 
6. Liability for service outside India.  
7. Resignation and withdrawal from the  post.  
8. Tenure of service under the Act.  
9. Termination of service by  Central Government . 
10. Dismissal, removal or reduction by the Director -General and by other officers.  
11. Certificate of termination of service . 
12. Restrictions respecting right to form associations, freedom of speech, etc.  
13. Remedy of aggrieved persons other than of ficers . 
14. Remedy of aggrieved officers.  
 
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES  
15. Offences in relation to the terrorists and other persons in arms against the Union and punishable 
with death . 
16. Offences punishable more severely on active duty than at other times . 
17. Mutiny . 
18. Desertion and aiding desertion . 
19. Absence without leave . 
20. Striking or threatening superior officer . 
21. Disobedience to superior officer . 
22. Assault and obstruction.  
23. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct.  
24. Ill-treating a subordinate.  
25. Drunkenness . 
26. Permitting escape of person in custody . 
27. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement . 
28. Escape from custody . 
29. Offences in respect of property . 
30. Extortion and exaction.  2 
 SECTIONS  
31. Making away with equipment . 
32. Injury to property . 
33. False accusations.  
34. Falsifying official documents and false declarations.  
35. False declaration on appointment . 
36. Offences relating to Security Guard Court . 
37. False evidence . 
38. Unlawful detention of pay.  
39. Unbecoming conduct.  
40. Violation of good order and discipline . 
41. Miscellaneous offences.  
42. Attempt.  
43. Abetment of offences that have been committed . 
44. Abetment of offences that have not been committed . 
45. Civil offences . 
46. Civil offences not triable by a Security Guard Court . 
CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENTS  
47. Punishments awardable by Security Guard Courts.  
48. Alternative punishments awardable by Security Guard Courts.  
49. Combination of punishments.  
50. Punishments otherwise than by Security Guard Courts.  
51. Minor punishments . 
52. Limit of punishments under section 51 . 
53. Punishment of officers of or below the rank of Squadron Commanders by officers no t below the 
rank of Inspectors -General.  
54. Punishment of persons of the rank of Assistant Commander.  
 
CHAPTER V  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
55. Custody of offenders . 
56. Duty of Commander in regard to detention . 
57. Interval between committal and trial.  
58. Arrest by  civil authorities . 
59. Capture of deserters.  
60. Inquiry into absence without leave . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
SECURITY  GUARD COURTS  
61. Kinds of security Guard Courts . 
62. Power to convene  General Security Guard Court.  
63. Power to convene a Petty Security Guard Court . 
64. Contents of warrants issued under sections 62 and 63 . 
65. Composition of General Security Guard Court . 
66. Composition of a Petty Security Guard Court . 
67. Summary Security Guard Court . 3 
 SECTIONS  
68. Dissolution of a Security Guard Court . 
69. Powers of a General Security Guard Court . 
70. Powers of a Petty Security Guard Court.  
71. Powers of a Summary Security Guard Court . 
72. Prohibition of second trial . 
73. Period of limitation for trial . 
74. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act . 
75. Application of Act during term of sentence . 
76. Place of trial.  
77. Choice between Criminal Court and Security Guard Court.  
78. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
PROCEDURE  OF SECURITY  GUARD  COURTS  
79. Presiding officer . 
80. Judge Attorneys, etc . 
81. Challenges . 
82. Oaths of members, Judge Attorney  and witness . 
83. Voting by members.  
84. General rule as to evidence . 
85. Judicial notice.  
86. Summoning witnesses.  
87. Documents exempted from production . 
88. Commissions for examination of witnesses . 
89. Examination of witness on commission.  
90. Conviction of offence not charged . 
91. Presu mption as to signatures.  
92. Appointment paper.  
93. Presumption as to certain documents . 
94. Reference by accused to Government officer . 
95. Evidence of previous convictions and general character . 
96. Lunacy of accused . 
97. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial . 
98. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 97.  
99. Release of lunatic accused . 
100. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives . 
101. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial . 
102. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed.  
103. Powers of Security Guard Court in relation to proceedings under the Act.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
104. Finding and sentence not valid, unless confirmed.  
105. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Security Guard Court  
106. Power to con firm finding and sentence of Petty Security Guard Court.  
107. Limitation of powers of confirming authority . 
108. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences.  4 
 SECTIONS  
109. Revision of finding or sentence.  
110. Finding and sentence of a Summary Security Guard Court . 
111. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Security Guard Court . 
112. Alteration of finding o f sentence in certain cases.  
113. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of Security Guard Court . 
114. Annulment of proceedings.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCES, PARDONS, REMISSIONS, ETC.  
115. Form of sentence of death.  
116. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment . 
117. Execution of sentence of imprisonment . 
118. Temporary custody of offender . 
119. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases.  
120. Conveyance of prisoner f rom place to place.  
121. Communication of certain orders to prison officers.  
122. Execution of sentence of fine.  
123. Informality or error in the order or warrant.  
124. Pardon and remission.  
125. Cancellation of condition al pardon, release on parole or remission .  
126. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment.  
127. Orders pending suspension.  
128. Release on suspension.  
129. Computation of period of suspension.  
130. Order after suspension.  
131. Reconsideration of case after suspension.  
132. Fresh sentence after suspension.  
133. Scope of power of suspension.  
134. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal . 
 
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
135. Rank structure.  
136. Deduction from pay and allowances.  
137. Powers and duties conferable and imposable on members of the Security Guard .  
138. Protection for acts of members of the Security Guard . 
139. Power to make rules.  
140. Provisions as to existing National Security Guard.  
  5 
 THE NATIONAL SECURITY GUARD ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 47 OF 1986  
  [22nd September , 1986 .] 
An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for 
combating terrorist  activities with a view to protecting States against internal disturbances 
and for matters connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called t he National Security Guard Act, 
1986.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “active duty ”, in relation to a person subject to this Act, means any duty as a member of the 
Security Guard during the period in which such person is attached to, or forms part of, a unit of the 
Security Guard — 
(i) which is engaged in operations against terrorists or any person in arms against the Union; 
or 
(ii) which is operating at a picket or engaged on patrol or any other duty, in relation to 
combating terrorist activity;  
(b) “Assistant Commander ” means a person appointed or in pay as an Assistant Commander 
Grade I, Assistant Commander Grade II or Assistan t Commander Grade III ; 
(c) “civil offence ” means an offence which is triab le by a Criminal Court or by a s pecial Judge 
appointed under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952  (46 of 1952) ; 
(d) “civil prison ” means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal prisoner under the 
Prisons Act, 1894  (9 of 1894) , or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(e) “combatised tradesman ” means a person appointed or in pay as a combatised tradesman;  
(f) “Commander ”, when used in any provision of this Act with reference to any unit of the 
Security Guard, means the officer whose duty it is to discharge with respect to that unit, the functions 
of a Commander in regard to matters of the description referred to in that provision;  
(g) “Criminal Court ” means a Court of ordinary criminal justice in any part of India and includes 
a Court of a special Judge appointed under the Criminal La w Amendment Act, 1952  (46 of 1952) ; 
(h) “Deputy Inspector -General ” means a Deputy Inspector -General of the Security Guard 
appointed under section 5;  
(i) “Director -General ” and “Additional Director -General ” mean, respectively, the              
Director -General and an Additional Director -General of the Security Guard appointed under     
section 5;  
                                                           
1. 16th October , 1986, vide notificat ion No. S.O. 737(E), dated 16th  October , 1986, see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (ii). 
 6 
 (j) “Group ” means a unit of the Security Guard constituted as a Group by the Central 
Government;  
(k) “Group Commander ” means a Group Commander of the Security Guard appointed under 
section 5;  
(l) “Inspector -General ” means an Inspector -General of the Security Guard appointed under 
section 5;  
(m) “Judge Attorney -General ”, “Additional Judge Attorney -General ”, “Deputy Judge      
Attorney -General ” and “Judge Attorney ” mean, respectively, the Judge Attorney -General, an 
Additional Judge Attorney -General, a Deputy Judge Attorney -General and a Judge Attorney of the 
Security Guard appointed in the appropriate rank by the Central Go vernment;  
(n) “member of the Security Guard ” means an officer, an Assistant Commander, a Ranger or a 
combatised tradesman;  
(o) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(p) “offence ” means any act or omission punishable under t his Act and includes a civil offence;  
(q) “officer ” means a person appointed or in pay as an officer of the Security Guard;  
(r) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules;  
(s) “Ranger ” means a Ranger Grade I and a Ranger Grade II of the Security Guard;  
(t) “rule” means a rule made under this Act;  
(u) “Security Guard ” means the National Security Guard;  
(v) “Security Guard Court ” means a Court referred to in s ection 61;  
(w) “Security Guard custody ” means the arrest or confinement of a member of the Se curity  Guard 
according to rules;  
(x) “superior officer ”, when used in relation to a person su bject to this Act, means — 
(i) any member of the Security Guard to whose command such person is for the time being 
subject in accordance with the rules;  
(ii) any officer of a higher rank or class,  
and includes, when such person is not an officer, an Assistant Commander or a Ranger of a higher rank or 
class;  
(y) “terrorist ” means any person who, with intent to over -awe the Government as by law 
established or to strike terror in the people or any section of the people or to alienate any section of 
the people or to adversely affect the harmony amongst different sections of the  people, does any act 
or thing by using bombs, dynamite or other explosive substances or inflammable substances or 
firearms or other lethal weapons or poisons or noxious gases or other chemicals or any other 
substances (whether biological or otherwise) of a hazardous nature, in such a manner as to cause, or 
as is likely to cause, death of, or injuries to, any person or persons or damage to, or destruction of, 
property or disruption of any supplies or services essential to the life of the community;  
(z) all words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code.  
(2) In this Act, references to any law not in force in any State shall be construed  as references to 
the corresponding law in force   in that State.  
3. Persons subject to this Act .—(1) The following persons appointed (whether on deputation or in 
any other manner) in the Security Guard shall be subject to this Act, wherever they may be, namely: — 
(a) officers and Assistant Commander; and  
(b) Rangers and combatised tradesmen.  7 
 (2) Every person subject to this Act shall remain so subject until repatriated, retired, released, 
discharged, removed or dismissed from the Security Guard in accordance with the provisions of this Act 
and the rules.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF THE  SECURITY  GUARD  AND CONDITIONS OR SERVCE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE  
SECURITY  GUARD  
4. Constitution of the Security Guard .—(1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the 
National Security Guard for combating terrorist activities with a view to protect States against internal 
disturbances.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Security Guard shall be constitute d in such manner as 
may be prescribed and the conditions of service of the members of the Security Guard shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
5. Control, direction, etc. —(1) The general superintendence, direction and control of the Security 
Guard shall vest in, and be exercised by, the Central Government and subject thereto and to the provisions 
of this Act and the rules, the command and supervision of the Security Guard shal l vest in an officer to be 
appointed by the Central Government as the Director -General of the Security Guard.  
(2) The Director -General shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be assisted by such 
number of Additional Directors -General, Inspect ors-General, Deputy Inspectors -General, Group 
Commanders and other officers as may be appointed by the Central Government.  
6. Liability for service outside India .—Every member of the Security Guard shall be liable to serve 
in any part of India as well as outside India.  
7. Resignation and withdrawal from the post .—No member of the Security Guard shall be at 
liberty— 
(a) to resign his appointment during the term of his engagement; or  
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment,  
except with the previous permission in writing of the prescribed authority.  
8. Tenure of service under the Act .—Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during the 
pleasure of the President.  
9. Termination of service by Central Government .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules, the Central Government may dismiss or remove from service any person subject to this Act.  
10. Dismissal, removal or reduction by the Director -General and by other officers .—(1) The 
Director -General, any Additional Director -General or any Inspector -General may dismiss or remove from 
service or reduce to a lower grade or rank or the ranks, any person subject to this Act other than an 
officer.  
(2) An officer not below the rank of a  Deputy Inspector -General or any prescribed officer may 
dismiss or remove from the service any person under his command other than an officer or an Assistant 
Commander.  
(3) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub -section (2) may reduce to a lower grade or rank or the 
ranks any person under his command except an officer or an Assistant Commander.  
(4) The exercise of any power under this section shall be subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules.  
11. Certificate of termination of service .—An Assistant Commander or a Ranger or a combatised 
tradesman who is retired, released, discharged, removed or dismissed from the service shall be furnished 
by the officer to whose command he is subject, with a certif icate setting forth — 
(a) the authority terminating his service;  8 
 (b) the cause for such termination; and  
(c) the full period of his service in the Security Guard.  
12. Restrictions respecting right to form association s, freedom of speech, etc. —(1) No person 
subjec t to this Act shall, without the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government o r of the 
prescribed authority, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour union, political 
association or with any class of trade unions, labour unions or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society, instit ution, association or 
organisation that is not recognised as part of the Security Guard or is not of a purely social, 
recreational or religious nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document  except where such communication or publication is in the bona  fide discharge  of his duties 
or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific character or is of a prescribed nature.  
Explanation .—If any question arises as to whether any society, institution, association or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause (b) of this sub -section, the decision of 
the Central Government thereon shall be final.  
(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any 
demonstration organised by any body of persons for any political purposes or for such other purposes as 
may be prescribed.  
13. Remedy of aggrieved persons othe r than officers .—(1) Any person subject to this Act other 
than an officer who deems himself wronged by any superior or other officer may, complain to the officer 
under whose command he is serving.  
(2) When the officer complained against is the officer to whom any complaint should, under           
sub-section (1), be preferred, the aggrieved pers on may complain to such officer’ s next superior  officer.  
(3) Every officer receiving any such complaint shall make as complete an investigation into it as may 
be possible for giving full redress to the complainant; or when necessary, refer the complaint to a superior 
authority.  
(4) The Director -General may revise a ny decision made under any of the foregoing sub -sections, but, 
subject thereto, such decision shall be final.  
14. Remedy of aggrieved officers .—Any officer who deems himself wronged by his Commander or 
any other superior officer and who, on due application made to his Commander or such other superior 
officer, does not receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled, may complain to the        
Director -General or the Central Government through proper channel.  
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES  
15. Offences in relation to the terrorists and other persons in arms against the Union and 
punishable with death .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follo wing offences, that 
is to say,— 
(a) shamefully abandons place of his duty or misbehaves in such manner as to show cowardice 
during operations;  
(b) treacherously holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, a terrorist or any 
person in arms against the Union; or  
(c) directly or indirectly assists any terrorist with money, arms, ammunition, stores or supplies or 
in any other manner whatsoever; or  9 
 (d) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of the Security Guard or the military, 
naval, air forces or an y other armed force of India or any forces co -operating therewith or any part of 
such forces,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
16. Offence s punishable more severe ly on active duty than at other times .—Any person subject to 
this Act who commits any of the follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) forces a safeguard, or forces or uses criminal force to a sentry; or  
(b) breaks into any house or other place in search of plunder; or  
(c) being a sentry sleeps upon his post, or is drunk; or  
(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves his guard, picket, patrol or post,  
shall, on convict ion by a Security Guard Court, — 
(i) if he commits any such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(ii) if he commits any such offence when not on active duty, be  liable to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven years of such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
17. Mutiny .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follo wing offences, that is to 
say,— 
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other person to cause any mutiny in the  Security 
Guard or in the military, naval, air forces or any other armed force of India or any forces co -operating 
therewith; or  
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or  
(c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost endeavours to suppress the  same; or  
(d) knowing or having reason to believe in the existence of any such mutiny, or of any intention 
to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give information thereof to his 
Commander or other superior officer; or  
(e) endeavours to seduce any  person in the Security Guard or in the military, naval, air forces or 
any other armed force of India or any forces co -operating therewith from his duty or allegiance to the 
Union,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer death o r such less punishment as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
18. Desertion and aiding desertion .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or attempts to 
desert the service shall, on conviction by a Sec urity Guard Court, — 
(a) if he commits the offence when on active duty or when under orders for active duty, be liable 
to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if he commits the offence under any other circumstances, be liable to suffer impriso nment for 
a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly harbours any such deserter shall, on conviction by 
a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonme nt for a term which may extend to three years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognizant of any desertion or attempt at desertion of a 
person subject to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own or some other superior officer, or take 
any steps in his power to cause such person to be apprehended, shall, on conviction by a Security Guard 
Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less punishme nt 
as is in this Act mentioned.  10 
 (4) For the purposes of this Act, a person deserts, — 
(a) if he absents from his unit or the place of duty at any time with the intention of not reporting 
back to such unit or place, or who, at any time and under any circumstances when absent from his 
unit or place of duty, does any act which shows that he has an intention of not reporting to such unit 
or place of duty;  
 (b) if he absents himself without leave with intent to avoid any active duty.  
19. Absence without l eave.—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) absents himself without leave; or  
(b) without sufficient cause overstays leave granted to him; or  
(c) being on leave or absence and having received information from the appropriate authority that 
any unit or part thereof to which he belongs, has been ordered on active duty, fails, without sufficient 
cause , to rejoin without delay; or  
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time fixed at th e parade or place appointed for 
exercise or duty; or  
(e) when on parade, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause or without leave from his 
superior officer, quits the parade or line of march; or  
(f) when in camp or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, or in any place prohibited, by 
any general, local or other order, without a pass or written leave from his superior officer; or  
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause, absents himself from any school 
when duly ordere d to attend there,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer im prisonment for a term which may  
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
20. Striking or threatening superior officer. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) uses criminal force to or assaults his superior officer; or  
(b) uses threatening language to such officer; or  
(c) uses insubordinate language to such officer,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, — 
(i) if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or, if the offence is committed on 
active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such 
less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(ii) in other cases, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned:  
Provided that in the case of any offence specified in clause ( c), the imprisonment shall not exceed five years.  
21. Disobedience to superior officer .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys, in such 
manner as to show a wilful defiance of authority, any lawful command given personally by his superior 
officer in the execution of his office whether the same is given orally, or in writing or by signal or 
othrewise, shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful com mand given by his superior officer 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  11 
 22. Assault and obstruction .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follo wing 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affray or disorder, refuses to obey any officer, though of 
inferior rank, who orders him into ar rest, or uses criminal force to  or assaults any such officer; or  
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults any person, whether subject to this Act or not, in whose 
custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or is not his superior officer; or  
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to apprehend him or have him in charge; or  
(d) breaks out of barracks, camp or quarters; or  
(e) refuses to obey any general, local or other order,   
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer impr isonment for a term which may 
extend, in the case of offences specified in clauses (d) and (e), to two years, and in the case of the 
offences specified in the other clauses, to ten years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
23. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is guilty of  any disgr aceful conduct of a cruel, indecent or unnatural kind; or  
(b) malingers or feigns or produces disease or infirmity in himself or intentionally delays his cure 
or aggravates his disease or infirmity; or  
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes hurt to 
himself or that  person,   
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment  as is in this Act mentioned.  
24. Ill-treating a subordinate .—Any o fficer, Assistant Commander or Ranger Grade I, who uses 
criminal force to, or otherwise ill -treats, any person subject to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or 
position, shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
25. Drunkenness .—(1) Any person subject to this Act, who is found in a state of drunkenness, 
whether on duty or not, shall , on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to six months or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) For the purposes of s ub-section (1), a person shall be deemed to be in a state of drunkenness if, 
owing to the influence of alcohol or any drug whether alone or in combination with any other substance, 
he is unfit to be entrusted with his duty or with any duty which he may be called upon to perform or 
behaves in a disorderly manner or i n a manner likely to bring discredit to the Security Guard.  
26. Permitting escape of person in custody .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when in command of a guard, picket, patrol, detachment or post, releases without proper 
authority, whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any person committed to his charge, or 
refuses to receive any prisoner or person so committed; or  
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to escape any person who is committed to his 
charge, or whom it is his duty to keep or guard,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment 
for a te rm which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he 
has not acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  12 
 27. Irregularity in  connection with arrest or confinement .—Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) unnecessarily detains a person in arrest or confinement without bringing him to trial, or fails 
to bring his case before the proper authority for investigation; or  
(b) having committed a person to Security Guard custody fails without reasonable cause to 
deliver at the time of such committal, or as soon as practicable, and in any case within forty -eight 
hours  thereafter, to the officer or other person into whose custody the person arrested is committed, 
an account in writing signed by himself of the offence  with which the person so committed is 
charged,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
28. Escape from custody .—Any perso n subject to this Act who, being in lawful custody, escapes or 
attempts to escape, shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mention ed. 
29. Offences in respect of property .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any Security Guard mess, 
band or institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or  
(b) dishonestly misappropriates or converts to his own use any such property; or  
(c) commits criminal b reach of trust in respect of any such property: or  
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such property in respect of which any of the offences under 
clauses (a), (b) and (c) has been committed, knowing or having reason to believe the commission of 
such o ffence; or  
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Government entrusted to him; or  
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one person or 
wrongful loss to another person,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
30. Extortion and exaction .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follo wing 
offences, that is to say ,— 
(a) commits extortion; or  
(b) without proper authority exacts from any person money, provisions or service,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment  as is in this Act mentioned.  
31. Making away with equipment .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away with, any arms, ammunition, equipment, 
instruments, tools, clothing or any other thing being the property of the Government issued to him for 
his use or entrusted to him; or  
(b) loses by neglect anything mentioned in clause (a); or 
(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal or decoration granted to him,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend, in the case o f the offences specified in clause (a), to ten years, and in the case of the offences 
specified in the other clauses, to five years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  13 
 32. Injury to property .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follo wing offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause (a) of section 31, or any property 
belonging to any Security Guard mess, band or institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or  
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of, any property of the Government 
by fire or in any other manner whatever; or  
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill -treats or los ses, any animal entrusted to him,  
shall, on conviction by a Securit y Guard Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment 
for a term which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he 
has acted without reasonable excuse, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
33. False accusations .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follo wing offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) makes a false accusation against any person subject to this Act, knowing or having reason to 
believe such accusation to be false; or  
(b) in making a complaint against any person subject to this Act makes any statement affecting 
the character of such person, knowing or having reason to believe such statement to be false, or 
knowingly and wilfull y suppresses any material fact,  
shall, on conv iction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
34. Falsifying official documents and false declarations .—Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or other document made or signed by him, or of the 
contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy , knowingly makes, or is privy to the making 
of, any false or fraudulent statement; or  
(b) in any document of the description mentioned in clause (a) knowingly makes, or is privy to 
the making of, any omission, with intent to defraud ; or 
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or knowingly and with intent to defraud, 
suppresses, defaces, alters or makes away with any document which it is his duty to preserve or 
produce; or  
(d) where it is his official duty to make a declaration re specting any matter, knowingly makes a 
false declaration; or  
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension, allowance or other advantage or 
privilege by a statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does n ot 
believe to be true, or by making or using a false entry in any book or record, or by making any 
document containing a false statement, or by omitting to make a true entry o r document containing a 
true statement,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
35. False declaration on appointment .—Any person having become subject to this Act  who is 
discovered to have made at the time of appointment a wilfully false statement or declaration  in connection 
with his appointment, shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to  suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three years or such less punishment as is in t his Act mentioned.  14 
 36. Offences relating to Security Guard Court s.—Any person subject to this Act who commits any 
of the follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before a Security Guard Court, 
wilfully or without reasonable excuse, makes default in attending; or  
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a Security Guard Court to 
be taken or made; or  
(c) refuses to produce or deliver any document in his power or control legally req uired by a 
Security Guard Court  to be produced or delivered  by him; or  
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question which he is by law bound to answer; or  
(e) is guilty of conte mpt of the Security Guard Court  by using insulting or threatening language, 
or by causing any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of such c ourt, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
37. False evidence .—Any person subject to this Act w ho, having been duly sworn or affirmed before 
any Security Guard Court, or before any officer competent under this Act to administer oath or 
affirmation or before a Court of inquiry constituted under this Act, makes any statement which is false, 
and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, shall, on conviction by a 
Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or 
such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
38. Unlawful detention of pay .—Any officer, Assistant Commander or Ranger Grade I who, having 
received the pay of a person subject to this Act unlawfully detains or refuses to pay the same when due, 
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suf fer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
39. Unbecoming conduct .—Any officer or Assistant Commander who behaves in a manner 
unbecoming of his position and the character expected of him shall, on conviction by a Security Guard 
Court, be liable to be dismissed or to suffer such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
40. Violation of good order and discipline .—Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act 
or omission which, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the 
Security Guard shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in  this Act mentioned.  
41. Miscellaneous offences .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follo wing 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being in command o f any detachment or post or on the march, and receiving a complaint that 
any one under his command has beaten or otherwise maltreated or oppressed any person, or has 
caused disturbance at any public place, or committed any riot or trespass, fails to have du e reparation 
made to the injured person or to report the case to the proper authority; or  
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise intentionally insults the religion, or wounds the 
religious feelings of any person; or  
(c) attempts to commit suici de, and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of such 
offence; or  
(d) being below the rank of an Assistant Commander, when off duty, appears without proper 
authority, in or about camp, or in or about, or when going to, or returning from, any town, carrying a 
rifle, sword or other offensive weapon; or  
(e) directly or indirec tly accepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to obtain, for himself 
or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or reward for procuring the appointment of any 
person, or leave of absence, promotion or any other advantage or indulgenc e for any person in the 
service; or  15 
 (f) commits any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or resident in, the 
country in which he is serving,  
shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term  which may 
extend to seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
42. Attempt .—Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences specified 
in sections 15 to 41 (both inclusive) and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the 
offence shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court, where no express provision is made by this Act 
for the punishme nt of such attempt, be liable, — 
(a) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death, to s uffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment, to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence 
or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
43. Abetment of off ences that have been committed .—Any person subject to this Act who abets 
the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 15 to 41 (both inclusive) shall, on conviction 
by a Security Guard Court, if the act abetted is committed in consequence of  the abetment and no express 
provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment 
provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
44. Abetment of offences that have not been co mmitted .—(1) Any person subject to this Act     
who abets the commission of any of the offences punishable with death under sections 15, 17 and        
sub-section (1) of section 18 shall, on conviction by a Security Guard Court , if that offence be not 
committed in consequence of the ab etment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such ab etment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen 
years or such less punishment as is  in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offence s specified in 
sections 15 to 41 (both inclusive) and punishable with imprisonment shall, on conviction by a Security 
Guard Court , if that offence be n ot committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision 
is made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence or such le ss punishment as is 
in this Act mentioned.  
45. Civil offences .—Subject to the provisions of section 46, any person subject to this Act who at any 
place in, or beyond, India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against 
this Act and, if charged therewith under this section shall be liable to be tried by a Security Guard Court 
and, on conviction, be punishab le as follows, that is to say, — 
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India with d eath, he 
shall be liable to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence, by the aforesaid law and such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence by the 
law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
46. Civil offences not triable by a Security Guard Court .—A person subject to this Act who 
commits an offence of murder or of culpable homicide not amounting to murder against, or of rape in 
relation to, a person not subject to this Act shall not be deemed to be guilty of an off ence under this Act 
and shall not be tried by a Security Guard Court, unless he com mits any of the said offences, — 
(a) while on active duty; or  
(b) at any place outside India.  16 
 CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENTS  
47. Punishments awardable by Security Guard Courts .—(1) Punishments may be inflicted in 
respect of offences committed by person s subject to this Act and convicted by Security Guard Courts 
according to the sc ale following, that is to say, — 
(a) death;  
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or any other lesser term but excluding 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Security Guard custody;  
(c) dismissal from the service;  
(d) imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in S ecurity Guard custody;  
(e) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade in the case of a Ranger Grade I;  
(f) forfeiture of se niority of rank and forfeiture of all or any part of the service for the purpose of 
promotion where promotion depends upon length of service;  
(g) forfeiture of service for the purpose of increment or pension or other prescribed purpose;  
(h) severe reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persons below the rank of Ranger    
Grade I;  
(i) forfeiture in the case of a person sentenced to dismissal from the service of all arrears of pay 
and allowances and other public money due to him at the time of such dismissal;  
(j) deduction from pay and allowances to make good any proved loss or damage occasioned by 
the offence for which h e is convicted.  
(2) Each of the punishments specified in sub -section (1) shall be deemed to be inferior in degree to 
every punishment preceding it in the above scale . 
48. Alternative punishments awardable by Security Guard Courts .—Subject to the provisions  of 
this Act, a Security Guard Court may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences 
specified in sections 15 to 44 (both inclusive) award either the particular punishment with which the 
offence is stated in the said sections to be p unishable or, in lieu , thereof, any of the punishments lower in 
the scale set out in section 47 regard being had to the nature and degree of the offence.  
49. Combination of punishments .—A sentence of a Security Guard Court may award in addition to, 
or without any one other punishment, the punishment specified in clause (c) of sub -section (1) of    
section 47 and any one or more of the punishments specified in clauses (e) to (j) (both inclusive) of that 
sub-section.  
50. Punishments otherwise than by Security Guard Courts .—Punishments may also be inflicted 
in respect of offences committed by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of a Security 
Guard Court in the manne r stat ed in sections 51 and 53.  
51. Minor punishments .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 52, a Commander of and above 
the rank of a Group Commander may, in the prescribed manner proceed against a person subject to this 
Act other than an officer or an Assistant Commander, who is charged with an offence under this Act and 
award such person, to the extent prescribed, one or more of the followin g punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) imprisonment in Security Guard custody up to twenty -eight days;  
(b) detention  up to twenty -eight days;  
(c) confinement to the lines up to twenty -eight days;  
(d) extra guards or duties;  
(e) deprivation of any acting rank provided such rank has not been held by him for more than two 
years;  17 
 (f) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(g) deductions from his pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any loss or 
damage occasioned by the offence for which he is punished.  
(2) If a group is being temporarily commanded by an officer of the rank of a Squadron Commander or 
a Team Comman der, such officer shall have full powers of a Commander as specified in sub -section (1). 
(3) Subject to the provisions of section 52, a Squadron Commander or a Team Commander 
commanding a squadron or a team or any detachment shall have the power to proceed against a person 
subject to this Act, other than an officer or an Assistant Commander, who is charged with an offence 
under this Act and award such person to the extent prescribed , one or more of the punishments specified 
in clauses (a) to (d) and (g) of sub -section (1) provided that the maximum limit of punishment awarded 
under each of the clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall not exceed fourteen days.  
52. Limit of punishments under section 51 .—(1) In the case of an award of two or more of the 
punishments specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) of sub -section (1) of section 51, the punishments 
specified in clause (c) or clause (d) shall take effect  only at the end of the punishment specified in clause 
(a) or clause (b). 
(2) When two or more of the punishments specified in the said clauses (a), (b) and (c) are awarded to 
a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said punishments, the whole extent of 
the punishments shall not exceed in the aggregate fifty -six days.  
(3) The punishments specified in the said clauses (a), (b) and (c) shall not be awarded to any person 
who is of the rank of Ranger Grade I or was, at the time of committing the offence for which he is 
punished, or such rank.  
(4) The punishments specified in clause (f) of sub -section (1) of section 51 shall not be awarded to 
any person below the rank of Ranger Grade I.  
53. Punishment of officers of or below the rank of Squadron Commanders by officers not below 
the rank of Inspectors -General .—An officer not below the rank of an Inspector -General may, in the 
prescribed manner, proceed against an officer of or below the rank of a Squadron Commander, who is 
charged with an offence under this Act, and award one or more of the followin g punishments, that is to 
say,— 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon length of 
service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding one year, but 
subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elect to be tr ied by a General Security 
Guard Court;  
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(c) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any proved loss or 
damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted.  
54. Punishment of persons of the rank of Assistant Commander .—(1) An officer not below the 
rank of a Deputy Inspector -General may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a person of the rank 
of an Assistant Commander who is charged with an offence under this Act and award one or more of the 
following punish ments, tha t is to say, — 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose promotion depends upon the length 
of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding one year, but 
subject to the right of the accused pre vious to the award to elect to be tried by a General Security 
Guard Court;  
(b) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(c) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any proved loss or 
damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted.  18 
 (2) An officer of the rank of a Group Commander may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a 
person of the  rank of an Assistant Commander who is charged with an offence under this Act and award 
any one or both of the following punishments , that is to say, — 
(a) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(b) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any proved loss or 
damage occasioned by the offence of which he is convicted.  
CHAPTER V  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
55. Custody of offenders .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may 
be taken into Security Guard custody, under the order of any superior officer.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), an officer may order into Security Guard 
custody any other officer, though such other officer may be of a higher rank, engaged in a quarrel, affray 
or disorder . 
56. Duty of Commander in regard to detention .—(1) It shall be the duty of every Commander to 
take care that a person under his command when charged with an offence is not detained in custody for 
more than forty -eight hours after the committal of such person into custody is reported to him, without the 
charge being investigated, unless investigation within that period seems to him to be impracticable having 
regard to the public service.  
(2) The case of every person being detained in custody beyond a period of forty -eight hours, and the 
reasons therefor, shall be reported by the Commander to the next higher authority.  
(3) In reckoning the period of forty -eight hours specified in sub -section (1), Sundays and other public 
holidays shall be excluded.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make rules providing for the 
manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may be taken into and detain ed 
in Security Guard custody, pending the trial by any competent authority for any offence committed by 
him. 
57. Interval between committal and trial .—In every case where any such person as is mentioned in 
section 55 and as is not on active duty, remains in such custody for a longer period than eight days 
without a Security Guard Court for his trial being convened, a special report giving reasons for the delay 
shall be made by his Commander and a similar report shall be forwarded at intervals of every eigh t days 
until a Security Guard Court is convened or such person is released from custody.  
58. Arrest by civil authorities .—Whenever any person subject to this Act, who is accused of an 
offence under this Act, is within the jurisdiction of any Magistrate or police officer, such Magistrate or 
police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to Security Guard custody of such persons upon 
receipt of a written application to that effect signed by his Commander or an officer authorised by the 
Commander in  that behalf.  
59. Capture of deserters .—(1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the Commander of 
the unit to which he belongs, shall give information of the desertion to such civil authorities as, in his 
opinion, may be able to afford assistance towards the capture of the deserter; and  such authorities shall 
thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in like manner as if he were a person for 
whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a Magistrate, and shall deliver the deserter, when 
apprehended, into Security G uard custody.  
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be subject to this 
Act, and to be a deserter and shall bring him without delay before the nearest Magistrate, to be dealt with 
according to law.  19 
 60. Inquiry into absence without leave .—(1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent 
from duty without due authority for a period of thirty days, a Court of inquiry shall, as soon as 
practicable, be appointed by an officer not below the rank of a Group Commander under whose command 
he is for the time being serving and such Court shall, on oath or affirmation administered in the prescribed 
manner, inquire respecting the absence of the person, and the deficiency, if any, in the property of the 
Government entrusted to his care, or in any arm s, ammunition, equipment, instruments, clothing or 
necessarie s; and if satisfied of the fact  of such absence without due authority or other sufficient cause, the 
Court shall declare such absence and the period thereof and the said deficiency, if any, and t ransmit the 
proceedings of the Court of inquiry to the officer who appointed the court of inquiry, for further action.  
(2) If the person declared absent does not afterwards surrender or is not apprehended, he shall, for the 
purposes of this Act, be deemed to be a deserter.  
CHAPTER VI  
SECURITY  GUARD  COURTS  
61. Kinds of Security Guard Courts .—For the purposes of this Act there shall be three kinds of 
Security  Guard Courts, that is to say, — 
(a) General Security Guard Courts;  
(b) Petty Security Guard Courts; and  
(c) Summary Security Guard Courts.  
62. Power to convene  General Security Guard Court .—A General Security Guard Court may be 
convened by the Central Government or the Director -General or by any officer empowered in this behalf 
by warrant of the Director -General.  
63. Power to convene a Petty Security Guard Court .—A Petty Security Guard Court may be 
convened by an officer having power to convene a General Security Guard Court or by an officer 
empowered in this behalf by warrant of any such officer.  
64. Contents of warrants issued under sections 62 and 63 .—A warrant, issued under section 62 or 
section 63 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the officer issuing it may think fit.  
65. Composition of General Security Guard Court .—A General Security Guard Court shall consist 
of not less than five officers.  
66. Composition of a Petty Security Guard Court .—A Petty Security Guard Court shall consist of 
not less than three officers.  
67. Summary Security Guard Court .—(1) A Summary Security Guard Court may be held by the 
Commander of any unit of the Security Guard and he alone shall constitute the Court.  
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be officers or 
Assistant Commanders or one of either, and who shall not as such, be sworn or affirmed:  
Provided that the persons attending the Court for the trial of an officer shall not be of a rank lower 
than the rank of that officer unless in the opinion of  the convening officer recorded in the convening 
order, officers of such rank are not, having due regard to the exigencies of pub lic service,  available.  
68. Dissolution of a Security Guard Court .—(1) If a Security Guard Court after the commencement 
of a trial is reduced below the minimum number of officers required by this Act, it shall be dissolved.  
(2) If, on account of the illness of the concerned Judge Attorney or, as the case may be, Deputy Judge 
Attorney -General or Additional Judge Attorney -General or of the accused before the finding, it is 
impossible to continue the trial, a Security Guard Court s hall be dissolved.  
(3) The authority or officer who convened a Security Guard Court may dissolve the same if it appears 
to it or him that the exigencies of the service or necessities of discipline render it impossible or 
inexpedient to continue the said Se curity Guard Court.  
(4) Where a Security Guard Court is dissolved under this section , the accused may be tried again.  20 
 69. Powers of a General Security Guard Court .—A General Security Guard Court shall have the 
power to try any person subject to this Act for any offence punishable thereunder and to pass any 
sentence authorised thereby.  
70. Powers of a Petty Security Guard Court .—A Petty Security Guard Court shall have the power 
to try any person subject to this Act other than an officer or an Assistant Com mander for any offence 
made punishable thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of 
death, or imprisonment for a term exceeding two years.  
71. Powers of a Summary Security Guard Court .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (2), 
a Summary Security Guard Court may try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action a reference can, without detriment to 
discipline, be made to the officer emp owered to convene a Petty Security Force Court for the trial of the 
alleged offender, an officer holding  a Summary Security Guard Court shall not try without such reference 
any offence punishable under any of the sections 15, 17 and 45, or any offence agai nst the officer holding 
the Court . 
(3) A Summary Security Guard Court may try any person subject to this Act and under the command 
of the officer holding the Court, except an officer, or an Assistant Commander.  
(4) A Summary Security Guard Court may pass any sentence which may be passed under this Act, 
except the sentence of death or of imprisonment for a term exceeding the limit specified in                    
sub-section (5). 
(5) The limit referred t o in sub -section (4) shall be,— 
(a) one year, if the officer holding the Security Guard Court holds the rank not below tha t of a 
Group Commander;  
(b) three months, in any other case.  
72. Prohibition of second trial .—(1) When any person subject to this Act has been acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by a Security Guard Court or by a Criminal Court or has been dealt with under 
section 51 or section 53 or section 54, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the same o ffence by a 
Security Guard Court or dealt with under the said sections.  
(2) When any person subject to this Act, has been acquitted or convicted of an offence by a Security 
Guard Court or has been dealt with under section 51 or section 53 or section 54, he  shall not be liable to 
be tried again by a Criminal Court for the same offence or on the same facts.  
73. Period of limitation for trial .—(1) Except as provided by sub -section (2), no trial by a Security 
Guard Court of any person subject to this Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expiration of 
a period of three years from the date of such offence.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section (1) shall not apply to a trial for an offence of desertion or for any of 
the offences mentioned in section 17.  
(3) In the computation of the period of time mentioned in sub -section (1), any time spent by such 
person in evading arrest after the commission of the offence, shall be excluded,  
74. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act .—(1) Where an offence under this 
Act had been committed by any person while subject to this Act, and he has ceased to be so subject, he 
may be taken into and kept in Security Guard custody and tried and punished for such offence as if he 
continued to be so sub ject. 
(2) No such person shall be tried for an offence, unless his trial commences within six months after he 
had ceased to be subject to this Act;  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to the trial of any such person for an 
offence of desertion or for any of the offences mentioned in section 17 or shall affect the jurisdiction of a 
criminal court to try any offence triable b y such Court as wel l as by a Security Guard Court.  21 
 75. Application of Act during term of sentence .—(1) When a person subject to this Act is 
sentenced by a Security Guard Court to imprisonment , this Act shall apply to him during the term of his 
sentence, though he is di smissed from the Security Guard , or has otherwise ceased to be subject to this 
Act, and he may be kept, removed, imprisoned and punished as if he continued to be subject to this A ct. 
(2) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a Security Guard Court to death, this Act shall 
apply to him till the sentence is carried out.  
76. Place of trial .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any offence against it may be tried 
and punished for such offence in any place whatever.  
77. Choice between Criminal Court and Security Guard Cour t.—When a Criminal Court and a 
Security Guard Court have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the 
Director -General, or the Inspector -General or the Deputy Inspector -General, within whose command the 
accused person is serving or such other officer as may be prescribed, to decide before which Court the 
proceedings shall be instituted, and, if that officer decides th at they shall be instituted before a Security 
Guard Court, to direct that the accused person shall be detained in Security Guard custody.  
78. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender .—(1) When a Criminal Court having 
jurisdiction is of the opinion that proceedings shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged 
offence, it may, by written notice, require the officer referred to in section 77 at his option, either to 
deliver ove r the offender to the nearest Magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to 
postpone proceedings, pending a reference to the Central Government.  
(2) In every such case, the said officer shall either deliver over the offender in compliance with the 
requisition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the Court before which the proceedings are to be 
instituted, for the determination of the Central G overnment whose order upon such reference shall be 
final.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROCEDURE OF SECURITY  GUARD  COURTS  
79. Presiding officer .—At every General Security Guard Court or Petty Security Guard Court, the 
senior member shall be the presiding officer.  
80. Judge Attorneys, etc. —Every General Security Guard Court shall, and every Petty Security 
Guard Court may, be attended by a Judge Attorney or a Deputy Judge Attorney -General or an Additional 
Judge Attorney -General, or, if no such officer is available, an o fficer approved by the Judge         
Attorney -General or by any officer authorised in this behalf by the Judge Attorney -General.  
81. Challenges .—(1) At all trials by a General Security Guard Court or by a Petty Security Guard 
Court, as soon as the Court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and members shall be read 
over to the accused, who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to bei ng tried by any officer, sitting 
on the Court.  
(2) If the accused objects to such officer, his objection and also the reply thereto of the officer 
objected to shall be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the Court shall, in the absence of 
the challenged officer, decide on the objection.  
(3) If the objection is allowed by one  half or more of the votes of the officers entitled to vote, the 
objection shall be allowed, and the member objected to shall retire, and his vacancy may be filled in the 
prescribed manner, by another officer subject to th e same right of the accused to object.  
(4) When no challenge is made, or when a challenge has been made and disallowed, or the place of 
every officer successfully challenged has been filled by another officer to whom no objection is made or 
allowed, the Co urt shall proceed with the trial.  
82. Oaths of members, Judge Attorney and witness .—(1) An oath or affirmation in the prescribed 
manner shall be administered to every member of every Security Guard Court and to the Judge Attorney, 
or, as the case may be, the Deputy Judge Attorney -General or the Additional Judge Attorney -General or 
the office r approved under section 80, before the commencement of the trial.  22 
 (2) Every person giving evidence before a Security Guard Court shall be examined after being duly 
sworn or affirmed in the prescribed form.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section (2) shall not apply where the witness is a child under twelve years 
of age and the Security Guard Court is of the opinion that though the witness understands the duty of 
speaking the truth , he does not understand the nature of an oath or affirmation.  
83. Voting by members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections (2) and (3), every  decision of 
a Security Guard Court shall be passed by an absolute majority of votes; and where there is an equality of 
votes on either the finding or the sentence, the decision shall be in favour of the accused.  
(2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a General Security Guard Court without the concurrence 
of at least two -thirds of the members of the Court.  
(3) In matters, other than a challenge or the finding or sent ence, the presiding officer shall have a 
casting vote.  
84. General rule as to evidence .—The Indian Evidence Act, 1872,  (1 of 1872)  shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, apply to all proceedings before a Security Guard Court.  
85. Judicial notice .—A Security Guard Court may take judicial notice of any matter within the 
general knowledge of the members as officers of the Security Guard.  
86. Summoning witnesses .—(1) The convening officer, the presiding officer of a Security Guard 
Court, the Judge Attorney or, as the case may be, the Deputy Judge Attorney -General or the Additional 
Judge Attorney -General or the officer approved under section 80 or the Commander of the accused 
person may, by summons under his hand, require the attendance, at a time and place to be mentioned in 
the summons, of any person either to give evidence or to produce any document or other thing.  
(2) In the case of a witness who is subject to this Act, the summons shall be sent to his Commander 
and such officer shall serve it upon him accordingly.  
(3) In the case of any other witness, the summons shall be sent to the Magistrate within whose 
jurisdicti on he may be, or resides, and such Magistrate shall give effect to the summons as if the witness 
was required in the Court of such a Magistrate.  
(4) When a witness is required to produce any particular document or other thing in his possession or 
power, th e summons shall describe it with reasonable precision.  
87. Documents exempted from production .—(1) Nothing in section 86 shall be deemed to effect 
the operation of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872)  or to apply to any 
letter, postcard, telegram or other document in the custody of the postal or telegraph authorities.  
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any District Magistrate, Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, Court of Session on High Court wanted for the purpose of any Security Guard Court, such 
Magistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph autho rities, as the case may be, to deliver such 
document to such person as such Magistrate or Court may direct.  
(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of any other Magistrate or of any Commissioner of Police 
or District Superintendent of Police, wanted fo r any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph 
authorities, as the case may be, to cause such search to be made for , and to detain such document pending 
the order of any such District Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court of Session or H igh Court.  
88. Commissions for examination of witnesses .—(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a 
Security Guard Court, it appears to the Court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends 
of justice, and that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, 
expense or inconvenience which , in the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable , such Court 
may address the Judge Attorney -General in order that a commission to take the evidence of such witnes s 
may be issued.  
(2) The Judge Attorney -General may then if he thinks necessary, issue a commission to any Chief 
Judicial Magistrate or Magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such 
witness resides, to take the evidence of such witness.  23 
 (3) The Magistrate or officer to whom the commission is issued, or, if he is the Chief Judicial 
Magistrate, he or such Magistrate of the first class as he appoints in this behalf, shall proceed to the place 
where the witness is, or shall summon the witness be fore him and shall take down his evidence  in the 
same manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as i n the trials of warrant -cases under 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(4) When the witness resides in a tribal area or in a ny place outside India, the commission may be 
issued in the manner specified in Chapter XXIII -B of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
89. Examination of witness on commission .—(1) The prosecutor and accused person in any case in 
which a commission is issued under section 88 may respectively forward any interrogatories in writing 
which the Court may think relevant to the issue, and the Magistrate or officer executing the commission 
shall examine the witness upon such interrogatories.  
(2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such Magistrate or officer by counsel , 
or, except in the case of an accused person in custody, in person, and may examine, cross -examine and  
re-examine, as the case may be, the said witness.  
(3) After a commission issued under section 88 has been duly executed, it shall be returned, together 
with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder, to the Judge, Attorney -General.  
(4) On receipt o f a commission, and deposition returned under sub -section (3), the Judge       
Attorney -General shall forward the same to the Court at whose instance the commission was issued or, if 
such Court has been dissolved, to any other Court conv eaned for the trial  of the accused person; and the 
commission, the return thereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by the prosecutor and the 
accused person, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either the 
prosecutor or the  accused and shall form part of the proceedings of the Court.  
(5) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 88, the trial may be adjourned for 
specified time reasonably sufficient for the execution and return of the commission.  
90. Convic tion of offence not charged .—A person charged before a Security Guard Court, — 
(a) with desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert or of being absent without leave;  
(b) with attempting to desert may be found guilty of being absent without leave;  
(c) with using criminal force may be found guilty of assault;  
(d) with using threatening language may be found guilty of using insubordinate language;  
(e) with any one of the offences specified in clauses (a), (b), (c) and (d) of section 29 may be 
found guilty of any other of these offences with which he might have been charged;  
(f) with an offence punishable under section 45 may be found guilty of any other                
offence of which he might have been found guilty, if the provisions of the Code of Criminal    
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , were applicable;  
(g) with any offence under this Act may, on failure of proof of an offence having been committed 
in circumstances i nvolving a more severe punishment, be found guilty of the same offence as having 
been committed in circumstances involving a less severe punishment;  
(h) with any offence under this Act may be found guilty of having attempted or abetted the 
commission of that offence, although the attempt or abetment is not separately charged.  
91. Presumption as to signatures .—In any proceeding under this Act, any applicat ion, certificate, 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by an officer in the service of the Government 
shall, on production, be presumed to have been duly signed by the person by whom and in the character in 
which it purports to have bee n signed, until the contrary is shown.  
92. Appointment paper .—(1) Any appointment paper purporting to be signed by an appointing 
authority shall, in proceedings under this Act, be evidence of the person appointed having given the 
answers to questions which he is therein represented as having given.  24 
 (2) The appointment o f such person may be proved by the production of the original or a copy of his 
appointment paper purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer having the custody of the 
appointment paper.  
93. Presumption as to certain documents .—(1) A letter, return or other document respecting the 
service of any person in, or the dismissal or discharge of any person from, any unit of the Security Guard, 
or respecting the circumstances of any person not having served in, or belonged to, any unit of t he 
Security Guard, if purporting to be signed by or on behalf of the Central Government or the         
Director -General, or by any other competent authority, shall be evidence of the facts stated in   such letter, 
return or other document.  
(2) A National Security Guard List or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be 
evidence of the status and rank of the officers and Assistant Commanders therein mentioned, and of any 
appointment held by them and of the group, unit or branch of the Secu rity Guard to which they belong.  
(3) Where a record is made in any unit book in pursuance of this Act or of any rules or otherwise in 
the discharge of official duties, and purports to be signed by the Commander or by the officer whose duty 
it is to  make such record, such record shall be evidence of the facts therein stated.  
(4) A copy of any record in any unit book purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer 
having custody of such book shall be evidence of such record.  
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave, and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of any officer or other person subject to 
this Act, or any unit of the Security Guard, or has been appr ehended by such officer or person, a 
certificate purporting to be signed by such officer, or by the Commander of the unit to which such person 
belongs, as the case may be, and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension, and 
the mann er in which he was dressed, shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of, or has been apprehended by, a police 
officer not below the rank of an officer in charge o f a police station, a certificate purporting to be signed 
by such police officer and stating the fact, date and place of such surrender or apprehension and the 
manner in which he was dressed shall be evidence of the matters so stated.  
(7) (a) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of a Government scientific expert to 
whom this sub -section applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or 
analysis and report in the course of any proceeding under this Act, may be used a s evidence in any 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Act.  
(b) The Security Guard Court may, if it thinks fit, summon and examine any such expert as to the 
subject matter of his report.  
(c) Where any such expert is summoned by a Security Guard Court and he is unable to attend 
personally, he may, unless the Court has expressly directed him to appear personally depute any 
responsible person working with him to attend the Court if such officer is conversant with the facts of the 
case and can satisfactorily depose in the Court on his behalf.  
(d) This sub -section applies to the Government scientific experts, for the time being specified in    
sub-section (4) of section 293 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
94. Reference by accused to Government officer .—(1) If at any trial for desertion or absence 
without leave , over-staying leave or no t rejoining when warned for service, the accused person states in 
his defence any sufficient or reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers in support thereof 
to any officer in the service of the Government, or if it appears that any such off icer is likely to prove or 
disprove the said statement in the defence, the Court shall address such officer and adjourn the 
proceedings until his reply is received.  
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall , if signed by him, be received in evidence and 
have the same effect as if made on oath before the Court.  25 
 (3) If the Court is dissolved before the receipt of such reply or if the Court omits to comply with the 
provisions of this section, the convening officer may, at his discretion, annul the proceedings and order a 
fresh trial.  
95. Evidence of previous convictions and general character .—(1) When any person subject to this 
Act has been convicted by a Security Guard Court of any offence, such Security Guard Court may inquire 
into and receive and record evidence of any previous convict ions of such person, either by a Security 
Guard Court or by a Criminal Court, or any previous award of punishment under section 51 or section 53 
or section 54 and may further inquire into and record the general character of such person and such other 
matte rs as may be prescribed.  
(2) The evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or 
certified extracts from, books of Security Guard Courts or other official records ; and it shall not be 
necessary to give notice before trial to the person tried that evidence as to his previous convictions or 
character will be received.  
(3) At a Summary Security Guard Court, the officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit, record an y 
previous convictions against the offender, his general character, and such other matters as may be 
prescribed, as of his own knowledge, instead of requiring them to be proved under the foregoing 
provisions of this section.  
96. Lunacy of accused .—(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Security Guard Court, it appears 
to the Court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making his 
defence, or that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of min d incapable of 
knowing the nature of the Act or knowing th at it was wrong or contrary to L aw, the Court shall record a 
finding accordingly.  
(2) The presiding officer of the Court, or, in the case of a Summary Security Guard Court, the officer 
holding the trial, shall forthwith report the case to the confirming officer, or to the authority empowered 
to deal with its finding under section 111, as t he case may be.  
(3) The confirming officer to whom the case is reported under sub -section (2) may, if he does not 
confirm the finding, take steps to have the accused person tried by the same or another Security Guard 
Court for the offence with which he was  charged.  
(4) The authority to whom the finding of a Summary Security Guard Court is reported under          
sub-section (2), and a confirming officer confirming the finding in any case so reported to him shall order 
the accused person to be kept in custody  in the prescribed manner and shall report the case for the orders 
of the Central Government.  
(5) On receipt of a report under sub -section (4), the Central Government may order the accused 
person to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.  
97. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for trial .—Where any accused person, having been found 
by reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence, is in custody or under detention 
under section 96, any office r prescri bed in this beha lf, may— 
(a) if such person is in custody under sub -section (4) of section 96, on the report of a medical 
officer that he is capable of maki ng his defence, or  
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub -section (5) of section 96, on a certificate of the 
Inspector -General of Prisons, and if such person is detained in a lunatic asylum under the said       
sub-section, on a certificate of any two or more of the visitors of such asylum and if he is detained in 
any other  place under that sub -section, on a certificate of the prescribed authority, that he is capable 
of making his defence,  
take steps to have such person tried by the same or another Security Guard Court for the offence with 
which he was originally charged or,  if the offence is a civil offence, by a Criminal Court.  26 
 98. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 97 .—A copy of every order 
made by an officer under section 97 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central 
Govern ment.  
99. Release of lunatic accused .—Where any person is in custody under sub -section (4) of section 96 
or under detention under sub -section (5) of that section, — 
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub -section (4), on the report of a medical officer, 
or 
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub -section (5), on a certificate from any of the 
authorities mentioned in clause (b) of section 97 that in the judgment of such officer or authority such 
person may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other person,  
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody, or transferred to a 
public lunatic asylum if he has not already been sent to such an asylum.  
100. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives .—Where any relative or friend of any person who is in 
custody under sub -section (4) of section 96 o f under detention under sub -section (5) of that section 
desires that he should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may, upon 
application by such relative or friend and, on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Government 
that the person delivered shall be properly taken care of, and, prevented from doing injury to himself or to 
any other officer, and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the 
Central Government may direct, order suc h person to be delivered to such relative or friend.  
101. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial .—When any property regarding 
which any offence appears to have been committed, or which appears to have been used for the 
commission of any offence, is produced before a Security Guard Court during a trial, the Court may make 
such order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and 
if the property is subject to speedy or natural decay may, af ter recording such evidence as it thinks 
necessary, order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.  
102. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed .—(1) After the 
conclusion of a trial before any Security Guard Court, the Court or the officer confirming the finding or 
sentence of such Security Guard Court, or any authority superior to such officer, or in the case of a 
Summary Security Guard Court whose fi nding or sentence does not require confirmation, an officer not 
below the rank of a Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the trial was held, may make such 
order as it or he thinks fit for the disposal by destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to 
be entitled to possession thereof, or otherwise, of any property or document produced before the Court or 
in its custody, or regarding which any offence appears to have been committed or which has been used for 
the commission of any offe nce. 
(2) Where any order has been made under sub -section (1) in respect of property regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed and certified by the authority 
making the same may, whether the trial was held within  India or not, be sent to a Magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction such property for the time being is situated, and such Magistrate shall thereupon cause the 
order to be carried into effect as if it were an order passed by him under the provisions of the Co de of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(3) In this section, the term “property ” includes in the case of property regarding which an offence 
appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under 
the control of any person, but also any property into or for which the same may have been converted or 
exchanged and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.  
103. Powers of Security Guard Court in relation to proceedings under the Act .—Any trial by a 
Security Guard Court under the provisions of this Act  shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  and the Security Guard Court 
shall be deemed to be a Court within the meaning of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 27 
 CHAPTER VIII  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
104. Finding and sentence not valid, unless confirmed .—No finding or sentence of a General 
Security Guard Court or a Petty Security Guard Court shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed 
as provided by this Act.  
105. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Security Guard Court .—The findings 
and sentences of General Security Guard Courts may be confirmed by the Central Government or by any 
officer empowered in this behalf  by warrant of the Central Government.  
 106. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Security Guard Court .—The findings and 
sentences of Petty Security Guard Courts may be confirmed by an authority or officer having power to 
convene a General Security Guard Court or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of such 
authority or officer.  
107. Limitation of powers of confirming authority .—A warrant issued under section 105 or section 
106 may contain such restrictions, reservations or con ditions as the authority issuing it may think fit.  
108. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences .—Subject to such 
restrictions, reservations or conditions, as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 105 or 
section 106, a confirming authority may, when confirming the sentence of a Security Guard Court, 
mitigate or remit the punishment thereby awarded, or commute that punishment for any punishment or 
punishments lower in the scale laid down in section 47 or may set as ide the proceedings of the trial if 
found to be illegal.  
109. Revision of finding or sentence .—(1) Any finding or sentence of a Security Guard Court which 
requires confirmation may be once revised by the order of the confirming authority and on such revision, 
the Court, if so directed by the confirming authority, may take additional evidence.  
(2) The C ourt, on revision, shall consist of the same officers as were present when the original 
decision was passed, unless any of those officers are unavoidably absent.  
(3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof shall be duly certified in the proce edings, 
and the Court shall proceed with the revision , provided that, if a General Security Guard Court, it still 
consist s of five officers, or, if a Petty  Security  Guard Court, of three officers.  
110. Finding and sentence of a Summary Security Guard Court .—The finding and sentence of a 
Summary Security Guard Court shall not require to be confirmed, but may be carried out forthwith.  
111. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Security Guard Court .—The proceedings of 
every Summary Security Guard Court shall,  without delay, be forwarded to the officer not below the rank 
of a Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the trial was held, or to the prescribed officer, and 
such officer, or the Director -General or any officer empowered by him in this behalf may , for reasons 
based on the merits of the case, but not on merely technical grounds, set aside the proceedings, or reduce 
the sentence to any other sentence which the Court might have passed.  
112. Alteration of finding of  sentence in certain cases .—(1) Where a finding of guilty by a Security 
Guard Court, which has been confirmed or which does not require confirmation, is found for any reason 
to be invalid or cannot be supported by the evidence, the authority which would have had power under 
section 124 to commute the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the finding had been valid, may 
substitute a new finding and pass a sentence for the offence specif ied or involved in such finding : 
Provided that no such substitution shall be made unless such finding s could have been validly made 
by the Security Guard Court on the charge and unless it appears that the Security Guard Court must have 
been satisfied of the facts establishing the said offence.  
(2) Where a sentence passed by a Security Guard Court which has been confirmed, or which does not 
require confirmation, not being a sentence passed in pursuance of a new finding substituted under       
sub-section (1), is found for any reason to be invalid, t he authority referred to in sub -section (1) may pass 
a valid sentence.  28 
 (3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2) shall not 
be higher in the scale of punishments than, or in excess of, the punishment awarded by, the sentence for 
which a new sentence is substituted under this section.  
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence passed under this section shall, for the purposes of this 
Act and the rules, have effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the case may be, of a Security Guard 
Court.  
113. Remedy against order, finding or sen tence of Security Guard Court .—(1) Any person 
subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by any order passed by any Security Guard Court 
may present a petition to the officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of such 
Security Guard Court, and the confirming  authority may take such steps as may be considered necessary 
to satisfy itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regularity of any 
proceeding to which the order relates.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who co nsiders himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of any 
Security Guard Court which has been confirmed, may present a petition to the Central Government, the 
Director -General, or any prescribed officer superior in command to the one who confirmed such fin ding 
or sentence, and the Central Government, the Director -General, or the prescribed officer, as the case may 
be, may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.  
114. Annulment of proceedings .—The Central Government, the Director -General or an Inspector -
General may annul the proceedings of any Security Guard Court on the ground that they are illegal or 
unjust.  
CHAPTER IX  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCES, PARDONS, REMISSIONS, ETC.  
115. Form of sentence of death .—In awarding a sentence of death, a Security Guard Court shall, in 
its discretion, direct that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead, or 
shall suffer death by being shot to death.  
116. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment .—Whenever any person is sentenced by  a 
Security Guard Court under this Act to imprisonment, the term of his sentence shall, whether it has been 
revised or not, be reckoned to commence on the day on which the original proceedings were signed by the 
presiding officer, or in the case of a Summa ry Sec urity Guard Court, by the Court:  
Provided that the period of detention or confinement, if any undergone by an accused person, during 
the investigation, inquiry or trial of the case in which he is sentenced and before the date on which the 
original pr oceedings were signed shall be set -off against the term of his sentence and the liability of such 
person to undergo imprisonment shall be restricted to the remainder, if any of the term of his sentence.  
117. Execution of sentence of imprisonment .—(1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is 
passed under this Act by a Security Guard Court or whenever any sentence of death is commuted to 
imprisonment, the confirming officer, or in case of a Summary Security Guard Court the officer holding 
the Court or s uch other officer as may be prescribed, shall, save as otherwise provided in sub -section s (3) 
and (4), direct that the sentence shall be carried out by confinement in a civil prison.  
(2) When a direction has been made under sub -section (1), the Commander of the person under 
sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form to the 
officer in charge of the prison in which such person is to be confined and shall arrange for his despatch to 
such prison with the warrant.  
(3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months and passed 
under this Act by a Security Guard Court, the appropriate officer under sub -section (1) may direct that the 
sentence shall be carried out by confinement in Security Guard custody instead of in a civil prison.  29 
 (4) On active duty, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in such place as 
the Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the person sentenced is serving or any prescribed 
officer , may, from time to time, appoint.  
118. Temporary custody of offender .—Where a sentence of imprisonment is directed to be 
undergone in a civil prison the offender may be kept in Security Guard custody or in any other fit place, 
till such time as it is possible to send him to a civil prison.  
119. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases .—Whenever, in the opinion of an 
officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the trial is held, any 
sentence or portion of a sentence of imprisonment cannot for special reasons, conveniently be carried out 
in Security Guard custody in accordance with the provisions of section 117, such officer may direct  that 
such sentence or portion of sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any civil prison or other fit 
place.  
120. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place .—A person under sentence of imprisonment may, 
during his conveyance from place to place, or when on board a ship, aircraft, or otherwise, be subjected to 
such restraint as is necessary for his safe conduct and removal.  
121. Communication of certain orders to prison officers .—Whenever an order is duly made under 
this Act setting aside or varyin g any sentence, order or warrant under which any person is confined in a 
civil prison, a warrant in accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making the order or 
his staff officer or such other person as may be prescribed, to the officer  in charge of the prison in which 
such person is confined.  
122. Execution of sentence of fine .—When a sentence of fine is imposed by a Security Guard Court 
under section 45, a copy of such sentence signed and certified by the confirming officer, or where no 
confirmation is required, by the officer holding the trial may be sent to any Magistrate in India, and such 
Magistrate shall thereupon cause the fin e to be recovered in accordance  with the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , as if it were a sentence of fine imposed by such Magistrate.  
123. Informality or error in the order or warrant .—Whenever any person is sentenced to 
imprisonment under this Act, and is undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in which he might be 
confined under a lawful order or warrant in pursuance of this Act, the confinement of such person shall 
not be deemed to be illegal only by reason of informality or error in, or as respects, the order, warrant or 
other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was brought into, or, is 
confined in any such place, and any such order, warrant or document may be amended accordingly.  
124. Pardon and remission .—When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by a Security 
Guard Court of any offence, the Central Government or the Director -General or, in the case of a sentence, 
which he could have confirmed or which did not require confirmation, an officer not below the rank of a 
Deputy Inspector -General within whose command such person at the  time of conviction was serving , or 
the prescribed officer may, — 
(a) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, pardon the person or 
remit the whole or any part of the punishment awarded; or  
(b) mitigate the punishment awarded; or  
(c) commute such punishment for any less punishment or punishments mentioned in this Act; or  
(d) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, release the person on 
parole.  
125. Cancellation of conditional  pardon, release on parole or remission .—(1) If any condition on 
which a person has been pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has been remitted is, in the 
opinion of the authority which granted the pardon, release or remission not fulfilled, such authority may 
cancel the pardon, release or  remission , and thereupon the sentence of the Court shall be carried into 
effect as if such pardon, release or remission had not been granted.  30 
 (2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is carried into effect under the provisions of            
sub-section  (1) shall undergo only the unexpired portion of his sentence.  
126. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment .—(1) Where a person subject to this Act is sentenced 
by a Security Guard Court to imprisonment, the Central Government, the Director -General or any officer 
empowered to convene a General Security Guard Court may suspend the sentence whether or not the 
offender  has already been committed to prison or to Security Guard custody.  
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub -section (1) may, in the case of an offender so sentenced, 
direct that until the orders of such authority or officer have been obtained the offender shall not be 
committed to prison or to Security Guard custody.  
(3) The powers conferred by sub -section s (1) and (2) may be exercised in the case of any such 
sentence which has been confirmed, reduced or commuted.  
127. Orders pending suspension .—(1) Where the sentence referred to in section 126 is imposed by 
a Security Guard Court, other than a Summary Security Guard Court, the confirming officer may, when 
confirming the sentence, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to Security Gua rd custody 
until the orders of the authority or officer specified in section 126, have been obtained.  
(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed by a Summary Security Guard Court, the officer 
holding the trial may make the direction referred to in sub -section (1). 
128. Release on suspension .—Where a sentence is suspended under section 126, the offender shall 
forthwith be released from custody.  
129. Computation of period of suspension .—Any period during which the sentence is under 
suspension shall be reckoned as part of the term of such sentence.  
130. Order after suspension .—The authority or officer speci fied i n section 126 may, at any time 
while a sentence is suspended, order — 
(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the unexpired portion of the sentence; or  
(b) that the sentence be remitted.  
131. Reconsideration of case after suspension .—(1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case 
may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than four months, be reconsidered by the authority or 
officer specified in section 126, or by any officer not below the rank of a Deputy Inspector -General du ly 
authorised by the authority or officer specified in section 126.  
(2) Where on such reconsideration by the officer so authorised it appears to him that the conduct of 
the offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of the sentence, he shall refer the 
matter to the authority or officer specified in section 126.  
132. Fresh sentence after suspension .—Where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended 
under this Act, is sentenced for any other offence, then — 
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, the two sentences shall run 
concurrently;  
(b) if the further sentence is for a period of three months or more and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall also be committed to prison or Security Guard custody for the unexpired 
portion of the previous sentence, but both sentences shall run concurrently; and  
(c) if the further sentence is for a period of less than three months and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall be so co mmitted on that sentence only , and the previous sentence shall, subject 
to any order which may be passed under section 130 or section 131 continue to be suspended.  
133. Scope of power of suspension .—The powers conferred by sections 126 and 130 shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.  31 
 134. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal .—(1) Where in addition to any other sentence 
the punishment of dismissal has been awarded by a Security Guard Court, and such other sentence is 
suspended under section 126, then, such dismissal shall not take effect until so ordered by the authority or 
officer  specified in section 126.  
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 130, the punishment of dismissal shall also be 
remitted.  
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
135. Rank structure .—(1) The officers and other members of the Security Guard shall be classified 
in accordance with their ranks in the  following categories, namely: — 
(a) officers— 
(i) Director -General.  
(ii) Additional Director -General.  
(iii) Inspector -General.  
(iv) Deputy Inspector -General.  
(v) Group Commander.  
(vi) Squadron Commander.  
(vii) Team Commander  
(b) Assistant Commanders — 
(viii) Assistant Commander Grade I.  
(ix) Assistant Commander Grade II.  
(x) Assistant Commander Grade III.  
(c) person other than off icers and Assistant Commanders — 
(xi) Ranger Grade I.  
(xii) Ranger Grade II.  
(xiii) Combatised tradesmen.  
(2) The matters relating to inter se  seniority of persons belonging to the same rank shall be 
determined in accordance with such rules as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Director -General may, subject to 
confirmation by the Central Government as provided hereinafter, grant to an officer or Assistant 
Commander Grade I a rank, mentioned in clause (a) of sub -section (1) as a local rank, whenever 
considered necessary by him in the interest of better functioning of the Security Guard.  
(4) An officer or Assistant Commander  Grade I holding a local rank, — 
(a) shall exercise the command and be vested with powers of an officer holding that rank;  
(b) shall cease to hold that rank, if the grant of such rank is not confirmed within one month by 
the Central Government, or when so ordered by the Director -General or when he ceases to hold the 
appointment for which the rank was granted;  
(c) shall not be ent itled to claim any seniority over other officers by virtue of his having held such 
local rank; and  
(d) shall not be entitled to any extra pay for holding such rank.  32 
 136. Deduction from pay and allowances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (4), the 
following deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of an officer, that is to say — 
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every day he absents himself without leave, unless 
a satisfactory explanation has been given and accepted by the Inspector -General under whom he is for 
the time being serving, and for every day of imprisonment awarded by a Criminal Court or a Security 
Guard Court;  
(b) any sum required to make good the pay of any person subject to this Act which the officer has 
unlawfully retained or unlawfully refused to pay;  
(c) any sum required to be paid as fine imposed by a Criminal Court;  
(d) any sum required to make up any loss, damage or destruction of public property or property 
belonging to the Security Guard which, after due investigation, appears to the Inspector -Genera l 
under whom the officer is for the time being serving, to have been occasioned by wrongful act or 
negligence on the part of the officer;  
(e) any sum required by an order of the Central Government to be paid for the maintenance of his 
wife or his legitimat e or illegitimate child or step -child or towards the cost of any relief given by the 
said Government to the said wife or child.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section (4), the following deductions may be made from the pay 
and allowances of a person subject to this Act, other th an an officer, that is to say, — 
(a) all pay and allowances due to him for every day of absence either on desertion or without 
leave unless a satisfactory explanation has been given and accepted by his Commander and for every 
day of imprisonment awarded by a Criminal Court, a Security Guard Court or an officer exercising 
authority under section 51;  
(b) any sum required to make good the pay of any person subject to this Act which he has 
unlawfully retained or unlawfully refused to pay;  
(c) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction caused by him to the C entral Government or to any building or property or any private 
fund of the Security Guard as may be awarded by his Commander;  
(d) any sum required to be paid as fine imposed by a Criminal Court;  
(e) any sum required by an order of the Central Government t o be paid for the maintenance of his 
wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or step -child or towards the cost of any relief given by the 
said Government to the said wife or child.  
(3) (i) No person shall be treated as absent or under imprisonment for a day unless the absence or 
imprisonment has lasted , whether wholly in one day or partly in one day and partly in another, for six 
consecutive hours or upwards.  
(ii) Any absence or imprisonmen t for less than a day may be reckoned as absence or imprisonment 
for a day if such absence or imprisonment prevented the absentee from fulfilling any duty as a member of 
the Security Guard which was thereby thrown upon some other member.  
(4) The total dedu ctions from the pay and allowances of a person made under clauses (b) to (e) of 
sub-section (1) or clauses (b) to (e) of sub -section (2) shall not, except where he is sentenced to dismissal, 
exceed in any one month, one -half of his pay and allowances for that month.  
(5) Any sum authorised by this Act to be deducted from the pay and allowances of any person may, 
without prejudice to any oth er mode of recovering the same, be deducted from any public money due to 
him other than a pension.  
(6) The following shall be the authorities competent to order deductions from pay and allo wances 
under this Act, namely: — 
(a) Commanders not below the rank of Group Commanders, in the case of persons other than 
officers;  33 
 (b) Inspector -General, in the case of officers.  
(7) Any authority superior to the one ordering any deduction under this Act shall be competent to 
remit the whol e or part of the said deduction . 
(8) Any power conferred by the provisions of this section on an officer may be exercised by an officer 
or authority superior in command to the first mentioned officer.  
137. Powers and duties conferable and imposable on members of the Security Guard .—(1) The 
Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject 
to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the order, any member of the Security Guard 
may exercise or discharge such of the pow ers or duties under any Central Act as may be specified in the 
said order, being the powers and duties which, in the opinion of the Central Government, an officer of the 
corresponding or lower rank is by such Central Act empowered to exercise or discharge for the said 
purposes.  
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, 
confer or impose, with the concurrence of the State Government concerned, any of the powers or duties 
which may be exercised or discharged  under a State Act by a police officer upon a member of the 
Security Guard who, in the opinion of the Central Government, holds a corresponding or higher rank.  
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, befor e each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive se ssions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
138. Protection for acts of members of the Security Guard .—(1) In any suit or proceeding against 
any member of the Security Guard for any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant or order of a 
competent authority, it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him under the authority 
of such warrant o r order.  
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrant or order directing the act, and if it 
is so proved the member of the Security Guard shall thereupon be discharged from liability in respect of 
the act so done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction of the authority which issued such 
warrant or order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any legal 
proceeding (whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any member of the Security 
Guard for anything done or intended to be done under the pow ers conferred by, or in pursuance of, any 
provision of this Act or the rules, shall be commenced within three months after the act complained of 
was committed and not otherwise, and notice in writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall 
be giv en to the defendant or his superior officer at least one month before the commencement of such 
proceeding.  
139. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the Security Guard shall be constituted and the conditions of service of 
its members under sub -section (1) of section 4;  
(b) the nature of the book or letter or other document, the communication or publication whereof 
would not be restricted by sub -section (1) of section 12;  
(c) the purposes other than political purposes for which a person subject to the Act shall not 
participa te in, or address, any meeting or demonstration under sub -section (2) of section 12;  34 
 (d) the purposes for which the forfeiture of service as a punishment may be inflicted under       
sub-section (1) of section 47;  
(e) the manner in which officers may be proceeded against under section 53 and sub -sections (1) 
and (2) of section 54;  
(f) the manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may be taken into 
and detained in Security Guard custody pending his trial under sub -section (4) of section 56;  
(g) the manner in which a Court of inquiry enquiring into the absen ce of person, shall administer 
oath or affirmation under sub -section (1) of section 60;  
(h) the manner in which a vacancy may be filled in on the retirement of a member of General 
Security Guard Court or a Petty Security Guard Court under sub -section (3) of section 81;  
(i) the manner in which oath or affirmation shall be administered to the members of the Security 
Guard Courts and the Judge Attorney, etc., under sub -section (1) of section 82;  
(j) the manner in which a person giving evidence before a Security Guard Court shall be sworn or 
affirmed in under sub -section (2) of section 82;  
(k) the manner in which a Security Guard Court when convicting a person may inquire into under 
sub-section (1) of section 95;  
(l) the manner in which an accused person shall be kept in custody under sub -section (4) of 
section 96;  
(m) the form of the warrant which shall be forwarded to the officer in charge of the prison           
in which a person under sentence of imprisonment is to be conferred under sub -section (2) of     
section 117;  
(n) the person who shall forward the warrant for the confinement of a person in a civil prison 
under section 121;  
(o) the matters relating to inter se  seniority of persons belonging to the same rank under          
sub-section  (2) of section 135;  
(p) the authorities or officers to be prescribed under section 7, sub -section (2) of section 10,     
sub-section (1) of section 12, section 77, section 97, section 111 , sub-section (2) of section 113,     
sub-sections (1), (2) and (4) of section 117 and section 124;  
(q) any other matter which is to be, or may be , prescribed or in respect of which this Act makes 
no provision  or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, necessary for the proper implementation of this Act.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and i f, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making 
any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effec t only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 
that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.  
140. Provisions as to existing National Security Guard .—(1) The National Security Guard in 
existence at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Security Guard constituted under 
this Act.  
(2) The members of the National Security Guard in existence at the commencement of this Act shall 
be deemed to have been appointed as such under this Act.  35 
 (3) Anything done or any action taken before the commencement of this Act in relation to the 
constitution of the National Security Guard referred to in sub -section (1), in relation to any person 
appointed, shall be as valid and as effective in law as if such thing or action was done or taken under this 
Act: 
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall render any person guilty of any offence in respect of 
anything done or omitted to be done by him before the commencement of this Act.  
--------------------------The Research and Development Cess Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CESS ACT, 1986  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Levy and collection of cess on payments made towards import of technology . 
4. Crediting proceeds of cess  to Consolidated Fund of India . 
5. [Omitted .] 
6. [Omitted .] 
7. Power of Central Government to exempt . 
8. Power to call for information . 
9. Penalty for non -payment of cess . 
10. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT CESS ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 32 OF 1986  
[14th August , 1986 .] 
An Act to provide for the levy and collection of a cess on all payments made for the import of 
technology for the purposes of encouraging the commercial application of indigenously 
developed technology and for adapting imported technology to wider  domestic application 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
 1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act  may be called the Research and 
Development Cess Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoi nt. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “Board ” means the Technology  Develo pment Board constituted under the Technology  
Development Board Act, 1995  (44 of 1995) ; 
(b) “cess” means the cess levied under section 3 ;] 
(d) “Import ”, in relation to any technology, means the bringing into India of, such technology 
from a place outside India;  
(e) “industrial concern ” has the meaning assigned to it in clause ( c) of section 2 of the Industrial 
Development  Bank  of India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964), and includes any other person in whose favour a 
foreign collaboration involving  the import of technology 3[is app roved or automatically approved in 
accordance with the Industrial Policy of the Government of India in force from time to time] ; 
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “specified agency ” means — 
(i) the Reserve Bank of India constituted under the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 
1934 ); or 
(ii) the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955 ); 
or 
(iii) such other bank or institution as may be specified in this behalf by the Central 
Government;  
(h) “technology ” means any special or technical knowledge or any special service r equired for 
any purpose whatso ever by an industrial concern under any foreign collaboration, and includes 
designs, drawings,  publications and technical personnel .  
                                                           
1. 1st December, 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 879(E) , dated 5 th October, 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 45 of 1995, s. 2, for clauses ( a) to ( c)(w.e.f.1 -9-1996).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “is approved by the Centra l Government”  (w.e.f. 1 -9-1996).  3 
 3. Levy and collection of cess on payments made towards import of technology .—(1) There shall 
be levied and collected, for the purposes of this Act, a cess at such rate not exceeding five per cent. on  all 
payments made towards the import of technology, as the Central Government may, from time to  time, 
specify, by notification , in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The cess shall be payable to the Central Government by an industrial concern which imports 
technol ogy on or before making any payments towards such import and shall be paid by the industrial 
concern to any specified agency.  
4. Crediting proceeds of cess to Consolidated Fund of India .—The proceeds of the cess levied and 
collected under section 3 shall f irst be credited to the Consolidated Fund  of India and the Central 
Government may, if Parliament by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provi des, pay to the 
1[Board ], from time to time, from out of such proceeds (after deducting the cost of collection), such sums 
of money as i t may think fit for being utilis ed for the purposes of the  2[Board .] 
5. [Venture Capital Fund. ]—Omitted by the  Research and Development Cess  (Amendment) Act,        
(45 of 1995 ), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-9-1996 ). 
6. [Application of Fund. ]—Omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-1996 ). 
7. Power of Central Government to exempt .—Notwith standing anything contained in this Act, if 
the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified t herein, 
exempt any industrial concern from the payment of the cess payable under this Act for the import of such 
technology as may be specified in such notification.  
8. Power to call for information .—The 3[Board ] may require an industrial concern to furnis h, for the 
purposes of this Act, such statistical and other information in such form and within such period as may be 
prescribed.  
9. Penalty for non -payment of cess .—(1) If any cess payable by an industrial concern is not paid on 
or before making payments towards the import of technology, if shall be deemed to be in arrears and the 
same shall be recovered by the  4[Board]  in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The 4[Board] may, after such inquiry as it deems fit, impose on the industrial concern, which is in 
arrears under sub -section ( 1), a penalty not exceeding ten times the amount in arrears:  
Provided that before imposing such penalty, such industrial concern shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, and it , after such hearing, the 3[Board]  is satisfied that the de fault was for any 
good and sufficient reason, on penalty shall be imposed under this sub -section . 
10. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying o ut the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the foregoin g power, such rules may provid e for the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form in which and the period within which the information u nder section 8 may be 
furnished;  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 45 of 1995, s. 3,for “Development Bank” (w.e.f. 1 -9-1996).  
2. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for “Fund ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-1996).  
3. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for “Development Bank” (w.e.f. 1 -9-1996).  4 
 (b) the manner in which the arrears of cess may be recovered under sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive se ssions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any  such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
 
 
--------------------------The Shipping Development Fund Committee (Abolition) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE SHIPPING DEVELOPMENT FUND COMMITTEE (ABOLITION) ACT, 1986  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
ABOLITION OF THE  SHIPPING  DEVELOPMENT  FUND COMMITTEE AND  VESTING OF ASSETS AND 
LIABILITIES OF THE  COMMITTEE IN THE  CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
3. Abolition of the Shipping Development Fund Committee and consequential amendments in the 
Act. 
4. Consequential provisions . 
5. Continuation of suits, etc., against Central Government . 
6. Moneys, etc., of the Committee to be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India . 
7. Transfer of services of existing employees of the Committee . 
CHAPTER III  
SPECIAL POWERS OF THE  CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
8. Power of Central Government to call for repayment before agreed  period . 
9. Appointment of receiver without intervention of court . 
10. Appointment of directors and administrators . 
11. Effect of notified order . 
12. Powers and duties of directors and administrators . 
13. No right to compensation for termination of contract of management, etc. 
14. Application of Act 1 of 1956 . 
15. Recovery of dues as arrear of land revenue . 
16.  Delegation of powers to the designated person . 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. Effect of the Act on other laws . 
18. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
19. Indemnification of directors , etc. 
20. Directors, etc., to be public servants . 
 
  2 
 THE SHIPPING DEVELOPMENT FUND COMMITTEE (ABOLITION) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 66 OF 1986  
[24th December , 1986.]  
An Act to abolish the Shipping Development Fund Committee constituted under the Merchant 
Shipping Act, 1958 and to provide for certain matters incidenta l thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Shipping Development Fund 
Committee (Abolition) Act, 1986.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Act” mean s the Merchant S hipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958);  
(b) “appointed day ” means the da te of commencement of this Act;  
(c) “Committee ” means the Shipping Development Fund Committee constitut ed under section 15 
of the Act;  
(d) “designated person ” means the person appointed as suc h under section 16 of this Act;  
(e) “Fund ” means the Shipping Development Fund form ed under section 14 of the Act;  
(f) “notified order ” means an order no tified in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “shipowner ” means a person of the  description mentioned in section 21 of the Act or who had 
obtained loans or financial assistance in any  other form from the Committee;  
(h) “shipping concern ” means any concern engaged in the business of shipping, owned, 
contro lled or managed by a shipowne r. 
CHAPTER II  
ABOLITION OF THE  SHIPPING  DEVELOPMENT  FUND COMMITTEE AND VESTING OF ASSETS AND 
LIABILITIES OF THE  COMM ITTEE IN THE  CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
3. Abolition of the Shipping Development Fund Committee and conse quential amendments in 
the Act .—On and from the appointed day, the Shipping Development Fund Committee constituted under 
section 15 of the Act shall stand abolished, and accordingly the Act sh all stand amended as follows: — 
(a) in the long title, the words “and a Shipping Development Fund ” shall be o mitted;  
(b) Part IV shall be omitted.  
4. Consequential provisions .—On th e abolition of the Committee ,— 
(a) all the rights and privileges of the Committee shall become the rights and privil eges of the 
Central Government;  
(b) all properties, movable and immovable, including cash balance s, reserve funds, instruments 
and moneys lying to the credit of the Committee and all rights and interests in, or arising out of, such 
properties as were immediately before the appointed day, in the ownership, possession, p ower or 
control of the Committee, and all books of account, registers, records and all other documents of 
whatever nature relating thereto, shall vest in the Central Government;  
                                                           
1.3rd April , 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 304 (E), dated 3rdApril , 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (c) all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of the Committee of whatever kind and subsisting 
immediately before the appointed day, shall be deemed, on and from such day, to be the borrowings, 
liabilities and obligations, as the case may be,  of the Central Government; and  
(d) all contracts entered into, and all matters and thing s engaged to be done by, with or for, the 
Committee and subsisting immediately before the appointed day shall be deemed, on and from such 
day, to have been entered into, or engaged to be done by, with or for, the Central Government.  
5. Continuation of suit s, etc., against Central Government .—(1) If, on the appointed day, any suit, 
appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to the Fund or the Committee is pending by or 
against such Committee, the same shall not abate, be discontinued, or be in  any way prejudicially affected 
by reason of the abolition of the Committee; but such suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, 
prosecuted and enforced by or against the Central Government.  
(2) Where, before the appointed day, no cause of action f or any suit or proceeding or any right to 
appeal arose in favour of, or against the Committee and the institution of any suit or proceeding on such 
cause of action or the filing of such appeal was not barred before the appointed day, such suit or 
proceedin g may be instituted or appeal may be filed by or against the Central Government.  
6. Moneys, etc., of the Committee to be credited to the Consolidated Fund of Ind ia.—On the 
appointed day, all moneys and cash balances lying in the credit of the Committee shall become part of, 
and be credited to, the Consolidated Fund of India.  
7. Transfer of services of exist ing employees of the Committee .—(1) Every person, who has been , 
immediately before the appointed day, employed under the Committee, shall become, on and from the 
appointed day, an employee of the Central Government and shall hold office under the Central 
Government with the same rights and privileges as to pension, g ratuity and other matters as would have 
been admissible to him if there had been no such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment under the Central Government is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other 
conditions of s ervice are duly alt ered by the Central Government.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employ ed 
under the Committee shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act 
or under any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any cour t, 
tribunal or other authority.  
(3) Where, under  the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, any person, whose services stand 
transferred to the Central Government by reason of the provisions of this Act, is entitled to any arrears of 
salary or wages or any payments for any leave not availed of, or to any other payment, not being payment 
by way of gratuity or pension, such person may enforce his claim against the Central Government.  
CHAPTER III  
SPECIAL P OWERS OF THE  CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
8. Power of Central Government to call for repayment before agreed period .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or anything in any agreement to the 
contrary, the Central Government may, by notice in writing, require a shipowner to whom the Committee 
had granted any financi al assistance at any time before the appointed day, to discharge forthwith in full 
his entire dues and also discharge his other liabilities to the Central Government, if — 
(a) it appears to the Central Government that false or misleading information in any material 
particular was given by the shipowner for the purpose of procuring or for continuing to procure the 
benefit o f such financial assistance; or  
(b) theshipowner has failed to comply with the terms of his agreem ent with the Committee; or  
(c) there is a reasonable apprehension that the shipowner is unable to pay his debts or, that 
proceedings for liquidation have been or may be comm enced against the shipowner; or  4 
 (d) the Central Government has reason to believe that the shipowner has not used or applied  the 
financial assistance granted by the Committee strictly for the purpose for which it was granted or has 
otherwise misapplied or misappropriated  the same for wrongful gain; or  
(e) the property assigned, charged, hypothecated, mortgaged or pledged to the  Committee as 
security for financial assistance is not insured or kept insured by the shipowner to the satisfaction of 
the Central Government, or if such property has depreciated in value to such an extent that, in the 
opinion of the Central Government, fu rther security to the satisfaction of the Central Government 
should be given and  such security is not given; or  
(f) without the permission of the Central Government any ship, machinery, plant or other 
property, whether forming part of the security or other wise, is removed by such shipo wner without 
being replaced; or  
(g) for any other reason, it is necessary so to do to protect the inter ests of the Central 
Government.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Act, “financial assistance ” shall include any loan, advance or 
monetary assistance including any guarantee or counter -guarantee given to the shipowner by the 
Committee at any  time before the appointed day.  
9. Appointment of receiver  without intervention of court .—(1) Where the Centr al Government 
issues a notice under section 8 an d the shipowner fails to comply with such notice, the Central 
Government may, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
anything contrary contained in any agreement, d eed or other instrument in the nature of any guarantee or 
counter -guarantee, appoint, without intervention of the court, a receiver to detain and take possession of 
any ship or other assets belonging to the shipowner whether mortgaged, hypotheca ted or char ged, with 
power to — 
(i) sell such ship or other assets by public auction notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in section 51 of the Act;  
(ii) demand and recover all the income in respect of which he is appointed receiver of any such 
ship or other assets and to appropriate the same in the discharge of rents, taxes and other dues and 
outgoings affecting the same and in payment of the liabilities  of the shipowner under any mortgage, 
hypothecation or charg e to the Central Government; or  
(iii) use, operate, charter or lease such ship or other assets to generate incomes, rents or profits to 
meet the liabilities of the shipowner to the Central Governm ent under the mortgage, hypothecation or 
charge, and pay the residue, if any, of the money received by him to the person who, but for the 
appointment of the receiver, would have been entitled to receive the income of which he is appointed 
receiver, or who is other wise entitled to such property.  
(2) A receiver appointed under this section shall be deemed to be the agent of the shipowner and the 
shipowner shall be sole ly responsible for the receiver’ s acts or defaults unless such acts or defaults are 
due to any improper intervention on the part of the Cen tral Government.  
10. Appointment o f directors and administrators .—(1) Where the Central Government requires a 
shipowner to discharge his dues and liabilities pursuant to a notice issued under section 8 and th e 
shipowner fails to comply with such notice, the Central Government may, notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, or anything contrary contained in any agreement, 
deed or other instrument in the nature of any guaran tee or counter -guarantee, and without prejudice to 
anything contained in section 9, by notified order, appoint as m any persons as it thinks fit, — 
(a) to be directors of the company, if the shipowner is a company, as defined in the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 o f 1956), or  
(b) in any other case, to be the administ rators of the shipping concern.  
(2) The power to appoint directors or administrators under this section includes the power to appoint 
any individual, firm or body corporate to be the directors or, as the case may be, administrators, on such 
terms and conditions as the Ce ntral Government may think fit.  5 
 (3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to appoint directors or 
administrators include the power to remove or replace the person s so appointed.  
(4) Nothing in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or in any other law for the time being in force, 
or in any instrument relating to the shipowner, if it is a company shall, in so far as it makes, in relation to 
a director, any provision fo r the holding of any share qualification, age limit, restriction on the number of 
directors or directorships, retirement by rotation or removal from office, apply to any director appointed 
by the Central  Government under this section.  
11. Effect of notifie d order .—(1) On the issue of a no tified order under section 10 — 
(a) if the shipowner is a company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), all persons 
holding office as directors of the shipowner, and in any other case, all persons holding any office 
having the powers of superintendence, direction and control immediately before the issue of the 
notified order, shall be deemed to have  vacated their offices as such;  
(b) any contract of management between the shipowner and any director or person re ferred to in 
clause ( a) holding office as such immediately before the issue of the notified order shall be deemed to 
have been terminated.  
(2) The directors or administrators appointed under section 10 shall take such steps as may be 
necessary to take into  their custody or under their control, the property, effects and act ionable claims to 
which the shipowner is, or appears to be, entitled, and all the property and effects of the shipowner shall 
be deemed to be in the custody of the directors or administrat ors, as the case may be, as from the date of 
the notified order.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the directors appointed under section 10, shall, for all 
purposes, be the directors of such company duly constituted under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), 
and such directors shall alone be entitled to exercise al l the powers of such directors.  
12. Powers and duties o f directors and administrators .—Subject to the control of the Central 
Government, the directors, or, as the case may be, the a dministrators appointed under section 10, shall 
take such steps as may be necessary for the purpose of efficiently managing the business of the shipowner 
and shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties as may be exercisable by persons in charge  of 
managing the said business.  
13. No right to compensation for termination of contract of m anagement, etc .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any contract or in any law for the time being in 
force, no managing or whole -time director or any other director or a manager or any person in charge of 
management of a shipowner which is a company sh all be entitled to any compensation for the loss of 
office or for the premature termination, under this Act, of any contract of management entered  into by 
him with such company.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right of any such ma naging or whole -time 
director, or any other director or manager or any such person in charge of management to recover from 
the shipowner moneys recoverable otherwise th an by way of such compensation.  
14. Application of Act 1 of 1956 .—(1) Where directors ha ve been appointed under section 10 in 
relation to a company, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 or in the 
memorandum or articles of  association of such company, — 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of such compa ny or any other person to nominate or 
appoint any person t o be a director of the company;  
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of such company shall be given effect 
to unless appro ved by the Central Government;  
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of such company or for the appointment of a receiver in 
respect thereof shall lie or be continued in any court, except with the con sent of the Central 
Government.  6 
 (2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and subject to such other exce ptions, restrictions and 
limitations, if any, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
behalf, the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), shall continue to apply to a shipowner which is a company 
in the same manner as it applied thereto before the issue of the n otified order under section 10.  
15. Recovery of dues as arrear of land revenue .—(1) Any amount payable to the Central 
Government by the shipowner pursuant to a notice issued under section 8 may be recovered in  the same 
manne r as an arrear of land revenue.  
(2) The Central Government may, for purposes of sub -section ( 1), appoint an officer to prepare a 
certificate specifying the amount due from such shipowner and send it to the Collector of the district in 
which the shipowner owns any property or carries on business provided that the officer so appointed 
shall, before sending the certificate to the Collector, give an opportunity of being heard to the shipowner.  
(3) The Collector shall, on receipt of such certifica te, proceed to recover from such shipowner the 
amoun t specified in the certificate.  
16. Delegation of p owers to the designated person .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, and subject to such conditions, restrictions and  limitations as may be 
specified therein or otherwise, delegate all or any of its powers and functi ons under 1[this Act] to a 
designated person.  
(2) Where any notification has been issued under sub -section ( 1), the provisions of this Act shall 
apply in rel ation to the designated person as they apply in relation to the Central Government in respect of 
any matter in relation to which the powers and functions of the Central Government have been dele gated 
to the designated person.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
17. E ffect of the Act on other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in the 
memorandum or articles of association of any company which is a sh ipowner or in any agreement, deed 
or other instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
18. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or any director or administrator appointed by the Central Government or the 
designated person or any officer or other employee of the Central Government or the designated person 
for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or i ntended 
to be done in pursuance of this Act or any other law or pro vision having the force of law.  
19. Ind emnification of directors, etc .—Every director or administrator appointed under section 10 
and the designated person appointed under section 16 shall be indemnified by the Central Government 
against all losses and expenses incurred by him in relation to the discharge of his duties, except such as 
are caused by  his own wilful act or default.  
20. Director s, etc., to be public servants .—Every director or a dministrator appointed under section 
10 and the designated person appointed under section 16 shall be deemed to be a public servant within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 41 of 1987, s. 2, for “this Chapter” (w.e.f.  2-12-1987).  
--------------------------The Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985--------------------------
1 
 THE SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT, 1985  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Declaration.  
3. Definitions.  
  CHAPTER II  
BOARD AND APPELLATE AUTHORITY  FOR INDUSTRIAL AND  
FINANCIAL  RECONSTRUCTION  
4. Establishment of Board.  
5. Constitution of Appellate Authority.  
6. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairman and other Members.  
7. Removal of Members from office in certain circumstances.  
8. Secretary officers and other employees of Board or Appellate Authority.  
9. Salaries, etc., be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
10. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board and Appellate Authority.  
11. Members and staff of Board and Appellate Autho rity to be public servants.  
12. Constitution of Benches of Board or Appellate Authority.  
13. Procedure of Board and Appellate Authority.  
14. Proceedings before Board or Appellate Authority to be judicial proceedings.  
CHAPTER III  
REFERENCES , INQUIRIES AND SCHEMES  
15. Refer ence to Board.  
16. Inquiry into working of sick industrial companies.  
17. Powers of Board to make suitable order on the completion of inquiry.  
18. Preparation and sanction of schemes.  
19.  Rehabilitation by giving financial assistance.  
19A. Arrangement for continuing operations, etc., during inquiry.  
20. Winding up of sick industrial company . 
21. Operating agency to prepare complete inventory, etc.  
22. Suspension of legal proceedings, contracts, etc.  
22A. Direction not to dispose of assets.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEEDINGS IN CASE OF POTENTIALLY SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES, MISFEASANCE PROCEEDINGS, 
APPEALS AND MISCELLANEOUS  
 
23. Loss of fifty per cent. net worth by industrial companies . 
23A. Proceedings on report, etc., of loss of fifty per cent. net worth . 
23B. Power of Board to call for periodic information.  
24. Misfeasance proceedings . 
25. Appeal.  
26. Bar of jurisdiction . 2 
 SECTIONS  
27. Delegation of powers . 
28. Returns and information . 
29. Power to seek the assistance of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and District Magistrate . 
30. Protection of action taken in good fa ith. 
31. Saving of pending proceedings.  
32. Effect of the Act on other laws . 
33. Penalty for certain offences . 
34. Offences by companies . 
35. Power to remove difficulties . 
36. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE  
 
 
  3 
 THE SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT, 1985  
ACT NO. 1 OF 1986  
[8th January , 1986.]  
An Act to make, in the public interest, special provisions with a view to securing the timely 
detection of sick and potentially sick companies owning industrial undertakings, the speedy 
determination by a Board of experts of the preventive, ameliorative, r emedial and other 
measures which need to be taken with respect to such companies and the expeditious 
enforcement of the measures so determined and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
  PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent , commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the Sick 
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any 
reference in any provision of this Act to the commenc ement of this Act shall be construed as a reference 
to the commencement of that provision.  
(4) It shall apply, in the first instance, to all the scheduled industries other than the scheduled industry 
relating to ships and other vessels drawn by power.  
(5) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, by notification, 
apply the provisions of this Act, on and from such date as may be specified in the notification, to the 
scheduled industry relating to ships and other vessels dr awn by power.  
2. Declaration. —It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect to the policy of the State 
towards securing the principles specified in clauses ( b) and ( c) of article 39 of the Constitution . 
3. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, —  
(a) “Appellate Authority ” means the Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction constituted under section 5;  
(b) “Board ” means the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction established under 
section 4;  
(c) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority;  
(d) “company ” means a company as defined in section 3 of the Companie s Act, 1956 (1 of 1956),  
2***;  
3[(da) “date of finalisation of the duly audited accounts ” means the date on which the audited 
accounts of the company are adopted at the annual g eneral meeting of the company;]  
(e) “industrial company ” means a company which owns one or more industrial undertakings;  
                                                           
1. 12th January, 1987, vide notification No. G.S.R. 24(E), dated 12th January, 1987  (except sections 15 to 34) , see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3  (i). 
2. The word s and figures “, but does not include a Government company as defined in section 617 of that Act” omitted by Act 57 
of 1991, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -12-1991).  
3. Ins. by Act 12 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  4 
 (f) “industrial undertaking ” means any undertaking pertaining to a scheduled industry carried on 
in one or more factories by any company but does not include — 
(i) an ancillary industrial undertaking as defined in clause ( aa) of section 3 of the Industries 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951); and  
(ii) a small scale industrial undertaking as defined in clause ( j) of the aforesaid section 3;  
(g) “Member ” means a Member of the Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority and 
includes the Chairman thereof;  
1[(ga) “net worth ” means the sum total of the paid -up capital and free reserves.  
Explanation .—For the purpo ses of this clause, “free rese rves” means all reserves credited out of 
the profits and share premium account but does not include reserves credit ed out of re -evaluation of 
assets, write back of depreciation provisions and amalgamation;]  
(h) “notification ” means a notification published in t he Official Gazette;  
2[(i) “operating agency ” means any public financial institution, State level institution, scheduled 
bank or any other person as may be specified by general or special order as its agency by the Board;]  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
3*   *   *   *  * 
(l) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(m) “scheduled bank ” means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(n) “scheduled industry ” means any of the industries specified for the time being in the First 
Schedule to the Industries (Development and  Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951);  
4[(o) “sick industrial company ” means an industrial company (being a company registered for not 
less than five years) which has at the end of any financial year accumulated losses equal to or 
exceeding its entire net w orth. 
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that an industrial company 
existing immediately before the commencement of the Sick Industrial Companies (Special           
Provision s) Amendment Act, 1993  (12 of 1994) , registered for not  less than five years and having at 
the end of any financial year accumulated losses equal to or exceeding its entire net worth, shall be 
deemed to be a sick industrial company ;]  
(p) “State level institution ” means any of the f ollowing institutions, namel y:—  
(i) State Financial Corporations established under section 3 or section 3A and institutions 
notified under section 46 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951);  
(ii) State industrial development corporations registered under the Compa nies                    
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(iii) such other institutions, being companies and not being public financial institutions, 
engaged in the development or financing of industrial undertakings, as the Central Government 
may, by notification, specify:  
Provided that no institution shall be so specified unless not less than fifty -one per cent. of the 
paid-up share capital thereof is held by any State Government or Governments or by any institution or  
institutions mentioned in sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii) or partly by one or more public financial ins titutions 
or institutions mentioned in sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii) and partly by one or more State Governments.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
2.Subs. by s. 2 , ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
3. Clause ( k) omitted by, s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
4. Subs. by s.  2, ibid, for clause ( o) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  5 
 (2) (a) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act shall have the meanings, if any, 
respectively assigned to them in the C ompanies Act , 1956 (1 of 1956).  
(b) Words and expressions used but not defined either in this Act or in the Companies                       
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall have the meanings, if any, respectively assigned to them in the Industries 
(Development and Regulatio n) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951).  
(3) Any reference in this Act to any other enactment or any provision thereof, shall, in relation to an 
area in which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the 
corresponding law or the r elevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
  CHAP TER II  
BOARD AND APPELLATE AUTHORITY  FOR INDUSTRIAL AND FINANCIAL  RECONSTRUCTION  
4. Establishment of Board. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification, appoint, there shall be established a Board to be known as the “Board for Industri al and 
Financial Reconstruction”  to exercise the jurisdiction and powers and discharge the functi ons and duties 
conferred or imposed on the Board by or under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall consist of a Chairman and not less than two and not more than fourteen other 
Members, to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(3) The Chairman and other Members of the Board shall be persons who are or have been or are 
qualified to be High Court Judges, or persons of ability, integrity and standing who have special 
knowledge of, and professional experience of not less than fifteen years in science, technology, 
economics, banking industry, law, labour matters, industrial finance, industrial management, industrial 
reconstruction, administration, investment, accountancy, marketing or any other matter, the special 
knowledge of, or professional experience in which, woul d in the opinion of the Central Government be 
useful to the Board.  
5. Constitution of Appellate Authority. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, 
constitute, with effect from such date as may be specified therein, an appellate authority to be called the 
“Appellate Authority for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction ” consisting of a Chairman and not mo re 
than three other Members, to be appointed by that Government, for hearing appeals against the orders of 
the Board under this Act.  
(2) The Chairman shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court or who is or has 
been a Judge of a High  Court for not less than five years.  
(3) A Member of the Appellate Authority shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of a High 
Court or who is or has been an officer not below the rank of a Secretary to the Government of India or 
who is or has been a  Member of the Board for not less than three years.  
6. Term of office, conditions of service, etc.,  of Chairman and other Members. —(1) Before 
appointing any person as the Chairman or other Member, the Central Government shall satisfy itself that 
the person  does not and will not, have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect 
prejudicially his functions as such Member.  
(2) The Chairman and every other Member shall hold office for such period, not exceeding five years, 
as may be specified by the Central Government in the order of his appointment, but shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that no person shall hold o ffice as the Chairman or other Member after he has attain ed the 
age of sixty -five years.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a Member may — 
(a) by writing under his hand and addressed to the Central Government resign his office at any  
time;  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 7.  6 
 (4) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal of the Chairman or any other Member under   
sub-section ( 3) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh appointment.  
(5) In t he event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the Chairman by reason of his death, 
resignation or otherwise, such one of the Members as the Central Government may, by notification, 
authorise in this behalf shall act as the Chairman till the date  on which a new Chairman, appointed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.  
(6) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, such one of the Members  as the Chairman may authorise in writing in this behalf, shall discharge 
the functions of the Chairman, till the date on which the Chairman resumes his duties.  
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the  
Chairman and other Members shal l be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairman or any other Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
(8) The Chairman and every other Member shall, before entering upon his office, make a declaration 
of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule.  
(9) The Chairman or any other Member ceasing to hold office as such shall not hold any appointment 
or be connected with the management or administration in any company in relation to which any matter 
has been the subject matter of consideration before the Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate 
Authority, for a period of five years from the date on which he ceases to hold such office . 
7. Removal of Members from office in certain circumstances. —(1) The Central Government may 
remove from office any Member, who — 
(a) has been adjudged as insolvent, or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the op inion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude, or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a Member, or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a Member, or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no Member shall be removed from his 
office on the ground specified in clause ( d) or clause ( e) of that sub -section unless the Supreme Court on a 
reference being made to it in this behalf by the Central Government, has, on an inquiry held by it in 
accordance with such procedure as it may specify in this behalf, reported that the Member ought, on su ch 
grounds, to be removed.  
8. Secretary officers and other employees o f Board or Appellate Authority. —(1) The Central 
Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Board and a Secretary (by whatever name called) to the 
Appellate Authority to exercise and pe rform, under the control of the Chairman, such powers and duties 
as may be prescribed or as ma y be specified by the Chairman.  
1[(2) The Central Government may  provide the Board and the Appe llate Authority with such other 
officers and employees as may be ne cessary for the efficient performance of the functions of the Boar d 
and the Appellate Authority.]  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to and the conditions of service of the Secretary and other 
officers and employees of the Board and the Appellate Authority shall be such as may prescribed:  
Provided that such Secretary, officer or other employee shall, before entering upon his duties, make a 
declaration of fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the Schedule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1994, s. 3, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  7 
 9. Salaries, etc., be defrayed out of  the Consolidated Fund of India. —The salaries and allowances 
payable to the Members and the administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pension, 
payable to or in respect of the officers and other employees of the Board and the Appellate Aut hority 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
10. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board and Appellate Authority. —No act or 
proceeding of the Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority shall be questioned on th e ground 
merely of the existence of any vacancy or defect in the constitution of the Board or the Appellate 
Authority or any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Board or the Appellate 
Authority.  
11. Members and staff of Board an d Appellate Authority to be public servants. —The Chairman 
and other Members and the officers and other employees of the Board and the Appellate Authority shall 
be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of  1860).  
12. Constitution of Benches o f Board or Appellate Authority. —(1) The jurisdiction, powers and 
authority of the Board or the Appellate Authority may b e exercised by Benches thereof.  
(2) The Benches shall be constituted by the Chairman and each Bench  shall consist of not less than 
two Members.  
 1[(3) If the members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, the point shall be decided according 
to the opinion of the majority, if there is a majority, but if the Members are equally divided, they shall 
state the point or points on which  they differ, and make a reference to the Chairman of the Board or, as 
the case may be, the Appellate Authority who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case 
for hearing on such point or points by one o r more of the other Members and such point or points shall be 
decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case including those 
who first heard it.]  
13. Procedure of Board and Appellate Authority. —(1) Subject to the p rovisions of this Act, the 
Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority, shall have powers to regulate — 
(a) the procedu re and conduct of the business;  
(b) the procedure of the Benches, including the places at which the sittings of the Benches shall 
be held;  
(c) the delegation to one or more Members of such powers or functions as the Board or, as the 
case may be, the A ppellate Authority may specify.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the powers  of the 
Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority, shall include the power to determine the extent to 
which persons interested or claiming to be interested in the subject matter of any proceeding before it may 
be allowed to be present or to be heard, either by themselves or by their representatives or to              
cross -examine witnesses or otherwise to take part in the proceedings.  
(3) The Board or the Appellate Authority shall, for the purposes of any inquiry or for any other 
purpose under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying suits in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of document or other material object producible as evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavit;  
(d) the requisitioning of any  public record from any court or office;  
(e) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1994, s. 4  for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  8 
 14. Proceedings before Board or Appellate Author ity to be judicial proceedings. —The Board or 
the App ellate Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter 
XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and every proceeding before the Board or the 
Appellate Authority shall be deemed to be a judicial proc eeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 
228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
CHAP TER III  
REFERENCES , INQUIRIES AND SCHEMES  
15. Reference to Board. —(1) Where an industrial company has become a sick industrial company, 
the Board of Directors of the company, shall, within sixty days from the date of finalisation of the duly 
audited accounts of the company for the financial year as at the end of which the company has become a 
sick industrial company, make a reference to the Board for determination of the measures which shall be 
adopt ed with respect to the company:  
Provided that if the Board of Directors had sufficient reasons even before such finalisation t o form the 
opinion that the company had become a sick industrial company, the Board of Directors shall, within 
sixty days after it has formed such opinion, make a reference to the Board for the determination of the 
measures which shall be adopted with resp ect to the company:  
1[Provided further that no reference shall be made to the Board for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction after the commencement of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 20 02 (54 of 2002) , where financial assets have been acquired by 
any securitisation company or reconstruction company under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of that Act:  
Provided also that on or after the commencement of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of 
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002  (54 of 2002) , where a reference is 
pending before the Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction, such reference shall abate if the 
secured creditors, representing not less than three -fourth in value of the amount outstanding against 
financial assistance disbursed to the borrower of such secured creditors, have taken any measures to 
recover their secured debt under sub -section ( 4) of section 13 of that Act.]  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government or the Reserve 
Bank or a State Government or a public financial institution or a State level institution or a scheduled 
bank may, if it has sufficient reasons to believe that any industrial company has become, for the purposes 
of this Act, a sick industrial company, make a reference in respect of such company to the Board for 
determination of the measures which may be adopted with respect to such company:  
Provided that a reference sh all not be made under  this sub -section in respect of any industrial 
company by — 
(a) the Government of any State unless all or any of the industrial undertakings belonging to such 
company are situated in such State;  
(b) a public financial institution or a State level institutio n or a scheduled  bank unless it has, by 
reason of any financial assistance or obligation rendered by it, or undertaken by it, with respect to, 
such company, an interest in such company.  
16. Inquiry into workin g of sick industrial companies. —(1) The Board may make such inquiry as 
it may deem fit for determining whether any industrial company has become a sick industrial company — 
(a) upon receipt of a reference with respect to such company under section 15;  or 
(b) upon information received with respect to such company or upon its own knowledge as to the 
financial condition of the company.  
 (2) The Board may, if it deems necessary or expedient so to do for the expeditious disposal of an 
inquiry under sub -section ( 1), require by order any operating agency to enquire into and make a report 
with respect to such matters as  may be specified in the order.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 2002, s. 41 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 21 -6-2002).   9 
 (3) The Board or, as the case may be, the operating agency shall complete its inquiry as expeditiously 
as possible and endeavour shall be made to complete the inq uiry within sixty days from the 
commencement of the inquiry.  
1[Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, an inquiry shall be deemed to have commenced 
upon the receipt by the Board of any reference or information or upon its own knowledge reduced to 
writing by the Board.]  
(4) Where the Board deems it fit to make an inquiry or to cause an inquiry to be made into any 
industrial company under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 2), 2[it may appoint] 
one or more persons to be a special director or special directors of the company for safeguarding the 
financial and other interests of the company 1[or in the public interest] .  
1[(4A) The Board may issue su ch directions to a special dire ctor appointed und er sub -section ( 4) as it 
may deem necessary or expedient for proper discharge of his duties.]  
 (5) The appointment of a speci al director referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall be valid and effective 
notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force or in the memorandum and articles of association or any other 
instrument relating to the industrial company, and any provision regarding share qualification, age limit, 
number  of directorships, removal from office of directors and such like conditions contained in any such 
law or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by the Board.  
(6) Any special director appointed under sub -section ( 4) shall—  
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the Board and may be removed or substituted by any person 
by order in writing by the Board;  
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reason only of his being a director or for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in relation 
thereto;  
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing the 
number of directors liable to such retirement;  
1[(d) not be liable to be prosecuted under any law for any thing done or omitted to be done in good 
faith in the discharge of his duties in relation to the sick industrial company.]  
17. Powers of Board to make suitable order on the completion of inquiry. —(1) If after making an 
inquiry under section 16, the Board is satisfied that a company has become a sick industrial company, the 
Board shall, after considering all the relevant facts and circumstances of the case, decide, as soon as may 
be by order in writing, whether it is prac ticable for the company to  3[make its net worth exceed the 
accumulated losses] within a reasonable time.  
(2) If the Board decides under sub -section ( 1) that it is practicable for a sick industrial company to 
make its net worth positive within a reasonable  time, the Board, shall, by order in writing and subject to 
such restrictions or conditions as may be specified in the order, give such time to the company as it may 
deem fit to 3[make its net worth exceed the accumulated losses] .  
(3) If the Board decides  under sub -section ( 1) that it is not practicable for a sick industrial company to 
3[make its net worth exceed the accumulated losses] within a reasonable time and that it is necessary or 
expedient in the public interest to adopt all or any of the measures  specified in section 18 in relation to the 
said company it may, as soon as may be, by order in writing, direct any operating agency specified in the 
order to prepare, having regard to such guidelines as may be specified in the order, a scheme providing 
for such measures in relation to such company.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1994, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “ it shall appoint” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “make its net worth positive” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994). 10 
 (4) The Board may, —  
(a) if any of the restrictions or conditions specified in an order made under sub -section ( 2) are not 
complied with by the compa ny concerned , 1[or if the company fails to revive in pursuance of the said 
order,] review such order on a referenc e in that behalf from any agency referred to in sub -section ( 2) 
of section 15 or on its own motion and pass a fresh order in respect of such company under            
sub-section ( 3); 
(b) if the o perating agency specified in an order made under sub -section ( 3) makes a submission 
in that behalf, review such order and modify the order in such manner as it may  deem appropriate.  
18. Preparation and sanction of schemes.—(1) Where an order is made under sub-section ( 3) of 
section 17 in relation to any sick industrial company, the operating agency specified in the order shall 
prepare, as expeditiously as possible and ordinarily within a period of ninety days from the date of such 
order, a scheme with respe ct to such company providing for any one or more of the following measures, 
namely:—  
2[(a) the financial reconstruction of the sick industrial company;]  
(b) the proper management of the sick industrial company by change in, or take over of, 
management of  the sick industrial company;  
3[(c) the amalgamation of — 
(i) the si ck industrial company with any other company, or  
(ii) any other company with the sick industrial company;  
(hereafter in this section, in the case of sub -clause ( i), the other company, and  in the case of 
sub-clause ( ii), the sick industrial company, referred to as “transferee company ”;] 
(d) the sale or lease of a part or whole of any industrial undertaking of the sick industrial 
company;  
4[(da) the rationalisation of managerial personnel, supervisory staff and workmen in accordance 
with law;]  
(e) such other preventive, ameliorative and remedial measures as may be appropriate;  
(f) such incidental, consequential or supplemental measures as may be necessary or expedient in 
connection with or for the purposes of the measures specified in clauses ( a) to ( e).  
(2) The scheme referred to in sub -section ( 1) may provide for any one or more of the following, 
namely:— 
(a) the constitution, name and registered office, the capital, assets, powers, rights, interests, 
authorities and privileges, duties and obligations of the sick industrial company or, as the case may 
be, of the 5[transferee company] ;  
(b) the transfer to the  5[transferee company] of the business, properties, assets and liabilities of 
the sick industrial company on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the scheme;  
 (c) any change in the Board of Directors, or the appointment of a new Board of Direct ors, of the 
sick industrial company and the authority by whom, the manner in which and the other terms and 
conditions on which, such change or appointment shall be made and in the case of appointment of a 
new Board of Directors or of any director, the peri od for which such appointment shall be made;  
(d) the alteration of the memorandum or articles of association of the sick industrial company or, 
as the case may be, of the 5[transferee company] for the purpose of altering the capital structure 
thereof or f or such other purposes as may be necessary to give effect to the reconstruction or 
amalgamation;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1994, s. 6  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1995).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994) . 
4. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
5. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “transferee industrial company” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  11 
 (e) the continuation by, or against, the sick industrial company or, as the case may be, the 
1[transferee company ] of any action or other legal proceeding pen ding against the sick industrial 
company immediately before the date of the order made under sub -section ( 3) of section 17;  
(f) the reduction of the interest or rights which the shareholders have in the sick industrial 
company to such extent as the Board considers necessary in the interests of the reconstruction, revival 
or rehabilitation of the sick industrial company or for the maintenance of the business of the sick 
industrial company;  
(g) the allotment to the shareholders of the sick industrial company  of shares in the sick industrial 
company or, as the case may be, in the  1[transferee company] and where any shareholder claims 
payment in cash and not allotment of shares, or where it is not possible to allot shares to any 
shareholder the payment of cash to those shareholders in full satisfaction of their  claims— 
(i) in respect of their interest in shares in the sick industrial company before its reconstruction 
or amalgamation; or  
(ii) where such interest has been reduced under clause ( f) in respect of their interest in shares 
as so reduced;  
(h) any other terms and conditions for the reconstruction or amalgamation of the sick industrial 
company;  
(i) sale of the industrial undertaking of the sick industrial company free from all encumbrances 
and all liab ilities of the company or other such encumbrances and liabilities as may be specified, to 
any person, including a co -operative society formed by the employees of such undertaking and fixing 
of reserve price for such sale;  
(j) lease of the industrial undert aking of the sick industrial company to any person, including a 
co-operative society formed by the employees of such undertaking;  
(k) method of sale of the assets of the industrial undertaking of the sick industrial company such 
as by public auction or by  inviting tenders or in any other manner as may be specified and for th e 
manner of publicity therefor;  
(l) transfer or issue of the shares in the sick industrial company at the face value or at the intrinsic 
value which may be at discount value or such other value as may be specified to any industrial 
company or any person including the executives and employe es of the sick industrial company;  
(m) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as may be necessary to secure that 
the reconstruction or amalgamation or other measures mentioned in the scheme are fully and 
effectively carried out.  
(3) 2[(a) The scheme prepared by the operating agency shall be examined by the Board and a copy of 
the scheme with modification, if any, made by the Board shall be sent, in draft, to the sick industrial 
company and the operating agency and in the case of amalgamat ion, also to any other company 
concerned, and the Board shall publish or cause to be published the draft scheme in brief in such daily 
newspapers as the Board may consider necessary, for suggestions and objections, if any, within such 
period as the Board m ay specify; ] 
(b) The Board may make such modifications, if any, in the draft scheme as it may consider necessary 
in the light of the suggestions and objections received from the sick industrial company and the operating 
agency and also from the 1[transfere e company ] and 3[any other company]  concerned in the amalgamation 
and from any shareholder or any creditors or employees of  4[such companies:]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1994, s. 7, for “transferee industrial company” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e. f. 1-2-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “any other industrial company” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “ such industrial companies ” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  12 
 Provided that where the scheme relates to amalgamation 1*** the said scheme shall be laid before 
2[the company other than the sick industrial company] in the general meeting for the approval of the 
scheme by its shareholders and no such scheme shall be proceeded with unless it has been approved, 
with or without modification, by a special resolution passed by th e shareholders of the 2[the company 
other than the sick industrial company] .  
(4) The scheme shall thereafter be sanctioned, as soon as may be, by the Board (hereinafter referred to 
as the „sanctioned scheme ‟) and shall come into force on such date as the Board may specify in this 
behalf:  
Provided that different dates may be specified for different provisions of the scheme.  
(5) The Board may on the recommendations of the operating agency or otherwise, review any 
sanctioned scheme and make such modifications  as it may deem fit or may by order in writing direct any 
operating agency specified in the order, having regard to such guidelines as may be specified in the order, 
to prepare a fresh scheme providing for such measures as the operating agency may consider  necessary.  
(6) When a fresh scheme is prepared under sub -section ( 5), the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4) 
shall apply in relation thereto as they apply to in relation to a scheme prepared under sub -section ( 1). 
3[(6A) Where a sanctioned scheme prov ides for the transfer of any property or liability of the sick 
industrial company in favour of any other company or person or where such scheme provides for the 
transfer of any property or liability of any other company or person in favour of the sick indu strial 
company, then, by virtue of, and to the extent provided in, the scheme, on and from the date of coming 
into operation of the sanctioned scheme or any provision thereof, the property shall be transferred to, and 
vest in, and the liability shall becom e the liability of, such other company or person or, as the case may 
be, the sick industrial company.]  
 (7) The sanction accorded by the Board under sub -section ( 4) shall be conclusive evidence that all 
the requirements of this scheme relating to the reconstruction or amalgamation, or any other measure 
specified therein have been complied with and a copy of the sanctioned scheme certified in writing by an 
officer of the Board to be a true copy thereof, shall, in all legal proceedings (whether in appeal  or 
otherwise) be admitted as evidence.  
4[(8) On and from the date of the coming into operation of the sanctioned scheme or any provision 
thereof, the scheme or such provision shall be binding on the sick industrial company and the transferee 
company or, a s the case may be, the other company and also on the shareholders, creditors and guarantors 
and employees of the said companies.]  
(9) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the sanctioned scheme, the Board may, 
on the recommendatio n of the operating agency  3[or otherwise], by order to anything, not inconsistent 
with such provisions, which appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the 
difficulty.  
(10) The Board may, if it deems necessary or expedient so to do, by order in writing, direct any 
operating agency specified in the order to implement a sanctioned scheme with such terms and conditions 
and in relation to such sick industrial company as may be specified in the order.  
(11) Where the whole of the un dertaking of the sick industrial company is sold under a sanctioned 
scheme, the Board may distribute the sale proceeds to the parties entitled there to in accordance with the 
provisions of section 529A a nd other provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
3[(12) The Board may monitor periodically the implementation of the sanctioned scheme.]  
                                                           
1. The words “of the sick industrial company” omitted by Act 12 of 1994, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-2-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for the words “ transferee industrial company” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 7,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sub -section 8  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  13 
  19. Rehabilitation by giving financial assistance. —(1) Where the scheme relates to preventive, 
ameliorative, remedial and other measures with respect to any sick industrial company, the scheme may 
provide for financial assistance by way of loans, advances or guarantees or reliefs or concessions or 
sacrifices  from the Central Government, a State Government, any scheduled bank or other bank, a public 
financial institution or State level institution or any institution or other authority (any Government, bank, 
institution or other authority required by a scheme t o provide for such financial assistance being hereafter 
in this section referred to as the person required by the scheme to provide financial assistance) to the sick 
industrial company.  
(2) Every scheme referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be circulated to  every person required by the 
scheme to provide financial assistance for his consent within a period of sixty days from the date of such 
circulation 1[or within such further period, not exceeding sixty days, as may be allowed by the Board, and 
if no consent is received within such period or further period, it shall be deemed that consent has been 
given] . 
 (3) Where in respect of any scheme the consent referred to in sub -section ( 2) is given by every 
person required by the scheme to provide financial a ssistance, the Board may, as soon as may be, sanction 
the scheme and on and from the date of such sanction the scheme shall be binding on all concerned.  
1[(3A) On  the sanction of the scheme under sub -section ( 3), the financial institutions and the banks 
required to provide financial assistance shall designate by mutual agreement a financial institution and a 
bank from amongst themselves which shall be responsible to di sburse financial assistance by way of loans 
or advances or guarantees or reliefs or conces sions or sacrifices agreed to be provided or granted under 
the scheme on behalf of all financial in stitutions and banks concerned.  
(3B) The financial institution and the bank designated under sub -section ( 3A) shall forthwith proceed 
to release the financial assistance to the sick industrial compa ny in fulfilment of the require ment in this 
regard.]  
(4) Where in respect of any scheme consent under sub -section ( 2) is not given by any person required 
by the scheme to provide financial assistance, the Bo ard may adopt such other measures, including the 
winding up of the sick industri al company, as it may deem fit.  
2[19A. Arrangement for continuing operations, etc., during  inquiry.—(1) At any time before 
completion of the inquiry under section 16, the sick industrial company or the Central Government or the 
Reserve Bank or a State Government or a public financial institution or a State level institution or a 
scheduled bank or any other institution, bank or authority providing or intending to provide any fina ncial 
assistance by way of loans or advances or guarantees or reliefs or concessions to the sick industrial 
company may make an application to the Board — 
(a) agreeing to an arrangement for continuing the operations of the sick industrial company; or  
(b) suggesting a scheme for the financial reconstruction of the sick industrial company.  
(2) The Board may, within sixty days of the receipt of the application under sub -section ( 1), pass such 
orders thereon as it may deem fit.]  
20. Winding up of sick industrial  company .—3[(1) Where the Board, after making inquiry under 
section 16 and after consideration of all the relevant facts and circumstances and after giving an 
opportunity  of being heard to all concerned parties, is of opinion that the sick industrial company is not 
likely to make its net worth  exceed the accumulated losses within a reasonable time while meeting all its 
financial obligations and that the company as a result  thereof is not likely to become viable in future and 
that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound up, it may record and forward its opinion to 
the concerned High Court.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 12 of 1994, s. 8  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994)  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994)  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub -section (1) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994)  14 
  (2) The High Court shall, on the basis of the opinion of the Board , order winding up of the sick 
industrial company and may proceed and cause to proceed with the winding up of the sick industrial 
company in accordance with the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
(3) For the purpose of winding up of the si ck industrial company, the High Court may appoint any 
officer of the operating agency, if the operating agency gives its consent, as the liquidator of the sick 
industrial company and the officer so appointed shall for the purposes of the winding up of the sick 
industrial company be deemed to be, and have all the powers of, the official liquidator under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) or sub - section ( 3), the Board may cause to 
be sold the assets of the sick industrial company in such manner as it may deem fit and forward the sale 
proceeds to the High Court for orders for distribution in accordance with the provisions of section 529A, 
and other provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 195 6). 
21. Operating agency to prepare complete inventory, etc. —Where,1[for the proper discharge of 
the functions of the Board under this Act] , the circumstances so require, the Board may, through any 
operating agency, cause to be prepared —  
(a) with respect to 2[a company], a complete inventory of — 
(i) all assets and liabilities of whatever nature;  
(ii) all books of account, registers, maps, plans, records, documents of title or ownership of 
property and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto;  
(b) a list of shareholders and a list of creditors showing separately in the list of creditor s, the 
secured creditors and the unsecured creditors;  
(c) a valuation report in respect of the shares and assets in order to arrive at the reserve price for 
the sale of a part or whole of the industrial undertaking of the company or for fixation of the lea se 
rent or share exchange ratio;  
(d) an estimate of reserve price, lease rent or share exchange ratio; and  
(e) proforma accounts, where no up -to-date audited accou nts, are available.  
22. Suspension of leg al proceedings, contracts, etc. —(1) Where in respect  of an industrial 
company, an inquiry under section 16 is pending or any scheme referred to under section 17 is under 
preparation or consideration or a sanctioned scheme is under implementation or where an appeal under 
section 25 relating to an industrial company is pending, then, notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or any other law or the memorandum and articles of association of the 
industrial company or any other instrument having effect under the said Act or other l aw, no proceedings 
for the winding up of the industrial company or for execution, distress or the like against any of the 
properties of the industrial company or for the appointment of a receiver in respect thereof 3[and no suit 
for the recovery of money or for the enforcement of any security against the industrial company or of any 
guarantee in respect of any loans or advance granted to the industrial company] shall lie or be proceeded 
with further, except with the c onsent of the Board or, as the case may be, the Appellate Authority.  
(2) Where the management of the sick industrial company is taken over or changed 3[in pursuance of 
any scheme sanctioned under section 18], notwithstanding anything contained in the Compa nies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) or any other law or in the memorandum and articles of association of such company or 
any instrument having effect under the said Act or other law — 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of such company or any other perso n to nominate or 
appoint any person to be a director of the company;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 1994, s. 11, for the words “in re lation to an inquiry or scheme”  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for the  words “ an industrial company”  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  15 
 (b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of such company shall be given effect 
to unless approved by the Board.  
(3) 1[Where an inquiry under section 16 is pending or a ny scheme referred to in section 17 is under 
preparation or during the period] of consideration of any scheme under section 18 or where any such 
scheme is sanctioned thereunder, for due implementation of the scheme, the Board may by order declare 
with respect to the sick industrial company concerned that the operation of all or any  of the contracts, 
assurances of property, agreements, settlements, awards, standing orders or other instruments in force, to 
which such sick industrial company is a party or which may be applicable to such sick industrial company 
immediately before the date o f such order, shall remain suspended or that all or any of the rights, 
privileges, obligations and liabilities accruing or arising thereunder before the said date, shall remain 
suspended or shall be enforceable with such adaptations and in such manner as m ay be specified by the 
Board:  
Provided that such declaration shall not be made for a period exceeding two years which may be 
extended by one year at a time so, however, that the total period shall not exceed seven years in the 
aggregate.  
(4) Any declarat ion made under sub -section ( 3) with respect to a sick industrial company shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or any other law, the 
memorandum and articles of association of the company or any instrume nt having effect under the said 
Act or other law or any agreement or any decree or order of a court, tribunal, officer or other authority or 
of any submission, settlement or standing order and accordingly, —  
(a) any remedy for the enforcement of any right, privilege, obligation and liability suspended or 
modified by such declaration, and all proceedings relating thereto pending before any court, tribunal, 
officer or other authority shall remain stayed or be cont inued subject to such declaration; and  
(b) on the declaration ceasing to have effect — 
(i) any right, privilege, obligation or liability so remaining suspended or modified, shall 
become revived and enforceable as if the declaration had never been made; and  
(ii) any proceeding so remaining stayed shall be proceeded with, subject to the provisions of 
any law which may then be in force, from the stage which had been reached when the 
proceedings became stayed.  
(5) In computing the period of limitation for the enforcement of any right, privilege, obligation or 
liability, the period during which it or the remedy for the enforcement thereof remains suspended under 
this section shall be excluded.  
2[22A. Dire ction not to dispose of assets. —The Board may, if it is of  opinion that any direction is 
necessary in the interest of the sick industrial company or creditors or shareholders or in the public 
interest, by order in writing, direct the sick industrial company not to dispose of, except with the consent 
of the Board,  any of its assets — 
(a) during the period of preparation or consideration of the scheme under section 18; and  
(b) during the period beginning with the recording of opinion by the Board for winding up of the 
company under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 and u p to commencement of the proceedings relating to 
the winding up before the concerned High Court.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 12 of 1994,  s. 12, for the words “ During the period” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 13,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  16 
 CHAP TER IV  
PROCEEDINGS IN CASE OF POTENTIALLY SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES,  MISFEASANCE PROCEEDINGS, 
APPEALS AND MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Loss of fifty per cent. net  worth by industrial companies .—(1) If the accumulated losses of an 
industrial company, as at the end of any financial year (hereinafter referred to as the relevant financial 
year) have resulted in erosion of fifty per cent., or more of its peak net worth during the immediately 
1[preceding four financial years] — 
(a) the company shall, within a period of sixty days from the date (hereinafter referred to as the 
relevant date) of finalisation of the duly audited accounts of the company for the relevant financial 
year— 
(i) report the fact of  such erosion to the Board; and  
(ii) hold a general meeting of the shareholders of the compan y for considering such erosion;  
 (b) the Board of directors shall, at least twenty -one days before the date on which the meet ing 
under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( a) is held, forward to every member of the company a report as to 
such erosion and the causes for such erosion;  
(c) the company may, by ordinary resolution passed at the meeting held under clause ( a) remove 
a director (being a director appointed by the members of the company) and fill the vacancy created by 
such removal, so far as may be, in accordance with the procedure provided in sub -sections ( 2) to ( 6) 
of section 284 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956).  
(2) A dir ector removed under sub -section ( 1) shall not be entitled to any compensation or damages for 
termination of his appointment as director or of any appointment terminating with that as director.  
(3) If default is made in complying with the provisions of thi s section, every director or other officer 
of the company who is in default shall be punishable with imprisonment which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to two years and with fine.  
2[23A. Proceedings on report, etc., of los s of fifty  per cent. net worth. —(1) Without prejudice to 
the provisions of clause ( a) of sub - section ( 1) of section 23, the Central Government or the Reserve Bank 
or a State Government or a public financial institution or a State level institution or a scheduled bank 
may, if it has sufficient reasons to believe that the accumulated losses of any industrial company have 
resulted in erosion of fifty per cent. or more of its peak net worth during the immediately preceding four 
financial years, report the fact of such erosion to the Board.  
(2) If the Board has, upon information received or upon its own knowledg e, reason to believe that the 
accumulated losses of any indu strial company have resulted in erosion of fifty per cent. or more of its 
peak net worth during the immediately preceding four financial years, it may call for such information 
from that company a s it may deem fit.  
(3) Where the Board is of the opinion that an industrial company referred to in sub -section ( 1) is not 
likely to make its net worth exceed its accumulated losses within a reasonable time while meeting all its 
financial obligations and th at the company as a result thereof is not likely to become viable in future, it 
may require by order an operating agency to inquire into and make a report with respect to such matters 
as may by specified in the order.  
(4) After consideration of the report of the operating agency the Board may publish or cause to be 
published a notice in such daily newspaper s as the Board may consider nec essary, for suggestions and 
objections, if any, within such period as the Board may specify, as to why the company should not be 
wound up.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 12 of 1994,  s. 14, for the words “preceding five financial years” (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994) . 
2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994) . 17 
 (5) Where the Board, after consideration of the relevant facts and circumstances and after giving an 
opportunity of being heard to all concerned parties, is of the opinion that the industrial company is not 
likely to make its net worth exc eed the accumulated losses within a reasonable time while meeting all its 
financial obligations and that the company as a result thereof, is not likely to become viable in future and 
that it is just and equitable that the company should be wound up, the Bo ard may record and forward its 
opinion to the concerned High Court in relation to the company as if it were a sick industrial company 
and the provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 20 shall apply accordingly.  
23B. Power of Board to call fo r periodic information. —On receipt of a report under sub -clause ( i) 
of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 23 or under sub -section ( 1) of section 23A or upon information 
or its own knowledge under sub -section ( 2) of section 23A, the Board may call for  any periodic 
information from the company as to the steps taken by the company to make its net worth exceed the 
accumulated losses and the company shall furnish such information.]  
24. Misfeasance proceedings. —(1) If, in the course of scrutiny or implementation of any scheme or 
proposal, it appears to the Board that any person who has taken part in the promotion, formation or 
management of the sick industrial company or its undertaking, including any past or present director, 
manager or officer or employee of the sick industrial company — 
(a) has misapplied or retained, or become liable or accountable for, any money or property of the 
sick industrial company; or  
(b) has been guilty of any m isfeasance, malfeasance or non -feasance or breach of trust in  relation 
to the sick industrial company,  
the Board may, by order, direct him to repay or restore the money or property or any part thereof, with or 
without interest, as it thinks just, or to contribute such sum to the assets of the sick industrial company  or 
the other person entitled thereto by way of compensation in respect of the misapplication, retainer 
misfeasance or breach of trust, as the Board thinks just, and also report the matter to the Central 
Government for any other action which that Governmen t may deem fit.  
(2) If the Board is satisfied on the basis of the information and evidence in its possession with respect 
to any person who is or was a director or an officer or other employee of the sick industrial company, that 
such person by himself or  along with other had diverted the funds or other property of such company for 
any purpose other than a bona fide  purpose of the company or had managed the affairs of the company in 
a manner highly detrimental to the interests of the company, the Board sha ll, by order, direct the public 
financial institutions, scheduled banks and State level institutions not to provide, during a   period of ten 
years from the date of the order, any financial assistance to such person or any firm of which such person 
is a pa rtner or any company or other body corporate of which such person is a director (by whatever name 
called).   
(3) No order shall be made by the Board under this section against any person unless such person has 
been given an opportunity for making his submissions.  
(4) This section shall apply notwithstanding that the matter is one for which the person may be 
crimin ally liable.  
25. Appeal. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Board made under this Act may, within 
forty -five days from the date on which a copy of the order is issued to him, prefer an appeal to the 
Appellate Authority:  
Provided that the Appella te Authority may entertain any appeal after the said period of forty -five days 
but not after sixty days from the date aforesaid if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.   18 
 (2) On receipt of an ap peal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Authority may, after giving an 
opportunity to the appellant to be heard, if he so desires, and after making such further inquiry as it deems 
fit, confirm, modify or set aside the order appealed against 1[or remand the matter to the Board for fresh 
consideration] . 
26. Bar of jurisdiction. —No order passed or proposal made under this Act shall be appealable 
except as provided therein and no civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the 
Appellate Authority or the Board is empowered by, or under, this Act to determine a nd no injunction shall 
be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any 
power conferred by or under this Act.  
27. Delegation of powers. —The Board may, by general or special order, delegate, subje ct to such 
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, to any Member or Secretary or other 
officer or employee of the Board or other person authorised by the Board to manage any industrial 
company or industrial undertaking or any operating agency, such powers and duties [except the powers 
and duties under sub -section s (2) and ( 4) of section 16, section 17, sub - sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 19, 
sub-section s (1) and ( 4) of section 20, sub -section ( 3) of section 22 and section 24] under this Act as it 
may deem necessary.  
28. Returns and information. —(1) The Board shall furnish from time to time to the Central 
Government such returns as the Central Government may require.  
(2) The Board may, for the purpose of efficient discharge of its functions under this Act, collect from, 
or furnish to — 
(a) the Central Government,  
(b) the Reserve Bank,  
(c) the scheduled bank or any other bank,  
(d) the public financial institution,  2*** 
(e) the State -level institution, 3[or]  
3[(f) the sick industrial company and, in case of amalgamation, the other company,]  
such information as it may consider useful for the purpose in such manner and within such time as it 
may think fit   
29. Power to seek the assistance of Chief Metropolitan Magi strate and District Magistrate. —(1) 
The Board or any operating agency, on being directed by the Board, may, in order to take into custody or 
under its control all property, effects and actionable claims to which a sick industrial company is or 
appears to be entitled, request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate 
within whose jurisdiction any property, books of account or any other documents of such sick industrial 
company be situate or be found, to take possession thereo f, and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the 
District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall, on such request being made to him, — 
(i) take possession of such property, books of account or other documents; and  
(ii) cause the same to be entrusted to the Bo ard or the operating agency.  
(2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate may take or cause to be taken such steps and use or 
cause to be used such force as  may, in his opinion, be necessary.  
(3) No act of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate done in pursuance of this 
section shall be called in question in any court or before any authority on any ground whatsoever.  
                                                           
1. Added  by Act 12 of 1994, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
2. The word “or” omitted by  s. 17,  ibid. (w.e.f.  1-2-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  19 
 30. Protection  of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Board or the Appellate Authority or the Chairman or any other Member, officer or other employee of the 
Board or the Appellate Authority, or operating agency or any other pe rson authorised by the Board or the 
Appellate Authority to discharge any function under this Act for any loss or damage caused or likely to be 
caused by any action which is in good faith done or intended to b e done in pursuance of this Act .  
31. Saving of pending proceedings .—Where a receiver or an official liquidator has been appointed 
in any proceeding pending immediately before the commencement of this Act, in any High Court for 
winding up of an industrial company such proceeding shall not abate but continue in that High Cou rt 
1[and no proceeding in respect of such industrial company shall lie or be proceeded with further before 
the Board.]  
32. E ffect of the Act on other laws. —(1) The provisions of this Act and of any rules or schemes 
made thereunder shall have effect notwit hstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other 
law except the provisions of the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973) and the Urban 
Land (Ceiling and Regulation) Act, 1976 (33 of 1976) for the time being in force or in the Me morandum 
or Articles of Association of an industrial company or in any other instrument having effect by virtue of 
any law other than this Act.  
(2) Where there has been under any scheme under this Act an amalgamation of a sick industrial 
company with anot her company, the provisions of section 72A of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), 
shall, subject to the modifications that the power of the Central Government under that section may be 
exercised by the Board without any recommendation by the specified a uthority referred to in that section, 
apply in relation to such amalgamation as they apply in relation to the amalgamation of a company 
owning an industrial undertaking with another company.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
33. Penalty for certain offences. —(1) Whoever  violates the provisions of this Act or any scheme, or 
any order of the Board, or the Appellate Authority and whoever makes a false statement or gives false 
evidence to the Board or the Appellate Authority, shall be punishable with simple imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to fine.  
 3[(2) No court shall take cogni zance of any offence under sub -section ( 1) except on a complaint in 
writing of the Secretary or any such other officer of the Board or the Appellate Au thority or any such 
officer of an operating agency as may be authorised in this behalf by the Board or the Appellate 
Authority.]  
34. Offences by companies. —(1) Where any offence, punishable under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who,  at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and  punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offenc e.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence punishable under this 
Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neg lect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly .  
                                                           
1. Added  by Act 12 of 1994, s. 18  (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  
2.Omitted by  s. 19,  ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994)  
3. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -2-1994).  20 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
35. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act or the rules, schemes or orders made thereunder, the Central Government may, by notification, 
remove the difficulty:  
Provided that no such notification shall be made by the Central Gov ernment after the expiry of a 
period of three years from the date on which this Act receiv es the assent of the President.  
36. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
 (2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairman an d other Members under sub -section ( 7) of section 6;  
(b) the powers which may be exercised and the duties which may be performed by the Secretary 
to the Board or the Appellate Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(c) the restrictions and conditions  subject to which officers and employees may be appointed to 
the Board or the Appellate Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(d) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers 
and employees of the B oard or the Appellate Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 8;  
(e) the additional matters referred to in sub -section  (3) of section 13;  
 (f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
 (3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immed iately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under that rule.  
  21 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section s 6 (8) and 8 ( 3) 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY  
I, ____________________, d o hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill 
and ability, execute and pe rform the duties required of me as the Chairman/Member/Secretary/other 
officer or employee of the Board for the Industrial and Fina ncial Reconstruction/the Appellate Authority 
for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction and which properly relate to the office or position held by me 
in or in relation to the said Board/Appellate Authority.  
I further declare that I will not communicate o r allow to be communicated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the Board/Appellate Authority, nor will I allow 
any such person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to or in possessi on of the 
Board/Appellate Authority or the business of any person having any dealing with the said 
Board/Appellate Authority.  
 
 
     
 
           Signature . 
Signed before me.  
--------------------------The Spices Board Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE SPICES BOARD ACT, 1986  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE SPICES  BOARD  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board.  
4. Secretary and other officers.  
5. Advisory Committees.  
6. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Cardamom Board and the Spices Export Promotion 
Council to the Board.  
7. Functions of the Board.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF OWNERS OF CARDAMOM ESTATES  
8. Registration of owners of cardamom estates.  
9. Power of State Government to make rules.  
10. Returns to be made by registered owners.  
CHAPTER IV  
CERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF SPICES  
11. No person to export spices without certificate.  
12. Grant of certificate.  
13. Cancellation, suspension , etc., of certifi cate.  
14. Appeal.  
15. Power to permit export without certificate.  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
16. Power to control price and distribution of cardamom.  
17. Power to prohibit or control import of cardamom.  
18. Power of the Central Government to issue directions.  
19. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Board.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
20. Grants and loans by the Central Government.  
21. Board Fund.  
22. Budget.  
23. Annual report.  
24. Accounts and audit.  
25. Annual report and auditor ’s report to be laid before Parliament.  
  2 
 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
26. Penalty for making false returns.  
27. Penalties for obstructing an officer or member of the Board in the discharge of his duties and for 
failure to produce books and records.  
28. Penalty for contravention of order r elating to control of price, etc.  
29. Penalties for contravention of section 11 or any order made under section 17.  
30. Other penalties.  
31. Offences by companies.  
32. Provisions of Act 52 of 1962 to apply to export of spices and import of cardamom.  
33. Previous sanction of the Central Government.  
34. Delegation.  
35. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants.  
36. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
37. Power to enter.  
38. Power to make rules.  
39. Power to make regulations.  
40. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  
42. Repeal and savings.  
THE SCHEDULE .  3 
 THE SPICES BOARD ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 10 OF 1986  
[20th March , 1986 .] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of a Board for the development of export of spices and for 
the control of cardamom industry including the control of cultivation of cardamom and 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Spices Board  Act, 1986.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the  context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Spices Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(b) “cardamom ” means the fruit of cardamom plant and includes green cardamom, bl eached 
cardamom, bleachable whit e cardamom, sun -dried cardamom,  cardamom seeds, powdered cardamom 
and oil extracted from cardamom;  
(c) “cardamom plant ” means ELETTARIA CARDAMOMUM MATON, AMMOM UM 
SUBULATUM ROXB  and any other plant which the Board may, by notification in the Officia l 
Gazette, declare to be a carda mom pla nt for the purposes of this Act;  
(d) “certificate ” means a certificate granted under section 12;  
(e) “dealer ” means a dealer in spices;  
(f) “estate ” means the area administered as one unit which contains land planted with cardamom 
plants;  
(g) “export ” and “import ” mean, respectively, taking out of or bringing into India by land, sea and 
air; 
(h) “manufacturer ” means a manufacturer of spices;  
(i) “member ” means a member of the Board appointed under sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(j) “owner ”, in relation to any land planted with cardamom plants, includes — 
(i) any agent of the owner; and  
(ii) a mortgagee, lessee or other person in actual possession of the land;  
(k) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(l) “registered estate ” means an estate in respect of which an owner is registered under             
sub-section  (1) of section 8 and includes any estate in respect of which an owner is required to be 
registered under the provisions of that sub -section;  
(m) “registered owner ” means an owner of a registered estate which has been or is registered or is 
required to be registered under sub -section ( 1) of section 8; and  
                                                           
1. 26th  February , 1987, vide Notificat ion No. S.O. 122(E), dated 26th  February , 1987, see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary,                  
    Part II, sec. 3 (ii). 4 
 (n) “spices ” means the s pices specified in the Schedule : 
Provided that the Central Government may, if satis fied that it is necessary or expedient in the 
public interest so to do, by notification in the Official Gazette, add any other spice to the Schedule or 
omit any spice therefrom.  
CHAPTER II  
THE SPICES  BOARD  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board .—(1) The Central Government shall, by  
notification in the Official Gazette , constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board, to be called the 
Spices Board . 
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
commo n seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to contract and shall, by the said name , sue 
and be sued.  
(3) The Board shall consist of such number of members, not exceeding thirty -two, as may be 
prescribed, and unless the rules made in this behalf otherwise provide, the Board shall consist of the 
following members , namely: — 
(a) a Chairman;  
(b) three Members of  Parliament , of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People and 
one by the Council of States;  
(c) three members to represent respectively the Ministries of the C entral Government dealing 
with— 
(i) Commerce;  
(ii) Agriculture; and  
(iii) Finance;  
(d) six members to represent the growers of spices;  
(e) eleven members to represent the exporters of spices;  
(f) three members to represent major spice producing States;  
(g) five members, one each to represent — 
(i) the Directorate of Cocoa, Arecanut and Spices Development, Calicut;  
(ii) the Indian Institute of Packaging, Bombay;  
(iii) the Central Food Technological and Research Institute, Mysore;  
(iv) the Regional Research Laboratory, Trivandrum; and  
(v) the Central Plantation Crops Research Institute, Ka sargode.  
(4) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, 
a member of either House of Parliament.  
(5) The term of office of the members and other conditions of service of the members shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
(6) The Chairman shall, in addition to presiding over the meetings of the Board, exercise and 
discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be delegated to him by the Board and such other 
powers and duties as may be prescribed.  
(7) The Board shall elect from among its members a Vice -Chairman who shall exercise such of the 
powers and perform such of the functions of the Chairman as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to 
him by the Chairman.  5 
 (8) No act or proceeding of the Board  shall be i nvalidated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board;  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
4. Secretary and other officers .—(1) The Board may appoint the Secretary and such other officers 
and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of se rvice of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the 
Board shall be such as may be determined by regulations.  
5. Advisory Committees .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the Board may, from time to 
time, constitute such committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.  
(2) Every committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall consist of such number of persons as the 
Board may deem fit.  
6. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Cardamom Board and the Spices Export Promotion 
Council to the Board .—(1) On and from  the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) all properties and other assets vested in the Cardamom Board and the Spices Export 
Promotion Council immediately before such comme ncement shall vest in the Board ; 
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be do ne by, with, or for the Cardamom  Board or the Spices Export Pro motion 
Council immediately before such commencement for or in connection with the purposes of the 
Cardamom Board or the Spices Export Promotion Council shall be deemed to have been incurred, 
entered into and engaged to be done by, with, or for the Board;  
(c) all sums of money due to the Cardamom Board or the Spices Export Promotion Council 
immediately before such commencement shall be deemed to be due to the Board;  
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by o r 
against the Cardamom Board or the Spices Export Promotion Council immediately before such 
commencement may be continued or instituted by or against the Board; and  
(e) every employee holding any office under the Cardamom Board or the Spices Export 
Promoti on Council immediately before such commencement shall on such commencement hold his 
office or service under the Board with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other 
matters as would have been admissible to him if there had been no su ch vesting; and shall continue to 
do so unless and until his employment under the Board is duly terminated or until his remuneration 
and other conditions of service are duly altered by the Board.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Dis putes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the absorption of any employee by the Board in its regular service 
under this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law and no 
such claim shall be entertained by any c ourt, tribunal or other authority.  
7. Functions of the Board .—(1) The Board may — 
(i) develop, promote and regulate export of spices;  
(ii) grant certificate for ex port of spices and register brokers therefor;  
(iii) undertake programmes and projects for promotion of export of spices;  
(iv) assist and encourage studies and research for improvement of processing, quality, techniques 
of grading and packaging of spices;  
(v) strive towards stabilisation of prices of spices for export;  
(vi) evolve suitable quality standards and introduce ce rtification of quality through “Quality 
Marking”  for spaces for export;  6 
 (vii) control quality of spices for export;  
(viii) give licences, subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed, to the 
manufacturers of spices for export;  
(ix) market any spice, if it considers necessary, in the interest of promotion of export;  
(x) provide warehousing fa cilities abroad for spices;  
(xi) collect statistics with regard to spices for compilation and publication;  
(xii) import, with the previous approval of the Central Government, any spice for sale; and  
(xiii) advise the Central Government on matters relating to import and export of spices.  
(2) The Board may also — 
(i) promote co -operati ve efforts among growers of cardamom;  
(ii) ensure remunerative returns to growers of cardamom;  
(iii) provide financial or other assistance for improved methods of cultivation and processing of 
cardamom, for replanting cardamom and for extension of cardamom  growing areas;  
(iv) regulate the sale of cardamom and stabilisation of prices of cardamom;  
(v) provide t raining in cardamom testing and fixing grade standards of cardamom;  
(vi) increase the consumption of cardamom and carry on propaganda for that purpose;  
(vii) register and licence brokers (including auctioneers) of cardamom and persons engaged in the 
business of cardamom;  
(viii) improve the marketing of cardamom;  
(ix) collect statistics from growers, dealers and such other persons as may be prescribed on any 
matter relating to the cardamom industry; publish statistics so collected or portions thereof or extracts 
therefrom;  
(x) secure better working conditions and the provision and improvement of amenities and 
incentives for workers; and  
(xi) undertake, ass ist or encourage scientific, technological and economic research.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF OWNERS OF CARDAMOM ESTATES  
8. Registration of owners of cardamom estates .—(1) Every owner of land planted with cardamom 
plants, whether such land is comprised in one estate or more than one estate, shall, before the expi ration 
of one month from the dat e on which he first became owner of such estate or estates, apply to the 
registering officer appointed in this behalf by the State Government to be registered as an o wner in 
respect of each estate owned by him : 
Provided that the State Government may, for sufficient reasons, extend the time -limit for registration 
by such period as it thinks fit.  
(2) Registration once made shall continue to be in force until it is cancel led by the registering officer.  
9. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry into effect the provisions of section 8.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may prescribe the form of 
the application for registration and for cancellation of registration, the fee payable on such applications, 
the particulars to be included in such application, the procedure to be followed in granting and cancelling 
registration, the registers to be kept by registering officers and the supply by registering officers of 
information to the Board.  7 
 10. Returns to be made by registered owners .—(1) A registered owner shall furnish returns to the 
Board in such  form, at such times and in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Board may authorise an officer to visit any estate at any time to verify the accuracy of any 
return made under this section or to ascertain the productive capacity of the estate.  
CHAPTER  IV 
CERTIFICATE FOR EXPORT OF SPICES  
11. No person to export spices without certificate .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no 
person shall, after the commencement of this Act, commence or carry on the business of export of any 
spice except under and in accordance with a certificate : 
Provided that a person carrying on the business of export of spices immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, may continue to do so for a period of three months from such 
commencement; and if he has made an applicat ion for such certificate within the said period of three 
months till the disposal of such application.  
Explanation .—The reference in this section to the commencement of this Act shall be construed in 
relation to any spice added to the Schedule by notification under the proviso to clause ( n) of section 2 as 
reference to the date with effect from which such spice is added to the Schedule.  
12. Grant of certificate .—(1) An application for grant of certificate shall be made to the Board in 
such form and  shall contain such particulars as may be prescribed and shall be accompanied by a receipt 
evidencing the payment of the prescribed fee.  
(2) On receipt of suc h application, the Board shall — 
(a) if the application is not in the prescribed form or does not c ontain any of the prescribed 
particulars, return the application to the applicant; or  
(b) if the application is in the prescribed form and contains the prescribed particulars, grant the 
certificate subject to such terms and conditions as may be determined by regulations.  
13. Cancellation, suspension; etc. of certificate .—(1) The Board may cancel any certificate on any 
one or more of t he following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the holder of the certificate has violated any of the terms and conditions of the cer tificate; 
and 
(b) that in the opinion of the Central Government it is necessary in the interests of general public 
to cancel the certificate.  
(2) Where the Board, for reasons to be recorded in writing, is satisfied that pending consideration of 
the question of cancelling the certificate on any grounds mentioned in sub -section ( 1), it is necessary so to 
do, the Board may, by order in writing, suspend the operation of the certificate for such period not 
exceeding forty -five days as may be specified in the order and require the holder of the certificate to show 
cause, within fifteen days from the date of receipt of such order, as to why the suspension of the 
certificate should not be extended till the determination of the question as to whether the regis tration 
should be cancelled.  
(3) No order of cancellation of registration under this section shall be made unless the person 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the grounds for such 
cancellation.  
14. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 13 may prefer an appeal to 
the Central Government within such period as may be prescribed.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor:  8 
 Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
the prescribed period.  
(3) Every appeal made under this se ction shall be made in such form and shall be accompanied by a 
copy of order appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed : 
Provided that before disposing of an appea l, the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
(5) The Central Government may confirm, modify or reverse the order appealed against.  
15. Power to permit export without certificate .—The Central Government may, if satisfied that it 
is necessary or expedient, so to do, in public interest, by notification in the Official Gazette and subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified therein, permit any  body or other agency to commence or 
carry on the business of export of spices w ithout a certificate.  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL BY THE CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
16. Power to control price and distribution of cardamom .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
order notified in the Official Gazette, fix in respect of cardamom of any description specified t herein — 
(a) the maximum price or the minimum price, or the maximum and minimum prices, which may 
be charged by a grower of cardamom or cardamom dealer, wholesale  or retail, whether for the Indian 
market or for export; and  
(b) the maximum quantity which may  in one transaction be sold to any person.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers conferred by sub -section ( 1), any ord er made 
thereunder may provide — 
(a) for requiring persons engaged in the production, supply or distribution of, or trade a nd 
commerce in, cardamom to maintain and produce for inspection such books, accounts and records 
relating to their business and to furnish such information relating thereto as may be specified in the 
order; and  
(b) for such other matters, including in part icular the entering and search of premises, vehicles, 
vessels and aircraft, and the seizure by a person authorised to make such search,  of cardamom in 
respect of which such person has reason to believe that a contravention of the order has been, is being 
or is about to be, committed.  
17. Power to prohibit or control import of cardamom .—The Central Government may, by order 
published in the Official Gazette, make provision for prohibiting, restricting or otherwise controlling the 
import of cardamom, either generally or in specified classes of cases.  
18. Power of the Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foreg oing 
provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be 
bound by su ch directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from 
time to time : 
Provided that the Board shall , as far as practicable , be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Cen tral Government whether a question  is one of policy or not shall be final.  
  9 
 19. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Board .—(1) If at any time the Ce ntral 
Government is of opinion — 
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the functions and duties 
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a resu lt of such default the financial position of the Board or 
the administration of the Board has deteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification in the Offici al Gazette, supersede the Board for such 
period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Board, — 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supe rsession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board, shall until the Board is reconstituted under    
sub-section ( 3), be  exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central Government 
may direct; and  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted under  
sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expi ration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under           
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh appointment and in such 
case any person or persons who vacated their offices under clau se (a) of sub -section ( 2), shall not be 
deemed disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any t ime, before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, take action under this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House of Parliament at the earliest.  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
20. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums 
of money as that Government may consider necessary.  
21. Board Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Spices Board Fund and there 
shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government under section 20;  
(b) all fees levied and collected in respect of certificate s granted under this Act; and  
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) salary, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and  other employees of 
the Board;  
(b) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under section 7; and  10 
 (c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.  
22. Budget .—The Board shall prepare in such form and at such time each financial year, as may be 
prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Board and forward the same to the Central Government.  
23. Annual report .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such t ime each financial year, as 
may be prescribed , its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
24. Accounts and audit .—The accounts of the Board shall be ma intained and audited in such manner 
as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed and the Board 
shall furnish to the Central Government before such date, as may be prescribed, its audited copy of 
accounts together  with the auditors’  report thereon.  
25. Annual report and auditors ’ report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government 
shall cause the annual report and auditor ’s report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, 
before each House of P arliament.  
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Penalty for making false returns .—Any person who being required by or under this Act to 
furnish any return fails to furnish such return or furnishes a return containing any particular which is false 
and which he knows to be false or does not believe to be true shall be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees.  
27. Penalties for obstructing an officer or member of the Board in the discharge of his duties 
and for failure to produce books and reco rds.—Any person who — 
(a) obstructs any member authorised by the Chairman in writing or any officer or other employee 
of the Board authorised by it in this behalf or any person authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government or by the Board, in the exercise of any power conferred, or in the discharge of any duty 
imposed, on him by or under this Act; or  
(b) having control over or custody of any account book or other record, fails to produce such 
book or record when required to do so by or under this A ct,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.   
28. Penalty for contravention of order relating to control of price, etc. —(1) If any person 
contravenes any orde r made under section 16, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both; and the 
property in respect of which the order has been contravened or such par t thereof as the Court may deem 
fit, shall be forfeited to the Central Government.  
(2) Any person who attempts to contravene, or abets the contravention of , any order under section 16 
shall be deemed to have contravened that order.  
29. Penalties for contravention of section 11 or any order made under section 17 .—If any person 
contravenes the provisions of section 11 or any order made under section 17 he shall, without prejudice to 
any confiscation or penalty to which he may be liable un der the provisions of the Customs                    
Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) , be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  11 
 30. Other penalties .—Whoever contraven es or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of 
the provisions of this Act or of any rules or regulations made thereunder other than the provisions, 
punishment for the contravention whereof has been provided for in sections 26, 27, 28 and 29, sh all be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one 
thousand rupees, or with both, and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which 
may extend to fifty rupees for every day dur ing which such contravention continues after conviction for 
the first such contravention.  
31. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly : 
Provided that nothing containe d in this sub -section shall render any such person l iable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, a ny director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
32. Provisions of Act 52 of 1962 to apply to export of spices and import of cardamom .—(a) All 
spices to which section 11 of this Act applies, and  
(b) the cardamom to which any order under section 17 of this Act applies,  
shall be deemed to be goods of which the import or export has been prohibited or restricted under   
section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) , and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect 
accordingly.  
33. Previous sanction of the Central Gov ernment .—No prosecution for any offence punishable 
under this Act shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
34. Delegation .—The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairman or 
any other member or to any officer of the Board, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may 
be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power under section 
39) as it may deem necessary.  
35. Members, officers  and employees of the Board to be public servants .—All members, officers 
and other employees of the Board shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any 
of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860) . 
36. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Government, or the Board or any committee appointed by it, or any member of the Board or 
such com mittee, or any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other person 
authorised by the Government or the Board , for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  12 
 37. Power to enter .—Subject to any rule made in this behalf, any person, generally or specially 
authorised by the Board in this behalf, may, whenever it is necessary so to do, for any of the purposes of 
this Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land o r premises and make any inspection or inquiry or 
do such other ac t or thing as may be prescribed : 
Provided that no such person shall enter any building or any enclosed courtyard or garden attached to 
a dwelling -house (unless with the consent of the occupie r thereof) without previously giving such 
occu pier at least twenty -four hours’  notice in writing of his intention to do so.  
38. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Governme nt may, by notification in the O fficial Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of members of the Board under sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(b) the term of office and other conditions of service of the members of the Board under          
sub-section ( 5) of section 3;  
(c) the powers and duties of the Chairman under sub -section ( 6) of section 3;  
(d) the powers and functions of the Vice -Chairman under sub -section ( 7) of section 3;  
(e) the constitution of committees under section 5;  
(f) the terms and conditions for giving licences to manufacturers of spices for export under   
clause ( viii) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(g) the form and manner in which and the time at  which the registered owner may furnish returns 
to the Board under section 10;  
(h) the form of the application and the fees under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(i) the period of limitation for appeal under sub -section ( 1) of section 14;  
(j) the form of ap peal and the fees payable under sub -section ( 3) of section 14;  
(k) the procedure for disposal of appeal under sub -section ( 4) of section 14;  
(l) the form in which, and the time at which, the Board shall prepare its budget under section 22 
and its annual re port under section 23;  
(m) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be maintained and audited and the date  
before which the audited copy of the accounts may be furnished to the Central Government under 
section  24; 
(n) the conditions and the restrictions with respect to the exercise of the power to enter under      
section 37;  
(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by rules.  
39. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the 
rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the gene rality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the 
Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 4; and  
(b) the terms and conditions under which the certificate may be granted under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 12.  13 
 40. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or t he 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made , the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
41. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necess ary for removing the difficulty : 
Provid ed that no order shall b e made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before  each 
House of Parliament.  
42. Repeal and savings .—(1) Section s 3 to 33 of the Cardamom Act, 1965 (42 of 1965) are hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the said 
Act shall, in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to 
have been done or taken under the provisions of this Act as if the said provisions were in force when such 
thing was done or such action was taken and shall continue in force accordingly until supe rseded by 
anything done or any action taken under this Act.   14 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2  (n)] 
1. Cardamom  
2. Pepper  
3. Chilly  
4. Ginger  
5. Turmeric  
6. Coriander  
7. Cumin  
8. Fennel  
9. Fenugreek  
10. Celery  
11. Aniseed  
12. Bishopsweed  
13. Caraway  
14. Dill  
15. Cinnamon  
16. Cassia  
17. Garlic  
18. Curry leaf  
19. Kokam  
20. Mint  
21. Mustard  
22. Parsley  
23. Pomegranate seed  
24. Saffron  
25. Vanilla  
26. Tejpat  
in any form including curry powders, spice oil, oleoresins and other mixtures where spice content is      
pre-dominant.  
--------------------------The State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH  ACT, 1986  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
 
PART II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE  STATE OF  ARUNACHAL  PRADESH  
3. Establishment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh . 
4. [Repealed ]. 
 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
 
5. [Repealed ]. 
6. Allocation of sitting member . 
7. [Repealed ]. 
The House of the People  
8. Allocation of seats in the existing House of the People . 
9. Provision as to sitting members . 
The Legislative Assembly  
10. Provision as to Legislative Assembly . 
11. Provisional Legislative Assembly . 
12. Speaker and Deputy Speaker . 
13. Rules of procedure . 
Delimitation of Constituencies  
14. Delimitation of constituencies . 
15. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitatio n orders up -to-date. 
16. [Repealed ]. 
17. [Repealed ]. 
 
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
18. Common High Court for Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh . 
19. Provision as to advocates . 
20. Practice and procedure in the common High Court . 
21. Custody of Seal of the common High Court . 
22. Form of writs and other processes . 2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Powers of Judges . 
24. Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High Court . 
25. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court . 
26. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura 
and Mizoram to the common High Court . 
27. Interpretation . 
28. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to the common High Court . 
29. Saving . 
 
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
30. Authorisati on of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature . 
31. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh . 
32. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Arunachal Pradesh . 
33. Distribution of revenues . 
 
PART VI  
ASSETS AND LIAB ILITIES  
34. Property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc . 
 
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
35. Provision relating to All -India Services . 
36. Provisions relating to other services . 
37. Other provisions as to services . 
38. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same posts . 
39. Advisory Committees . 
40. Prohibition of representation after certain period . 
41. Power of Central Government to give direcions . 
 
PART VIII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
42. [Repealed ]. 
43. [Repealed ]. 
44. [Repealed ]. 
45. [Repealed ]. 
46. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptations . 
47. Power to construe laws . 
48. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc . 
49. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws .  3 
 SECTIONS  
50. Power to remove difficulties . 
51. Power to make rules . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  [REPEALED ]. 
THE SECOND  SCHEDULE [REPEALED ]. 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE [REPEALED ]. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE [REPEALED ]. 
 
 
  4 
 THE STATE  OF ARUNACHAL PRADESH ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 69 OF 1986  
[24th December , 1986.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the State of Arunachal Pradesh Act, 1986.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the Administrator appointed by t he President under article 239;  
(b) “appointed day1” means the day which the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoi nt; 
(c) “article” means an article of the Constitution ; 
(d) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by t he President under 
article 324;  
(e) “existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh ” means the Union territory of Arunachal 
Pradesh as existing immedi ately before the appointed day;  
(f) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, notification 
or other instrument having, immediately before the appoint ed day, the force of law in the whole or 
any part of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Prades h; 
(g) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly of 
the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh, mea ns a person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is a member of that House or that Assembly;  
(h) “treasury” includes a sub -treasury . 
PART II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE  STATE OF  ARUNACHAL  PRADESH  
3. Establishment of the State of Arunachal Pradesh .—On and from the appointed day, there shall 
be established a new State, to be known as the State of Arunachal Pradesh comprising the territories 
which immediately before that day were comprised in the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh.  
4. [Amendment of  First Schedule to the Constitution ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 
2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE  LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
5. [Amendment of Fourt h Schedule to the Constitution ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 
2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
6. Allocation of  sitting member .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the sitting member of the 
Council of States representing the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall be deemed to have 
                                                           
1. 20th February, 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 74(E), dated 11th February, 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 5 
 been duly elected under clause ( 4) of article 80 to fill the seat allotted to the State of A runachal Pradesh in 
that Council.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting  member shall remain unaltered.  
7. [Amendment of  section 27A of Act 43 of 1950 ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 2001  
(30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
The House of the People  
8. Allocation of seats in th e existing House of the People .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the 
allocation of seats to the State of Arunachal Pradesh in the House of the People shall be two; and the First 
Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), shall be deemed to be amended 
accordingly . 
(2) On and from the appointed day, the two parliamentary constituencies of the existing Union 
territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall be deemed to be the parliamentary constituencies of the State of 
Arunachal Pradesh and the Delimitation of Parliamentary an d Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, shall 
be construed accordingly.  
9. Provision as to sitting members .—The sitting members of the House of the People representing 
the constituencies which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of section 8 become the 
constituencies of the State of Arunachal Pradesh shall be deemed to have been elected under  
sub-clause ( a) of clause (1) of article 81 to the House of the People by those constituencies.  
The Legislative Assembly  
1[10. Provision as to Legislative As sembly .—The total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly 
of the State of Arunachal Pradesh, to be filled by persons chose n by direct election from asse mbly 
constituencies shall be sixty, out of which fifty -nine seats shall be reserved fo r the Scheduled Tribes; and 
the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) shall be dee med to be amended 
accordingly.]  
11. Pr ovisional Legislative Assembly .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act 
(including provisions  relating to the strength of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal 
Pradesh), on and from the appointed day and until the Legislative Assembly of that State has been duly 
constituted and summoned to meet for the first session, there shall be a provisional Legislative Assem bly 
2[which shall consist of — 
(a) members elected by the ter ritorial constituencies of; and  
(b) members nominated to,  
the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union t erritory of Arunachal Pradesh .] 
(2) The period of five years  referred to in clause (1) of article 172 shall, in the case of the provisional 
Legislative Assembly referred to in sub -section ( 1), be deemed to have commenced on the day on which 
the duration of the existing Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of  Arunachal Pradesh commenced 
under section 5 of the Government of Union Terr itories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963).  
3[(3) For so long as the provisional Legislative Assembly constituted unde r this section is in 
existence, — 
(a) it shall be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh duly 
constituted under the Constitution and shall be competent to discharge all the functions of a 
Legislative Assembly of a State under the Constitution; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 52 of 19 88, s. 2, for section 10 (w.e.f. 27 -9-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 1987, s.  2, for certain words (w.e.f. 20 -2-1987).  
3. Subs. by  s. 2, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 20 -2-1987).  
 6 
 (b) the members thereof, referred to in cl ause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed to be the 
members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh duly elected under the 
Constitution.]  
12. Speaker and Deputy Speaker .—The persons who immediately before the appointed day are the 
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh, 
shall be the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker, respectively, of the provisional Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Arunacha l Pradesh on and from that da y. 
13. Rules of procedure .—The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
Assembly of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh as in force immediately before the 
appointed day shall, until rules are made under clause (1) of arti cle 208, be the rules of procedure and 
conduct of business of the provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Arunachal Pradesh, subject to 
such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof . 
 14. Delimitation of constitu encies .—(1) The Election Commission shall, in the manner herein 
provided, distribute, whether before or after the appointed day, the seats assigned to the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Arunachal Prad esh under section 10 to single -member territorial constituencies 
and delimit them having regard to the provisions of the Constitution and to the following provisions, 
namely:— 
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas, and in 
delimiting them regard shall be had t o physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communicat ion and public convenience; and  
(b) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, 
be located in areas where the pr oportion of their population to the t otal population is the largest.  
(2) For the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functions under sub -section ( 1), the 
Election Commission shall associate with  itself as associate members, — 
(a) the sitting members of the House of the Peopl e referred to in section 9; and  
(b) such six of the members of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh or, as the case may be, the provisional Legislative Assembly referred to in  
section 11 as th e Speaker thereof may nominate:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any decis ion of the 
Election Commission.  
(3) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls va cant, it shall be filled, 
if practicable, in accordance with the  provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any assoc iate member who desires publication thereof, in the Official Gazette 
and in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting 
objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after whic h the 
proposals wi ll be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by i t before the date so 
specified;  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before th e 
date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or orders 
shall have the full force of law and shall not be  called  in question in any court.  
(5) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to assembly constituencies 
shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh or, as 
the case may be,  the provisional Legislative Asse mbly referred to in section 11.  7 
 15. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation  orders up -to-date.—(1) The Election 
Commission may, from time to time, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistake in any order made under section 14 or any error arising therein 
from inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any such order are or is 
altered, make such amendments as appear t o it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such order 
up-to-date.  
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is issued, before the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory of Arunachal 
Pradesh, the provisional Legislative Assembly referred to in section 11 or the Legislative Assembly of the 
State of Arunach al Pradesh, as the case may be.  
16. [Amendm ent of Scheduled Castes Orders ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending  Act, 2001   
(30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
17. [Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Orders ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid.  
(w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
PART IV  
HIGH COURT 
18. Common High Court for Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura,  Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh .—(1) On and from the appointed day, — 
(a) there shall be a common High Court for the States of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, 
Tripura, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh to be called the Gauhati  High Court (the High Court of 
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh) (hereinafter 
referre d to as the common High Court);  
(b) the Judges of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and 
Mizoram hol ding office immediately before that day shall, unless they have elected otherwise, 
become on that day the J udges of the common High Court.  
(2) The expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of the Judges of the common High Court 
shall be allocat ed amongst the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland and Tripura in such proportion as the Presi dent may, by order, determine.  
19. Provision as to advocates .—(1) On and from the appointed day, — 
(a) in the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), in section 3, in sub -section ( 1), for clause ( b), the 
following clause shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(b) for the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland 
and Tripura to be known as the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, 
Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh; ”; 
(b) the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram shall be 
deemed to be the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and 
Arunachal Pradesh.  
(2) Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practise in the 
High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram shall be entitled to practise 
as an advocate  in the co mmon High Court.  
(3) All persons who, immediately before the appointed day, are advocates on the roll of the Bar 
Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram shall, as from that day, become 
advocates on the roll of the Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura,  Mizoram 
and Arunachal Pradesh.  8 
 (4) The right of audience in the common High Court shall be regulated in accordance with the like 
principles as, immediately before the appointed day, are in force with  respect to the right of audience in 
the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya , Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram:  
Provided that as among the Advocates -General of the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur, 
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura, the right of audience shall be determined with reference to 
their d ates of enrolment as advocates.  
20. Practice and proc edure in the common High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the 
law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High 
Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram shall, with the necessary 
modifications, apply in rel ation to the common High Court.  
21. Custody of  Seal of the common High Court .—The law in force imme diately before the 
appointed day with respect to the custody of the Seal of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, 
Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody 
of the  Seal of the common High  Court.  
22. For m of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of 
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram  shall, with necessary modifications, apply 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the common High Court.  
23. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram and with respect to all matters, ancillar y to the exercise of 
those powers shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the common High Court.  
24. Principal seat and other places of si tting of the common High Court .—(1) The principal seat 
of the common High Court shall be at the  same place at which the principal seat of the High Court of 
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram is located immedi ately before the 
appointed day.  
(2) The President may, by notified order, provide for the establishment of a permanent be nch or 
benches of the common High Court at one or more places within the territories to which the jurisdiction 
of the High Court extends, other than the principal seat of the High Court, and for a ny matters connected 
therewith:  
Provided that before issuing  any order under this sub -section, the President shall consult the Chief 
Justice of the common High Court and the Governor of the State in which the bench or benches is or are 
proposed to be established.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sectio n (1) or sub - section ( 2), the Judges and division 
courts of the common High Court may also sit at such other place or places in the States of Assam, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura, Mizoram and Aruna chal Pradesh as the Chief Justice may, with 
the ap proval of the Governor o f the State concerned, appoint.  
25. Procedure a s to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur,  Tripura and Mizoram and the Judges and division courts thereof shall, with the 
necessary modifications, apply in rel ation to the common High Court.  
26. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, 
Tripura and Mi zoram  to the common High Court .—(1) All proceedings pending in the High Court of 
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram immediately before the appointed day 
shall, from such day, stand transf erred to the common High Court.  
(2) Every proceeding  transferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be disposed of by the common High 
Court as if such proceeding was entertained by that High Court.  
  9 
 27. Interpretation .—For the purpose s of section 26, — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has disposed of all issues 
between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings 
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to a ppeal to the Supreme Court, applications for 
review, petitions for revisi on and petitions for writs; and  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
court thereof; and references to an order made by a co urt or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that court or Judge.  
 28. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transf erred to the common High Court .—Any 
person who, immediately before the ap pointed day, is an advocate entitled to practise in the High Court of 
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram and was authorised to appear or to act in 
any proceedings transferred from the said High Court to the common High Court under sec tion 26 shall 
have the right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the common High Court in  relation to those 
proceedings.  
29. Savi ng.—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the common High Court of any 
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made 
on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other authority having  
power to make such provisions.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DIST RIBUTION OF REVENUES  
30. Authorisation of expenditure pending i ts sanction by the Legislature .—(1) The President 
may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise by order such expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of the State of Arunachal Pradesh as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months 
beginning with the appointed day, pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly 
of the State of Arunachal Pradesh:  
Provided that the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh may, af ter the appointed day, authorise by order 
such further expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Arunachal 
Pradesh for any period not extending beyond  the said period of six months.  
(2) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall make separate 
orders under sub -section ( 1) in respect of periods fallin g in different financial years.  
31. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh .—(1) 
The reports of the  Comptroller and Auditor -General of India referred to in section 49 of the Government 
of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963), relating to the accounts of the exising Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be submitted to the Governor 
of Arunachal Pradesh who shall cause them to be laid before the Leg islative Assembly of the State.  
(2) The Governor may, by orde r,— 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of the existing Un ion territory 
of Arunachal Pradesh on any service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the 
financial year 1986 -87 or in respect of any earlier fi nancial year in excess of the amount granted for 
that service and for that year as disclo sed in the reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) to have been 
duly authorised, and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said r eports.  
32. Allowances and privileges of  Governor of Arunachal Pradesh .—The allowances and 
privileges of the Governor of Arunachal Pradesh shall, until, the Governors (Emoluments, Allowances 
and Privileges) Act, 1982 (4 3 of 1982), comes into force, be such as the Pres ident may, by order, 
determine.  
33. Distribution of revenues .—The President shall, by order, determine the grants -in-aid of the 
revenues of the State of Arunachal Pradesh and the share of that State in the Union duties of excise, estate 10 
 duty and taxes on income and for that purpose amend thereby the relevant provisio ns of the Additional 
Duties of Excise (Goods of Special Importance) Act, 1957 (58 of 1957), the Union Duties of Excise 
(Distribution) Act, 1979 (24 of 1979), the Estate Duty (Distr ibution) Act, 1962 (9 of 1962) and the 
Constitution (Distribution of Revenue s) Order, 1985 i n such manner as he thinks fit.  
PART VI  
ASSETS AND  LIABILITIES  
34. Property, assets, rights,  liabilities, obligations, etc .—(1) All such property and assets within the 
existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh as are held immediately before the appointed day by the 
Union for purposes of governance of that Union territory shall, on and from that day, pass to the State of 
Aruna chal Pradesh unless the purposes for which such property and assets are so held are Union 
purposes:  
Provided that the cash balances in the treasuries in the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh 
before the appointed day shall, as from that day, ves t in the State of Arunachal Pradesh.  
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations (other than those relatable to, or in connection with, a Union 
purpose), whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, which are, immediat ely before the appointed 
day,— 
(a) the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central Government arising out of, or in 
connection with, the governance of the existing Union ter ritory of Arunachal Pradesh; or  
(b) the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Administrator of the exist ing Union territory of 
Arunachal Pradesh in his capacity as such , or of the Government of that Union territory,  
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of the 
State of Arunachal Pradesh.  
(3) The right to recover arrears of — 
(a) any tax or duty being a tax or duty enumerated in the State List in the Seventh Schedu le to the 
Constitution; or  
(b) any duty  referred to in article 268; or  
(c) any tax under the Central Sa les Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956),  
which have fallen due in the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh, shall pass to the State of 
Arunach al Pradesh.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to, or in relation to, — 
(a) any institution, undertaking or project the expenditure i n relation to which is, immediately 
before the appointed day, met from and out of the Consolidated Fund of  India;  
(b) any property which has been placed by the Union at the disposal of the administration of the 
existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh  subject to the condition that the ownership thereof will  
continue to vest in the Union.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “liability” includes liability in respect of any civil deposit, local fund deposit, charitable or 
other endowment, provident fund accoun t, pension or actionable wrong;  
(b) “Union purposes ” means the purposes of Government relatable to any of the matte rs 
mentioned in the Union List.  
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
35. Provision relating to All -India Services .—Every member of the Indian Administrative Service, 
the Indian Police Service and the Indian Forest Service who, immediately before the appointed day, is 
holdin g any post in the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall, until otherwise directed by 
the Central Government, be deemed to be on deputation, on and from the appointed day, to the 
Government of the State of Arunachal Pradesh on the same terms a nd conditions of service as are 
applicable to him under the relevant cadre rules:  11 
 Provided that the period of such deputation shall in no case extend beyond a period of thre e years 
from the appointed day.  
Explanation .—In this section, “cadre rules ” means the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 
1954, the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954 or the Indian Forest Service (Cadre) R ules, 1966, as 
the case may be.  
36. Provisi ons relating to other services .—(1) Every person who immediately be fore the appointed 
day is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administrative control of the 
Administrator of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall, unless otherwise directed by an 
order of the Central Government,  be deemed to have been allocated for service as from that day in 
connection with the affairs of the State of Arunachal Pradesh:  
Provided that no directions shall be issued under this section after the expiry of a period of one ye ar 
from the appointed day.  
(2) The provisions of this section shall not apply in relation to persons to whom the pro visions of 
section 35 apply.  
37. O ther provisions as to services .—(1) Nothing in this section or section 36 shall be deemed to 
affect  on or after the appointed day, the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the 
Constitution in relation to determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with 
the affairs of the State of Arunachal Pradesh:  
Prov ided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day in the case of 
any person referred to in section 36 shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous 
approval of the Central Government.  
(2) All services pr ior to the appointed day rendered by a person deemed to have been allocated under 
section 36 in connection with the administration of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh, 
shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of  the State of Arunachal Pradesh 
for the purposes of the rules regulating his condition s of service.  
38. Provisions as to continu ance of officers in same posts .—Every person who, immediately before 
the appointed day, is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs 
of the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall continue to hold the same post or office and 
shall be deemed, on and from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the 
Govern ment of, or other appropriate authority in, the State of Arunachal Pradesh on the same terms and 
conditions of appointment and on the same tenure as he was holding the post or offi ce immediately before 
that day:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority on or after the 
appointed day from passing in relation to such person any order affecting his cont inuance in such post or 
office.  
39. Advisory Committees .—The Central Government may, by order, establish one or mor e Advisory 
Committees for the purpose  of assisting it in regard to — 
(a) the discharge of its  functions under this Part; and  
(b) the  ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
Part and the proper consideration of any repres entations made by such persons.  
40. Prohibition of repre sentation after certain period .—Notwithstanding anything to t he contrary 
contained in any law or rule for the time being in force, no representation shall lie against any order 
passed under the provisions of this Part on the expiry of three months from the date of publication or 
service, which ever is earlier, of suc h order:  
Provided that the Central Government may, suo motu  or otherwise and for reasons to be recorded, re -
open any matter and pass such orders thereon as may appear to it to be appropriate if it is satisfied that it 
is necessary so to do in order to prev ent any miscarriage of justi ce to any affected person.  12 
 41. Power of Centra l Government to give direcions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions to the Government of the State of Arunachal Pradesh as may appear to it to be necessary for the 
purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the State Government sha ll comply 
with such directions.  
PART VIII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
42. [Amendment of article 210, article 239A and a rticle 240 of the Constitution ].—Rep. by the  
Repealing and Amending Act, 2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
43. [Amendment of Act 28 of 1958 ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
44. [Amendment of Act 20 of 1963 ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
45. [Amendment of Act 84 of 1971 ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
46. Continuance of exist ing laws and their adaptations .—(1) All laws in force, immediately before 
the appointed day, in the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh shall continue to be in force in the 
State of Arunachal Pradesh until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislatur e or other 
competent authority.  
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the applica tion in relation to the State of Arunachal Pradesh of any 
law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, within two years from that day, by 
order, make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment , as 
may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations 
and modifications so made until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislatur e or other 
competent authority.  
Explanation .—In this section , the expression “appropriate Government ” means, as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central 
Government and as respects any other law, the Government of the State of Aruna chal Pradesh.  
47. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under section 46 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in 
relation to the State of Arunachal Pradesh, construe the law in such manner not affecting the substance as 
may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or  authority, as the case may 
be. 
48. Provisions as  to continuance of courts, etc .—All courts and tribunals and all authorities 
discharging lawful functions throughout the existing Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh or any part 
thereof immediately before the appointed day shall, unless their continuance is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act or until other provision is made by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority, continue to exerc ise their respective functions.  
49. Effect of provision s of Ac t inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therew ith contained in any other law.  
50. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purp ose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of thre e years from the appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid b efore each House of Parliament.  
  13 
 51. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect to t he provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, th e rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
[THE FIRST S CHEDULE ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
[THE SECOND SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
[THE THIRD SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
 
--------------------------The State of Mizoram Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE STATE OF MIZORAM ACT, 1986  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
PART II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE STATE  OF MIZORAM  
3. Establishment of the State of Mizoram . 
4. [Repealed ]. 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION  IN THE  LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
5. [Repealed ]. 
6. Allocation of sitting member . 
7. [Repealed ]. 
The House of the People  
8. Allocation of seat in the existing House of the People . 
9. Provision as to sitting member . 
The Legislative Assembly  
10. Provision as to Legislative Assembly . 
11. Delimitation of constituencies . 
12. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up -to-date. 
13. [Repealed ]. 
14. [Repealed ]. 
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
15. Common High Court for Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram . 
16. Provision as to advocates . 
17. Practice and procedure in the common High Court . 
18. Custody of seal of the common High Court . 
19. Form of writs and other processes . 
20. Powers of Judges . 
21. Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High Court . 
22. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court . 2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and 
Tripura to the common High Court . 
24. Interpretation . 
25. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to the common High Court . 
26. Saving . 
26A. Non-applicability of this Part to the States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura . 
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
27. Authori sation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature . 
28. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Mizoram . 
29. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Mizoram . 
30. Distribution of revenues . 
PART VI  
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
31. Property, assets, rights, liabilities, obligations, etc . 
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
32. Provision relating to All India Services . 
33. Provisions relating to other services . 
34. Other provisions as to services . 
35. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same posts . 
36. Advisory Committees . 
37. Prohibition of representation after certain period . 
38. Power of Cent ral Government to give directions . 
PART VIII  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
39. [Repealed ]. 
40. [Repealed ]. 
41. [Repealed ]. 
42. [Repealed ]. 
43. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptations . 
44. Power to construe laws . 
45. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc . 
46. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws . 
47. Power to remove difficulties . 
48. Power to make rules . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  REPEALED.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE REPEALED.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE REPEALED.  
THE FO URTH SCHEDULE REPEALED.  3 
 THE STATE OF MIZORAM ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1986  
[14th August , 1986 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of the State of Mizoram and for matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of t he Republic of India as follows: — 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short  title.—This Act may be called the State of Mizoram Act, 1986.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator ” means the administrator appointed by the President under Article 239 of the 
Constitution;  
(b) “appointed  day”1 means the day  which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint;  
(c) “article” means an article of the Constitution;  
(d) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by the President under 
Article 324; 
(e) “existing Union territory of Mizoram ” means the Union territory of Mizoram as existing 
imme diately before the appointed day;  
(f) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, notification 
or other instrument h aving, immediately before the appointed day , the force of law in the whole or 
any part of the existing Union territory of Mizoram;  
(g) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislative Assembly of 
the existing Union territor y of Mizoram, means a person who, immediately before the appointed day, 
is a member of that House or that Assembly;  
(h) “treasury” includes a sub -treasury.  
PART  II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE  STATE  OF MIZORAM  
3. Establishment of the State of Mizoram .—On and from the appointed day, there  shall be 
established a new State, to be known as the State of Mizoram,  comprising the territories which immedi ately 
before that day were comprised in the exist ing Union territory of Mizoram.  
4. [Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 
2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
PART  III 
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
5. [Amendment of Fourth Schedule to the Constitution ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 
2001 (30 of 2001) , s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
                                                           
1. 20th February , 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 72 (E), dated 11th February , 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
 4 
 6. Allocation of sitting member .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the sitting  member of the 
Council of States representing the existing Union territory of Mizoram  shall be deemed to have been duly 
elected under clause (4) of article  80 to fill the seat allotted to the State of Mizoram in that Council.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting  member  shall remain unaltered.  
7. [Amendment of section 27A of Act 43 of 1950 ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 2001  
(30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
The House of the People  
 8. Allocation of seat in the existing House of the People .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the 
allocation of seats to the S tate of Mizoram in the House of the People and the number of seats to be reserved 
for the Scheduled Tribes of that State  shall be one; and the First Schedule to the Representation of the 
People Act,  1950  (43 of 1950) , shall be deemed to be amended, accordingly . 
(2) On and from the appointed day, the parliamentary constituency of the existing Union territory of 
Mizoram  shall be deemed  to be the parliamentary constituency of the State of Mizoram and the Delimitation 
of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies  Order,  1976,  shall be construed accordingly.  
9. Provision as to sitting member .—The sitting  member of the House of the People representing the 
constituency which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the provisions of section  8 becomes the con stituency 
of the State of Mizoram,  shall be deemed to have been elected under  sub-clause ( a) of clause (1) of  
article  81 to the House of the People by that constituency.  
The Legislative Assembly  
10. Provision as to Legislative Assembly .—On and from the appointed day, the total number of seats 
in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Mizoram to be filled by persons, chosen by direct election from 
assembly  constituencies  shall be forty; and the Second Schedule to the Representation of  the People 
Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) , shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.  
11. Delimitation of constituencies .—(1) The Election Commission  shall, before the appointed day, 
and in the manner herein provided , distribute the seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Mizoram under section  10 to sing le-member territorial constituencies and delimit them, having regard to 
the provisions of the Constitution and to t he following provisions, namely: — 
(a) all constituencies  shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas, and in delimiting 
them regard  shall be had to physical features , existing boundaries of administrative units, fa cilities of 
communication and public convenience; and  
(b) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes  shall, as far as practicable , be 
located in areas where the proportion of their population to the total population is the largest.  
(2) For the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functions under  sub-section ( 1) the Election 
Commission  shall associate with itself as associate members, — 
(a) the sitting member of the House of the People referred to in section 9; and  
(b) such six of the members of the Legislative Assembly of the  existing Union territory of 
Mizoram  as the Speaker thereof may nominate : 
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any decision of the 
Election Commission.  
(3) If owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled, if 
practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together with the dissenting propos -
als, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof, in the Official Gazette and in 
such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and 5 
 suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifyi ng a date on or after which the proposals will be 
further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified;  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the 
date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or orders 
shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in any Court.  
(5) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to assembly constituencies 
shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly o f the existing Union territory of Mizoram.  
12. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up -to-date.—(1) The Election 
Commission may, from time to time, by notific ation in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistake in any  order made under section  11 or any error arising therein from 
inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division  mentioned in any such  order are or is 
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such  order  
up-to-date. 
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency  shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is issued, before the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory of Mizoram.  
13. [Amendment of Scheduled Castes Orders ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 2001   
(30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
14. [Amendment of Scheduled Tribes Orders ].—(1) Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid.  
(w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
PART  IV 
HIGH COURT  
15. Common High Court for Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram .—
(1) On and from the appointed day, — 
(a) there  shall be a common  High Court for the States of Assa m, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur,  
Tripura and Mizoram to be called the Gauhati  High Court (th e High Court of Assam, Nagaland,  
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram)  (hereinafter referred to as the common  High Court);  
(b) the  Judges of the  High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura holding 
office immediately before that day  shall, unless they have elected  otherwise, become on that day the 
Judges of the common  High Court.  
(2) The expenditure in respect of the  salaries and allowances of the Judges of the common  High 
Court  shall be allocated amongst the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and 
Tripura and the Union in such proportion as the President may, by  order, determine.  
16. Provision as t o advocates .—(1) On and from the appointed day, — 
(a) in the Advocates Act,  1961 (25 of 1961) , in section  3 in sub-section ( 1), for clause ( b), the 
following clause  shall be  substituted, namely: — 
“(b) for the States of Assam, Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Tripura and the 
Union territory of Arunachal Pradesh , to be known as the  Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram; ” 
(b) the  Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripua  shall be deemed to be 
the Bar Council of Assam, Naga land, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram.  6 
 (2) Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practise in 
the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura , shall be entitl ed to practise as an 
advocate in the common  High Court.  
(3) All persons who, immediately, before the appointed day, are advocates on the roll of the  Bar Council 
of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura , shall as from that day , become advocates on the roll 
of the  Bar Council of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram.  
(4) The right of audience in the common  High Court  shall be regulated in accordance with the like 
principles as, immediately before the appointed d ay, are in force with respect to the right of audience in 
the High Court of Assam, Nagaland,  Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura : 
Provided that as among the Advocates -General of the State s of Assam, Ma nipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, 
Nagaland and Tripura, the right of audience  shall be determined with reference to their dates  of enrolment as 
advocates.  
17. Practice and procedure in the common High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the 
law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the  High Court 
of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura  shall, with the necessary modifica tions, apply in 
relation to the common  High Court.  
18. Custody of seal of the common High Court .—The law in force immediately bef ore the appointed 
day with respect to the custody of the Seal of the  High Court  of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and 
Tripura  shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the 
common  High Court.  
19. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to the form of writs and  other  processes used, issued or awarded by the  High Court of Assam, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura  shall, with necessary modifi cations, apply with respect to the 
form of writs and  other  processes used, issued or awarded by the common  High Court.  
20. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the  High Court of Assam, Nagaland, 
Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura  and with respect to all matter , ancillary to the e xercise of those 
powers  shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the common  High Court.  
21. Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High Court .—(1) The principal seat 
of the common  High Court  shall be at the same place  at which the principal seat of the  High Court of 
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura is located immediately before the appointed day.  
(2) The President may, by notified  order, provide for the establishment of a permanent bench or benches 
of the common  High Court at one or more places within the territories to which the jurisdiction of the  High 
Court extends,  other  than the principal seat of the  High Court , and for any matters connected therewith : 
Provided that before issuing any  order under t his sub-section , the President  shall consult the Chief 
Justice of the common  High Court and the Governor of the State in which the bench or benches is or are 
proposed to be established.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in  sub-section ( 1) or sub-section (2), the Judges and division 
courts of the common  High Court may also sit at such  other  place or places in the States of Assam, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur, Tripura and Mizoram as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the 
Governor of the State c oncerned, appoint.  
22. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force immediately before the appointed 
day relating to appeals to the  Supreme Court from the  High  Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, 
Manipur and Tripura and the Judges and  division courts thereof  shall,  with the necessary modifications, 
apply in relation to the common  High Court.  
23. Transfer of proceedings from the High Court of Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur 
and Tripura to the common High Court .—(1) All proceedings pending in the  High Court of Assam, 
Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura immediately before the appointed day  shall, from such day, 
stand transferred to the common  High Court.  7 
 (2) Every proceeding transferred under  sub-section ( 1) shall be disposed of by the common  High Court 
as if such proceeding was entertained by the  High Court.  
24. Interpretation .—For the purposes of section  23,— 
(a) proceedings  shall be deemed to be  pending in a court until that court has disposed of all issues 
between the  parties,  including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the  proceedings 
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court,  applications for review, 
petitions for revision and petitions for writs; and  
(b) reference s to a  High  Court  shall be construed as  including references to a Judge or division court 
thereof; and references to an  order made by a court or a Judge  shall be construed as  including references 
to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that  court or Judge.  
25. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to the common High Court .—Any 
person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practi se in the  High Court of 
Assam, Nagaland, Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura  and was authori sed to appear or to act in any 
proceedings transferred from the said  High Court to the common  High Court under section  23 shall have the 
right to appear or to act, as the case may be, in the common  High Court in relation to those proceeding s. 
26. Saving .—Nothing in this Part  shall affect the application to the common  High Court of any 
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part  shall have effect  subject to any provision that may be made on 
or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or  other  authority having 
power to make such provisions.  
1[26A. Non-applicability of this Part to the States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura .—On 
and from the date of commencement of the North -Eastern Areas ( Reorganisation) and Other Related 
Laws (Amendment) Act, 2012, the provisions of sections 15 to 26 (both inclusive) shall not apply to the 
States of Meghalaya, Manipur and Tripura.]  
PART  V 
AUTHORI SATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
27. Authori sation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature .—(1) The President may, 
at any time before the appointed day, authori se by order such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the 
State of Mizoram as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with the 
appointed day, pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative A ssembly of the State  of 
Mizoram : 
Provided that the Governor of Mizoram may, after the appointed day, authori se by order such further 
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Mizoram for any period not 
extending beyond the said period of six  months.  
(2) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor of Mizoram  shall make separate  orders 
under  sub-section ( 1) in respect of periods falling in different financial years.  
28. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Mizoram .—(1) The reports 
of the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India referred to in section  49 of the Government of Union 
Territories Act,  1963  (20 of 1963) , relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory of Mizoram in  
respect of any period  prior to the appointed day,  shall be  submitted to the Governor of Mizoram who  shall 
cause them to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the State.  
(2) The Government may, by  order,— 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of  the existing Union territory of 
Mizoram on any service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial 
year 1986 -87 or in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service 
and for that year as disclosed in the reports referred to in  sub-section ( 1) to have been duly authori sed, 
and 
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said reports.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2012, s. 12 (date to be notified).  8 
 29. Allowances and privileges of Governor of Mizoram .—The allowances and privile ges of the 
Governor of Mizoram  shall, until provision in that behalf is made by Parliament by law under clause (3) of 
Article  158, be such as the President may, by  order, determine.  
30. Distribution of revenues .—The President  shall, by  order, determine the  grants -in-aid of the 
revenues of the State of Mizoram and the  share of that State in the Union duties of excise, estate duty and 
taxes on income and for that purpose amend thereby the relevant provisions of the Additional Duties of 
Excise (Goods of Specia l (Importance) Act,  1957  (58 of 1957) , the Union Duties of Excise (Distribution) 
Act, 1979  (24 of 1979) , the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act,  1962  (9 of 1962)  and the Constitution 
(Distribution of Revenues)  Order,  1985  in such manner as he thinks fit.  
PART  VI 
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
31. Property, assets, rights , liabilities, obligations, etc .—(1) All such property and assets within the 
existing Union territory of Mizoram as are held immediately before the appointed day by the Union for 
purposes of governance of that Union territory  shall, on and from that day, pass to the State of Mizoram 
unless the purposes for which such property and assets  are so held are Union purposes : 
Provided that the cash balances in the treasuries in the Union territory of Mizoram bef ore the appointed 
day shall, as from that day, vest in the State of Mizoram.  
(2) All rights, liabilities and obligations (other than those relatable to, or in connection with , a Union 
purpose), whether arising out of any contract or  otherwise , which are, immedia tely before the appointed  
day,— 
(a) the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Central Government arising out of, or in connection 
with, the governance of the Union territory of Mizoram; or  
(b) the  rights, liabilities and obligations of the Administrator of the existing Union territory of 
Mizoram in  his capacity as such, or of the Gove rnment of that Union territory,  
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of the State 
of Mizoram.  
(3) The right to recover arrears of — 
(a) any tax or duty being a tax or duty enumerated in the State List in the Seventh Schedule to the 
Constitution; or  
(b) any duty referred to in article  268; or  
(c) any tax under the Central Sales Ta x Act,  1956  (74 of 1956) , 
which have fallen due in the existing Union territory of Mizoram  shall pass to the State of Mizoram.  
(4) The provisions of this section  shall n ot apply to or in relation to, — 
(a) any institution, undertaking or  project the expenditure in relation to which is immediately be fore 
the appointed day,  met from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India;  
(b) any property which has been placed by the Union at the disposal of the administration of the 
existing Union terr itory of Mizoram  subject to the condition that the ownership thereof will continue to 
vest in the Union.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “liability” includes liability in respect of any civil deposit , local fund deposit, charitable 
or other  endowment, provident fund account, pension or actionable wrong;  
(b) “Union purposes ” means the purposes of Government relatable to any of the matters  mentioned 
in the Union List.  
  9 
 PART  VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
32. Provision relating to All India Services .—Every member of the Indian Administrative Service, 
the Indian Police Service and the Indian Forest Service who, immediately before the appointed day, is 
holding any post in the existing Union territory of Mizoram shall, until otherwise directed by the Cent ral 
Government, be deemed to be on deputation, on and from the appointed day, to the Government of the 
State of Mizoram on the same terms and conditions of service as are applicable to him  under the relevant 
cadre rules : 
Provided that the period of such de putation shall in no case extend beyond a period of three years 
from the appointed day.  
Explanation .—In this section, “cadre rules ” means the Indian Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 
1954, the Indian Police Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954 or the Indian For est Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966, as 
the case may be.  
33. Provisions relating to other services .—(1) Every person who immediately before the ap pointed 
day is serving in connection with the affairs of the Union under the administrative control of the 
Administrator of the Union territory of Mizoram shall, unless otherwise directed by an order of the 
Central Government, be deemed to have been alloca ted for service as from that day in connection with the 
affairs of the State of Mizoram : 
Provided that no directions shall be issued under this section after the expiry of a period of one year 
from the appointed day.  
(2) The provisions of this section shal l not apply in relation to persons to whom the provisions of  
section 32 apply.  
34. Other provisions as to services .—(1) Nothing in this section or section 33 shall be deemed to 
affect  on or after the appointed day the operations of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the 
Constitution in relation to determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with 
the affairs of the State of Mizoram : 
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day in the case of 
any person referred to in section 33 shall not be varied to his disadvantage except with the previous 
approval of the Central Government.  
(2) All services prior to the  appointed day rendered by a person deemed to have been allocated under 
section 33 in connection with the administration of the Union territory of Mizoram, shall be deemed to 
have been rendered in connection with the affairs of the State of Mizoram for the  purposes of the rules 
regulating his conditions of service.  
35. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same posts .—Every person who immediately before 
the appointed day, is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affairs 
of the Union territory of Mizoram shall continue to hold the same post or office and shall be deemed, on 
and from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or other 
appropriate authority in, the State of Mizoram on the same terms and conditions of appointment and on 
the same tenure as he was holding the post or off ice immediately before that day : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority on or after the 
appointe d day from passing in relation to such person any order affecting his continuance in such post or 
office.  
36. Advisory Committees .—The Central Government may, b y order, establish one or more Advisory 
Committees for the purpos e of assisting it in regard to — 
(a) the discharge of its functions under this Part; and  
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
Part and the proper consideration of any representations made by such persons.  10 
 37. Prohibition of re presentation after certain period .—Notwithstanding anything to the con trary 
contained in any law or rule for the time being in force, no representation shall lie against any order 
passed under the provisions of this Part on the expiry of three months from  the date of publication or 
service , whic hever is earlier, of such order : 
Provided that the Central Government may, suo motu  or otherwise and for reasons to be recorded,  
re-open any matter and pass such orders thereon as may appear to it to be appropriate  if it is satisfied that 
it is necessary so to do in order to prevent any miscarriage of justice to any affected person.  
38. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions to the Government of the State of Mizoram as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose 
of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the State Government shall comply with such 
directions.  
PART  VIII 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISION  
39. [Amendment of Article 210, Article 239A, Article 240, Article 244, the Fifth Schedule and the 
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 
and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
40. [Amendment of Act 28 of 1958 ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
41. [Amendment of Act 20 of 1963 ].—Rep. by s . 2 and the First Schedule, ibid . (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
42. [Amendment of Act 84 of 1971 ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid . (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
43. Continuance of existing laws and their adaptations .—(1) All laws in force, immediately before 
the appointed day, in the existing Union territory of Mizoram shall continue to be in force in the State of 
Mizoram until altered, repealed or amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.  
(2) For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of Mizoram of any law made 
before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, within two years from that day, by order, 
make such adaptations and modifications of the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be 
necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law shall have effect subject to the adapta tions and 
modifications so made until altered, repealed or ame nded by a competent Legislature or other competent 
authority.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means, as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, th e Central 
Government, and as respects any other law, the Government of the State of Mizoram.  
44. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under section 43 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in 
relation to the State of Mizoram, construe the law in su ch manner not affecting the sub stance as may be 
necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority, as the case may be.  
45. Provisions as to con tinuance of courts, etc .—All courts and tribunals and all authorities 
discharging lawful functions throughout the existing Union territory of Mizoram or any part thereof 
immediately before the appointed day shall, unless their continuance is inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act or until other provision is made by a c ompetent legislature or other competent authority, continue 
to exercise their respective functions.  
46. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
47. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may , by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  11 
 48. Power to m ake rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under the section shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each 
House of Parliam ent while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and it, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid both H ouses agree in making any modifica tion 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica tion or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
[THE FIRST SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
[THE SECOND SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
[THE THIRD SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
--------------------------The Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1986--------------------------
1 
 THE SWADESHI COTTON MILLS COMPANY LIMITED (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1986  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
3. Transfer and vesting of the textile undertakings . 
4. General effect of vesting . 
5. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities . 
6. Transfer of any textile undertaking or part thereof to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation . 
7. Shares to be issued by National Textile Corporation for the value of assets transferred to it by the 
Central Government . 
 
CHAPTER  III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount . 
9. Payment of further amounts . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
10. Management,  etc., of the textile undertakings . 
10A. Special provision for disposal of assets of the textile undertakings in certain circum stances.  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of the textile undertakings to deliver all assets, etc.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISION S RELATI NG TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
12. Continuance of employees of the textile undertakings . 
13. Provident and other funds.  
14. Transfer of employees to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation.  
 
 
 2 
 CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
SECTIONS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
16. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
17. Certain powers of the National Textile Corporation.  
18. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
19. Priorities of claims.  
20. Examination of claims.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims.  
22. Disbu rsement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect.  
25. Assumption of liability.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless  ratified by National Textile Corporation.  
27. Penalties.  
28. Offences by companies.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Delegation of powers.  
31. Power to make rules . 
32. Power to remove difficulties  
33. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE SWADESHI COTTON MILLS COMPANY LIMITED  (ACQUISITION AND 
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1986  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1986  
[30th May , 1986 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of certain textile undertakings of the Swadeshi  
Cotton Mills Company Limited, with a view to securing the proper management of such 
undertakings so as to subserve the interests of the general public by ensuring the continued 
manufacture, production and distribution of different variet ies of cloth and y arn and there by 
to give effect to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clauses ( b) 
and ( c) of article 39 of the Constitution and for matters connected t herewith or incidental 
thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Swadeshi  Cotton Mills Company Limited has, through its six textile undertakings, 
been engaged in the manufacture and production of different varieties of cloth and yarn;  
AND WHEREAS the management of the said textile undertakings was taken over by the Cent ral 
Gove rnment under section 18 AA of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) ; 
AND WHEREAS large sums of money have been invested with a view to making the said textile 
undertakings viable;  
AND WHEREAS further investment of very large sums  of money is necessary for the purpose of 
securing the optimum utilisation of the available facilities for the manufacture, production and              
distribu tion of cloth and yarn by the said textile undertakings of the Company;  
AND WHEREA S such investment is also necessary for securing the continued employment of the 
workmen employed in the said textile undertakings;  
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary in the public interest to acquire the said textile undertakings of the 
Swadeshi Cotton Mills Comp any Limited to ensure that the interests of the general public are served by 
the continuance by the said undertakings of the Company of the manufacture, production and distribution 
of different varieties of cloth and yarn which are vital to the needs of th e country ; 
AND WHEREAS  such acquisition is for giving effect to the policy of the State towards securing the 
principles specified in clauses ( a) and ( b) of article 39 of the Constitution;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -seventh Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Swadeshi Cotton Mills 
Company Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1986.  
(2) The provisions of sections 27 and 28 shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions 
of this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April, 1985.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of April, 1985;  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 15;  
(c) “Company ” means the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Limited, Kanpur, a company within 
the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and having its registered office at Swadeshi 
House, Civil Lines, Kanpur, in the State of Uttar Pradesh;  
(d) “date of taking over ” means the date on which the management of the textile undertakings of 
the Company was taken over by the Central Government by virtue of the order of the Government of 
India in the late Ministry of Industrial Development No. S.O. 265(E), dated the 13th Apr il, 1978, 4 
 made under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 18 -AA of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951) ; 
(e) “National Textile Corporation ” means the National Textile Corporation Limited, a company 
formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “Ordinance ” means the Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company L imited (Acquisition and Transfer 
of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1986  (5 of 198 6); 
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “specified date, ” in relation to any provision of this Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette and in the newspapers circulating in the 
locality in which the registered office of the Company is situated, specify for the p urposes of that 
provision and different dates may be specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(j) “Subsidiary Textile Corporation ” means a textile corporation formed by the National Textile 
Corporation as its subsidiary;  
(k) “textile undertakings ” means the six textile undertakings  of the Company specified below :— 
(i) the Swadeshi Cotton Mills, Kanpur;  
(ii) the Swadeshi Cotton Mills, Pondicherry;  
(iii) the Swadeshi Cotton Mills, Naini;  
(iv) the Swadeshi Cotton Mills, Maunath Bhanjan;  
(v) the Udaipu r Cotton Mills, Udaipur;  
(vi) the Rae Bareli Textile Mills, Rae Bareli;  
(l) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Companies Act,                
1956  (1 of 1956) , shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that A ct. 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
3. Transfer and vesting of the textile undertakings .—(1) On the appointed day, every textile 
undertaking and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to every such textile undertaking 
shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and shall vest in, the Central Government.  
(2) Every such textile undertaking which stands vested in the Central Government by virtue of             
sub-section ( 1) shall , immediately after i t has so vested, stand transferred to, and vested in, the National 
Textile Corporation.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The textile undertakings referred to in section 3 shall be deemed to 
include all assets, rights, lease holds, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and 
immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash 
balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments and book debts pertaining to the textile un dertakings 
and all o ther rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the 
appointed day in the ownership , possession, power or control of the Company in relation to the said 
undertakings, whether within or outside India, and all books o f account, registers and all other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All property as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any  trust, obligation, mortgage, 
charge, lien and all other incumbrances affecting it, and any attachment, injunction or decree or order of 
any court or other authority restricting the use of such property in any manner shall be deemed to have 
been withdrawn.  5 
 (3) Where any licence  or other instrument had been granted at any time before the appointed day to 
the Company in relation to the textile undertakings by the Central Government or a State Government or 
any local authority, the National Textile Corporation shall, on and from su ch day, be deemed to be 
substituted in such licence or other instrument in place of the Company as if such licence or other 
instrument had been granted to the National Textile Corporation and that Corporation shall hold it for the 
remainder of the period o f which the Company to which it was granted would have held it under the terms 
thereof.  
(4) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in rela tion to, any such property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other interest.  
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to  in 
sub-section ( 2) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any  such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interests , payment of the  mortgage 
money or ot her dues, in whole or in part, out of the amounts specified in section 8 and section  9, but no 
such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any property which has  vested in 
the Central Government.  
(6) If, on the appointed day,  any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
property which has vested in the Central Government, under section 3, instituted or preferred by or 
against the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be,  in any way, prejudicially 
affected by reason of the transfer of the textile undertakings or of anything contained in this Act, but the 
suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the National 
Textile Corporation . 
5. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability of the Company in 
relation to the textile undertakings in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be the liability 
of the Company and shall be enforceable against i t and not against the Central Government of the 
National Textile Corporation.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other section of this Act, no 
liability of the Company in relation to the textile undertakings, in respect of any period prior to the 
appointed day shall be enforceable against the Central Government or the National Textile 
Corporation;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other auth ority in relation to any textile 
undertaking, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or dispute which arose 
before that day shall be enforceable against the Central Government or the National Textile 
Corporation;  
(c) no liability i ncurred by the Company in relation to any textile undertaking before the 
appointed day, for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being in force, shall be 
enforceable against the Central Government or the National Textile Corporation.  
6. Transfer of any textile undertaking or part thereof to a Subsidiary Textile                  
Corporation .—(1) The National Textile Corporation may, by order in writing, transfer any of the textile 
undertakings or part thereof to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation and any such transfer shall be subject to 
such terms and conditions as may be specified in the said order.  
(2) The Subsidiary Textile Corporation shall, on and from the date of such transfer, be deemed to be 
substituted in the licence or other instrument referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 4 in place of the 
National Textile Corporation as if such licence or other instrument had been granted to the Subsidiary 
Textile Corporation, and shall hold such licence or other instrument for the remai nder of the period for 
which the National Textile Corporation would have held such licence or other instrument.  6 
 (3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, references in this Act to the National Textile 
Corporation shall, in respect of any textil e undertaking or part thereof which is transferred to a Subsidiary 
Textile Corporation, be construed as references to the Subsidiary Textile Corporation.  
7. Shares to be issued by National Textile Corporation for the value of assets transferred to it by 
the Central Government .—An amount equal to the value of the assets of the textile undertakings 
transferred to, and vested in , the National Textile Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 shall be 
deemed to be the contribution made by the Central Government to the equity capital of the National 
Textile Corporation; and for the contribution so made, the National Textile Corporation shall issue              
(if necessary after amending its memorandum and articles of association) to the Central Government paid 
up shares, in its equity capital having a face value equal to the amount specified in section 8.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting in the Central Government , under section 3, 
of the textile undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to 
such undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company in cash and  in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees twenty -four crores and thirty -two lakhs.  
9. Payment of further amounts .—(1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of the 
textile undertakings, there shall be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, an amount 
calculated at the rate of rupees ten thousand per annum for the period commencing on the date on which 
the management of the textile undertakings of the Company was taken over in pursuance of the order 
made by the Central Government under section 18AA of the Industries (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951)  and ending on the appointed day.  
(2) In consideration of the re trospective operation of the provisions of sections 3 and 4, there shall 
also be given by the Central Government to the Company, in cash, an amount calculated at the rate of 
rupees ten thousand per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date 
on which the Ordinance was promulgated.  
(3) The amount specified in section 8 and the amounts determined in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall carry simple interest at the rate of four per cent . per annum for the period 
commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on whi ch payment of such amounts is made by 
the Central Government to the Commissioner . 
(4) The amounts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall be 
given by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 8.  
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the Company in relation to 
the textile undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall be discharged 
from the amount referred to in section 8 and also from the amounts determined under sub -sections ( 1), (2) 
and ( 3), in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTER  IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
10. Management, etc., of the textile undertakings .—The National Textile Corporation or any 
person which that Corporation may, by order in writing, specify, shall be entitled to exercise the powers 
of general superintendence, direction, control and management of the affairs and business of a textile 
undertaking, the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to which have vested in that 
Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, and do all such things as the Company is authorised to 
exercise and do.  
1[10A. Special provision for disposal of assets of the textile undertakings in certain                     
circum stances .—If the National Textile  Corporation considers it necessary or expedient for the better 
management,  modernisation, restructuring or revival o f a textile undertaking so to do, it may, with the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 1995, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -6-1995).  7 
 previous sanction of the Central Government, transfer, mortgage,  sell or otherwise dispose of any land, 
plant, machinery or  any other assets of  any of the textile undertakings : 
Provided  that the proceeds o f no such transfer, mortgage, sale or disposal shall be  utilised for any 
purpose other than the purpose for which the sanction of the  Central Government has been obtained.]  
11. Duty of persons in charge of management of the textile undertakings to deliver all assets, 
etc.—On the vesting of a textile undertaking in the National Textile Corporation, all persons in charge of 
the management of a textile undertaking immediately before such vesting shall be bound to deliver to the 
National Textile Corporation, al l assets, books of account, registers or other documents in their custody 
relating to the textile undertaking.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
12. Continuance of employees of the textile undertakings .—(1) Every person  who has been, 
immediately before the appointed day, employed by the Company in relation to a textile undertaking, 
shall become, on and from the appointed day, an employee of the National Textile Corporation and shall 
hold office or service in that Corpora tion with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and 
other like matters as would have been admissible to him if the rights in relation to such textile undertaking 
had not been transferred to, and vested in, the National Textile Corporation,  and shall continue to do so 
unless and until his employment in that Corporation is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms 
and conditions of employment are duly altered by that Corporation.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial  Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1974) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in a textile undertaking to the National Textile Corporation shall not entitle such officer or other emp loyee 
to any compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
13. Provident and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in a textile undertaking, the 
moneys relatable to the officers and other employees whose services have been transferred by or under 
this Act to the National Textile Corporation s hall, out of the moneys standing, on the appointed day , to 
the credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund , stand transferred to  and vest in, 
the National Textile Corporation.  
(2) The moneys which stand transferred under sub -sectio n (1) to the National Textile Corporation, 
shall be dealt with by that Corporation in su ch manner as may, be prescribed.  
14. Transfer of employees to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation .—Where any textile undertak ing 
or any part thereof is transferred under this Act to a Subsidiary Textile Corporation, every person referred 
to in section 12 shall, on and from the date of such transfer, become an employee of the Subsidiary 
Textile Corporation, and the provisions of sections 12 and 13 shall apply to such employ ee of the 
National Textile Corporation as if references in the said sections to the National Textile Corporation were 
references to the Subsidiary Textile Corporation.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
15. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The  Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable under sections 8 and 9 to the Company, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist  the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to  
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and different persons may be 
authorised  to exercise different powers.  8 
 (3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the  
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have  
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authoris ation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India . 
16. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thir ty days from the specified date  pay in cash to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
Company, an amount equal to the amount specified in section 8 and the amounts payable to the Company 
under section 9.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by th e Central Government in favour of the Commissioner in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account , and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) The interests accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in 
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the Company.  
17. Certain powers of the National Textile Corporation .—(1) The National Textile Corporation 
shall be entitled to receive , up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due 
to a textile undertaking, realised after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a 
period prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The National Textile  Corporation may make a claim to  the Commissioner with regard to every  
payment made by it as the authorised person in relation to a textile undertaking after the appointed day  
but before the date on which the Ordi nance was promulgated for discharging any liability of the Company  
in relation to any period prior to the appointed day, and every such claim shall have priority, in 
accordance  with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to whi ch such liability 
has been  discharged by the authorised person.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities in relation to a textile undertaking in respect 
of any period prior to the appointed day which have not been discharged by the authorised person shall be 
the liabilities of the Company.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “authorised person ” means the person authorised to 
take over the management of any textile undertaking in pursuance of the order of the Gover nment of India 
in the late Ministry of Industrial Development No. S.O. 265(E), dated the 13th April, 1978, issued under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 18AA of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act,             
1951  (65 of 1951) . 
18. Claims to be  made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
in relation to the textile undertakings with regard to any of the matters specified in the Schedule shall 
prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thir ty days from the specified date : 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days, but not t hereafter.  
19. Priorities of claims .—The claims arising out of matters specified in the Schedule shall have 
priorities in accordance with the following principles namely :— 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall  have 
precedence over Category III and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories, shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly; and  
(c) the question of discharging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  9 
 20. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made under section 18, the Commissioner 
shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with such order.  
(2) If on examination of the claims against the Company , the Commissioner is of the opinion that the 
amounts paid to him under this Act for payment to such Company are not sufficient to meet the liabilities 
specified in any lower category, he shall not be required to examine any claim in respect of such lower 
category.  
21. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims against the Company with 
reference to the priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a date on or before which 
every claimant shall file the proof of his cla im. 
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’s notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the country 
and in one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commission er may consider 
suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with the 
Commissioner within the period specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the perio d specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded from the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim a nd after giving the claimant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, by order, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge o f his functions, including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings and shall, 
for the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908),  while trying a suit, in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavit;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding wi thin the 
meaning of sections 193  and 228 of the India n Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ). 
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner, may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered of fice of the Company is situated : 
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a H igh Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
such appeal shall lie to the High Court of Allahabad and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not 
less than two Judges of that High Court.  
22. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—(1) After admitting a claim 
against the Company under this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the 
Commissioner to the person or persons to whom such amount is due and on such payment, the liability of 
the Company in respect of suc h claim shall stand discharged.  
(2) If, out of the moneys paid to him in relation to the textile undertakings, there is a balance left  after 
meeting the liabilities as specified in the Schedule , the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to  the 
Company.  10 
 23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited with the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner before his office is finally wound up, t o the general revenue account of the Central 
Government, but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and the 
order,  if any, for payment of the claim being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
25. Assumption of liability .—(1) Where any liability of the Company  in relation to any textile 
undertaking arising out of any item specified in Part I of the Schedule is not discharged fully by the 
Commissioner out of the amounts paid to him under this Act, the Commissioner shall intimate in writing 
to the Central Governm ent the extent of the liability which remains undischarged and that liability shall 
be assumed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order, direct the National Textile Corporation to take over the 
liability assumed by the Central Go vernment under sub -section ( 1), and on receipt of such direction, it 
shall be the duty of that Corporation to discharge such liability.  
26. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by National Textile Corporation .—Every 
contract, entered into by the Company in relation to any textile undertaking which has vested in the 
National Textile Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, for any service, sale or supply and in 
force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of a period of one hundre d and 
eighty days from the date on which the Ordinance was promulgated, cease to have effect unless such 
contract is, before the expiry of that period, ratified in writing by the National Textile Corporation, and in 
ratifying such con tract, the National Textile Corporation may make such alterations or modifications 
therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the National Textile Corporation shall not omit to ratify a contract and shall not make 
any alteration or modification in a contra ct— 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the textile undertaking concerned, and  
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable opportun ity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
27. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having  in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of any of the textile 
undertakings, wrongfully withholds such property from the National Textile Corporation; or  
(b) wrongfully  obtains possession of, or retains any property forming part of any of the textile 
undertakings; or  
(c) wilfu lly withholds or fails to furnish to the National Textile Corporation or any person or body 
of persons specified by that Corporation, any document or inventory relating to any of the textile 
undertakings which may be in his possession, custody or control; or  
(d) wilfu lly fails to deliver to the National Textile Corporation any inventory or property and 
assets forming part of any of the textile undert akings; or  11 
 (e) fails to deliver to the National Textile Corporation or any person or body of persons specified 
by that Corporation, any assets, books of account, registers or other documents in his possession, 
custody or control relating to any of the text ile undertakings; or  
(f) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of any of the textile undertakings or 
prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reason to believe to be false or grossly 
inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imp risonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees.  
28. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be preceded against and punished accordingly:  
Provid ed that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act, has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
office of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means anybody corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of, or other person authorised by, that Government 
or the National Textile Corporation or any Subsidiary Textile Corporation or any officer of, or other 
person au thorised by, such Corporation for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of, or 
other person authorised by, that Government, or the National Textile Corporation or any Subsidiary 
Textile Corporation or any officer of, or other person authorised by, such Corporation for any damage 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under t his 
Act. 
30. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may by notification, direct that all or any of 
the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by this section and sections 
31 and 32, may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government . 
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gen erality of the foregoing powers,  such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the time within which , and the manner in which, an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 4) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or other fund, referred to in                        
sub-section ( 2) of section 13 shall be dealt with;  12 
 (c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, b efore each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the success ive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, th at 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
32. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which the Ordinance was promulgated.  
33. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Swadeshi Cotton Mills Company Limited (Acquisition and 
Transfer of Undertakings) Ordinance, 1986  (5 of  1986), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 18, 19, 20  (1), 21 (1), 22 (2) and 25  (1)] 
ORDER OF PRIOR ITIES  FOR THE DISCHARGE OF LIABI LITIES OF THE  COMPANY  
PART I  
Category I  
Employees ’ dues on account of unpaid salaries, wages, provident fund, Employees ’ State Insurance 
contribution or premiums relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India and any other amounts due 
to employees in respect of any period whether before or after the date of taking over of the textile 
undertakings.  
Category II  
Secured loans obtained from nationalised banks and public financial institutions, other than the 
National Textile Corporation, in respect of any period whether before or after the date of taking over of 
the textile undertakings.  
Category III  
Any credit ava iled of for trade or manufacturing purposes during the post -take over management 
period.  
Category IV  
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rate or other dues to the Central Government, State Government and local 
authorities for the period after the date of taking over o f the textile undertakings.  
PART II  
Category V  
Revenue, taxes, cesses, rate or other dues to the Central Government, State Government and local 
authorities or State Electricity Boards for the pre -take over management period . 
Category VI  
Any credit availed of for trade or manufacturing purposes during the pre -take over management 
period.  
 
