--------------------------The All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION ACT,  1987  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER  II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COUNCIL  
3. Establishment of the Council.  
4. Term of office of members.  
5. Meetings of the Council . 
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Council.  
7. Temporary association of persons with the Council for particular purposes.  
8. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Council.  
9. Authentication  of orders and other instruments of the Council.  
 
CHAPTER  III 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  
10. Functions of the Council . 
11. Inspection . 
CHAPTER  IV 
BODIES OF THE COUNCIL  
12. Executive Committee of the Council . 
13. Boards of Studies.  
14. Regional Committees . 
CHAPTER  V 
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
15. Payment to the Council . 
16. Fund of the Council . 
17. Budget . 
18. Annual report . 
19. Accounts and audit . 
  2 
 CHAPTER  VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
 
20. Directions by the Central Government . 
21. Power to supersede the Council . 
22. Power to make rules . 
23. Power to make  regulations.  
24. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
25. Power to remove difficulties .  3 
 THE ALL INDIA COUNCIL FOR TECHNICAL EDUCATION ACT,  1987  
ACT NO. 52 OF 1987  
[23rd December , 1987 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of an All India Council for Technical Education with a view 
to the proper planning and co -ordinated development of the technical education system 
throughout the country, the promot ion of qualitative improve ment  of such education  in relation 
to planned quantitative growth  and the regula tion and proper maintenance of norms and 
standards in the technical education system and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
 PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called t he All India Council fo r Technical 
Education Act, 1987 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context  otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Commission ” means the University Grants Commission established under section  4 of the 
University Grants Commission Act,  1956  (3 of 1956) ; 
(b) “Council ” means the All India Council for Technical Education established under section  3; 
(c) “Fund ” means the F und of the Council constituted under section  16; 
(d) “member ” means a  member of the Council and includes the Chairman and Vice -Chairman;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this  Act; 
(f) “regulations ” means regulations made under this Act;  
(g) “technical education ” means programmes of education, research and training in engineering 
technology, architecture, town planning, management, pharmacy and applied arts and crafts and 
such other  programme or areas as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Council, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, declare;  
(h) “technical institution ” means an institution, not being a University, which offers courses or 
programmes of  technical education, and  shall include such  other  institutions as the Central Government 
may, in consultation with the Council, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette, declare as technical 
institutions;  
(i) “University ” means a University defined under clause ( f) of section  2 of the University Grants 
Commission Act,  1956  (3 of 1956)  and includes an institution deemed to be a University under 
section  3 of that Act.   
                                                           
1. 28th March, 1988, vide notification No. S.O. 317 (E), dated 28th March, 1988, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                      
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 CHAPTER  II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE COUNCIL  
3. Establishment of the Council .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Govern ment may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there  shall be established a Council by the name of the All India 
Council for Technical Education.  
(2) The Council  shall be a body  corporate by the name afores aid, having perpetual succes sion and a 
common seal, with power to  contract and  shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Council  shall be at Delhi and the Council may, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government, establis h offices at  other  places in India.  
(4) The Council  shall consist of t he following  members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) a Vice -Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(c) the Secretary to the Governmen t of India in the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with 
education, ex officio ; 
(d) the Educational Adviser (General) to the Government of India, ex officio ; 
(e) the Chairme n of the four Regional Committees, ex officio ; 
(f) the Chairmen of, — 
(i) the All India Board of Vocational Education, ex officio ; 
(ii) the All India Board of Technician Education, ex officio ; 
(iii) the All India Board of Under -graduate Studies in Engineering and Technology, ex officio ; 
(iv) the All India Board of Post -graduate Education and Research in Engineering and 
Technology, ex officio ; 
(v) the All India Board of Management Studies, ex officio ; 
(g) one member to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of Finance of 
the Central Government;  
(h) one  member to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Ministry of Science and 
Technology of the Central Government;  
(i) four members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation to represent the Minis tries 
and the Department s of the Central Government,  other  than those specified in clauses ( g) and  (h); 
(j) two members of Parliament of whom one  shall be elected by the House of the People and one by 
the Council of States;  
(k) eight members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation in the alphabeti cal order to 
represent the S tates and the Union territories : 
Provided that an appointment under this clause shall be made on the recommendation of the 
Government of the State, or as the case may be, the Union territory concerne d; 
(l) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the organisations in the 
field of industry and commerce;  5 
 (m) seven members to be appointed by the Ce ntral Government to represent, — 
(i) the Central Advisory Board of Education;  
(ii) the Association of Indian Universities;  
(iii) the Indian Society for Technical Education;  
(iv) the Council of the Indian Institutes of Technology;  
(v) the Pharmacy Council of India;  
(vi) the Council of Architecture;  
(vii) the National Productivity Council;  
(n) four members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the professional bodies in 
the field of technical and management education;  
(o) not more than two members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent such 
interests  not covered by the foregoing clauses as the Central Government may deem fit;  
(p) the Chairman, University Grants Commission, ex officio ; 
(q) the Director, Institute of Applied Manpower Research, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(r) the Director -General, Indian Coun cil of Agricultural Research, ex officio ; 
(s) the Director -General, Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, ex officio ; 
(t) Member -Secretary to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything  contained in  sub-section ( 4),— 
(a) the first Chairman shall be the Minister of Human Resource Development of the Central 
Government;  
(b) the first Vice -Chairman of the Council shall be the Minister of State for Education of the Central 
Government;  
(c) the first Member -Secretary of the Counc il shall be the Educational Adviser (Technical) of the 
Central Government.  
4. Term of office of members .—(1) The term of office of a  member,  other  than an ex officio  member, on 
the first constitution of the Council  shall be five years and thereafter three years.  
(2) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman, whether by reason of  his death, resignation 
or inability to discharge  his functions owing to illness or  other  incapacity, the Vice -Chairman holding office 
as such for the time being  shall  act as the Chairman and  shall, unless any  other  person is appointed earlier as 
the Chairman, hold office of the Chairman for the remainder of the term of office of the person in whose 
place he is to so act.  
(3) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice -Chairman or any  other member, whether by reason 
of his death, resignation or inability to discharge  his functions owing to illness or  other  incapacity, such 
vacancy  shall be filled by the Central Government by making a fresh appointment and the  member so  
appointed  shall hold office for the remainder of the term of office of the person in  whose place he is so 
appointed.  6 
 (4) The Vice -Chairman  shall perform such functions as may be assigned to  him by the Chairman from 
time to time.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by the  members in the discharge of their functions  shall be such as may 
be prescribed.  
5. Meetings of the Council .—(1) The Council  shall  meet at such time and places, and  shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its  meetings (includ ing the quorum at 
such meetings) as may be provid ed by regulations : 
Provided that the Council shall  meet at least once every year.  
(2) The Chairman and in  his absence the Vice -Chairman  shall preside at the  meetings of the Council.  
(3) If for any reason the Chairman or the Vice -Chairman is unable to attend any  meeting of the Council , 
any other member chosen by the  members present at the  meeting  shall preside at the  meeting.  
(4) All questions which come up before any  meeting of the Council  shall be decided by a  majority of the 
votes of the  members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in  his 
absence, the person presiding,  shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
6. Vacancies, e tc., not to i nvalidate proceedings of the Council .—No act or proceeding of the Council 
shall be invalid  merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of , the Council; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a  member of the Council; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of the case.  
7. Temporary association of persons with the Council for particular purposes .—(1) The  Council 
may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by regulations, any 
person whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying out any of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) A person associated with it by the Council under  sub-section ( 1) for any purpose  shall hav e a right to 
take part in the discussions relevant to that purpose, but  shall not have a right to vote at a  meeting of the 
Council, and  shall not be a  member for any  other  purpose.  
8. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Council .—(1) For the purpose of enabling it 
efficiently to discharge its functions under this Act, the Council  shall,  subject to such regulations as may be 
made in this behalf, appoint (whether on deputation or  otherwise) such number of officers 
and other  employe es as it may c onsider necessary : 
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers, as may be specified in such regulations, shall 
be subject to the approval of the Central Government.  
(2) Every officer or  other  employee appointed by the Council  shall be  subjec t to such conditions of 
service and  shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be determined by regulations.  
9. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Council .—All orders and deci sions of the 
Council  shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any  other member authorised by the 
Council in this behalf, and all  other  instruments issued by the Council  shall be authenticated by the signature 
of the Member -Secretary or any  other  officer of the Council authorised in like m anner in this behalf.   7 
 CHAPTER  III 
POWERS  AND FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  
10. Functions of the Council .—It shall be  the duty of the Council to take all such steps as i t may think 
fit for ensuring co ordinated and integrated development of technical education and maintenance of standards 
and for the purposes of performing its functions u nder this Act, the Council may — 
(a) undertake survey in the various fields of technical education, collect data on all related matters 
and make forecast of the needed growth and  development in technical education;  
(b) coordinate the development of technical education in the country at all levels;  
(c) allocate and disburse out of the Fund of the Council such grant s on such terms and con ditions as it 
may think fit to — 
(i) technical  institutions, and  
(ii) Universities impa rting technical education in co ordination with the Commission;  
(d) promote innovations research and development in established and new technologies, generation, 
adoption and adaptation of new technologies to  meet de velopmental re quirements and for overall 
improvement of educational processes;  
(e) formulate schemes for promoting technical education for women, handicapped and weaker 
sections of the society;  
(f) promote an effective link between technical education sys tem and  other relevant sys tems 
including research and development organisations, industry and the community;  
(g) evolve suitable performance appraisal systems for technical institutions and Universi ties 
imparting technical education, incorporating norms and mechanisms for enforcing accountability;  
(h) formulate schemes for the initial and in -service training of teachers and identify institu tions or 
centres and set up new centres for offering staff development programmes including continuing education 
of teachers;  
(i) lay down norms and standards for courses, curricula, physical and instructional facili ties, staff 
pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment and examina tions;  
(j) fix norms and guidelines for charging tuition and  other fees; 
(k) grant approval for starting new technical institutions and for introduction of new courses or 
programmes in consultation with the agencies concerned;  
(l) advis e the Central Government in respect of grant of charter to any professional b ody or ins titution 
in the field  of technical education conferring powers, rights and privileges on it for the promotion of such 
profession in its field including conduct of examination s and awarding of  member ship certificates;  
(m) lay down norms for granting autonom y to technical institutions;  
(n) take all necessa ry steps to prevent commercialis ation of technical education;  
(o) provide  guidelines for admission of students to technical institutions and Universities imparting 
technical education;  
(p) inspect or cause t o inspect any technical institution;  8 
 (q) withhold or discontinue grants in respect of courses, programmes to such technical institutions 
which fail to comply with the directions given by the Council within the stipulated period of time and 
take such other  steps as may be necessary for ensuring compliance of the directions of the Council;  
(r) take steps to strengthen the existing organisations , and to set up new organisations to ensure 
effective discharge of the Council’ s responsibilities and to create posit ions of professional , technical and 
supporting staff based on requirements;  
(s) declare technical institutions at various levels and types offering courses in technical education fit 
to receive grants;  
(t) advis e the Commission for declaring any institutio n imparting technical education as a deemed 
University;  
(u) set up a National Board of Accreditation to periodically conduct evaluation of technical 
institutions or programmes on the basis of guidelines, norms and standards speci fied by it and to make 
recommendation to it, or to the Council , or to the Commission or to  other  bodies, regarding recognition 
or de -recognition of the institution or the programme;  
(v) perform such other  functions as may be prescribed.  
11. Inspection .—(1) For the purposes of ascert aining the financial needs of technical institution or a 
University or its standards of teaching , examination and research, the Council may cause an inspection of any 
department or departments of such technical institution or University to be made in  such manner as may be 
prescribed and by such person or persons as it may direct.  
(2) The Council  shall communicate to the technical institution or University the date on which any 
inspection under  sub-section ( 1) is to be made and the technical institutio n or University  shall be entitled to 
be associated with the inspection in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Council  shall communicate to the technical institution or the University, its views in regard to the 
results of any such inspection and may,  after ascertaining the opinion of that technical institution or 
University, recommend to that institution or University the action to be taken as a result of such inspection.  
(4) All communications to a technical institution or University under this secti on shall be made to the 
executive authority thereof and the executive authority of the technical institution or University  shall report to 
the Council the action, if any, which is proposed to be taken for the purposes of implementing any such 
recommendatio n as is referred to in  sub-section ( 3). 
CHAPTER  IV 
BODIES OF THE COUNCIL  
12. Executive Committee of the Council .—(1) The Council  shall constitute a Committee, called the 
Executive Committee for discharging such functions as may be assigned to it by the Council.  
(2) The Executive Committee  shall consist of the following  members , namely.— 
(a) the Chairman of the Council;  
(b) the Vice -Chairman of the Council;  
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with 
Education, ex officio ; 
(d) two Chairmen of the Regional Committees;  
(e) three Chairmen of the Boards of Studies;  9 
 (f) a member of the Council representing the Ministry of Finance of the Central Govern ment, ex 
officio ; 
(g) four out of eight members of the Council representing the States and Union territories under 
clause ( k) of sub-section ( 4) of section  3; 
(h) four  members with expertise and distinction in areas relevant to Technical Education to be 
nominated by the Chairman of the Council;  
(i) the Chairma n of the University Grants Commission, ex officio ; 
(j) the Director, Institute of Applied Manpower Research, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(k) the Director General, Indian Council of Agricultural Research, ex officio ; 
(l) the Member -Secretary of the Council.  
(3) The Chairman and the Member -Secretary of the Council  shall , respectively, function as the Chairman 
and the Member -Secretary of the Executive Committee.  
(4) The Chairman or in  his absence, the Vice -Chairman of the Council  shall preside at the  meetings of th e 
Executive Committee and in the absence of both the Chairman and the Vice -Chairman, any  other member 
chosen by the  members present at the  meeting  shall preside at the  meeting.  
(5) The Executive Committee shall meet at such time and places, and shall obser ve such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) as 
the Council may provide by regulations.  
13. Boards of Studies .—(1) The Council  shall establish the follow ing Boards of Studies , namely:— 
(i) All India Board of Vocational Education;  
(ii) All India Board of Technic ian Education;  
(iii) All India Board of Under -graduate Studies in Engineering and Technology;  
(iv) All India Board of Post -graduate Education and Research in Engineering and Technol ogy; 
(v) All India  Board of Management Studies.  
(2) The Council may, if it considers necessary, establish such other Boards of Studies as it may think fit.  
(3) Every  Board of Studies  shall advise the Executive Committee on academic matters fall ing in its area 
of concern including norms, standards, model curricula, model facilities and structure of courses.  
(4) The area of concern, powers, the constitution and functions of the  Boards of Studies  shall be such as 
the Council may provide by regulati ons. 
14. Regional Committees .—(1) The Council  shall establish the following Regional Com mittees,    
namely:— 
(i) The Northern Regional Committee with its office at Kanpur;  
(ii) The Southern Regional Committee with its office at Madras;  
(iii) The Western Regional Committee with its office at Bombay;  
(iv) The Eastern Regional Committee with its office at Calcutta.  
(2) The Council may, if it considers necessary, establish such  other  Regional Committees as it may think 
fit. 10 
 (3) The Regional Committee  shall advise and assist the Council to look into all aspects of planning, 
promoting and regulating technical education within the region.  
(4) The region for which the Regional Committees may be established and the constitution and functions 
of such Committees  shall be prescribed by regulation.  
CHAPTER  V 
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
15. Payment to the Council —The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, pay to the Council in each financial year such sums as may be considered necessary for 
the performance of functions of the Council under this Act.  
16. Fund of the Council —(1) The Council  shall have its own Fund; and all sums which may, from time 
to time, be paid to it by the Central Government and all the receipts of  the Council (including any sum which 
any State Government or any  other  authority or person may hand over to the Council ) shall be credited to the 
Fund and all pay ments by the Council  shall be made therefrom.  
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund  shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may,  subject to the approval of the Central Government, be decided by the Council.  
(3) The Council may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act, and such 
sums  shall b e treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund of the Council.  
17. Budget .—The Council shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year as may be prescribed, a 
budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing  showing the estimated re ceipts and  expenditure, and 
copies thereof  shall be forwarded to the Central Government.  
18. Annual report .—The Council shall prepare once every year in such form and at such time as may be 
prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account of its acti vities during the previous year  and copies 
thereof  shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government  shall cause the same to be laid 
before both Houses of Parliament.  
19. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Council  shall cause to be maintained such books  of account 
and other  books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may, in consultation with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed.  
(2) The Council  shall, as soon as may be, after closing its annual accounts pr epare a state ment of 
accounts in such form, and forward the same to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India by such date, 
as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General, determine.  
(3) The accounts of the Coun cil shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at such 
times and in such manner as he thinks fit.  
(4) The accounts of the Council as certified  by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other  person appointed by  him in thi s behalf together with the audit report thereon  shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government  shall cause the same to be laid before both Houses 
of Parliament.  
CHAPTER  VI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
20. Directions by the Central Government .—(1) The Council  shall, in the discharge of its functions 
and duties under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may 
give in writing to it from time to time.  11 
 (2) The decision of the Central Government as to whether a question is one of policy or not  shall be final.  
21. Power to supersede the Council .—(1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that the Council 
is unable to perform, or has persistently made default in the performance of, the duty imposed o n it by or 
under this Act or has exceeded or abused its powers, or has wilfully or without sufficient cause, faile d to 
comply with any direction issued by  the Central Govern ment under s ection 20, the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official  Gazette, supersede the Council for such period as may be specified in the 
notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section, the Central Government shall give a 
reasonable time to the Council to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider the 
explanation and objections, if any, of the Council.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -sectio n (1) superseding the C ouncil,— 
(a) all the  members of the Council shall, notwithstanding that their term of  office had not expired, as 
from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such members;  
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or 
performed by or on behalf of the Council shall, during the period of supersession, be e xercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct ; 
(c) all property vested in the Council shall, during the period of supersession, vest in the Central 
Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the  period of supersession specified in the notification issued under                 
sub-section ( 1), the Central  Government may — 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further period as it may consider necessary; or  
(b) reconstitute the Council in the manner provided in section 3.  
22. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Offi cial Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure to be followed by the  members in the discharge of their functions;  
(b) the inspectio n of technical institutions and Universities;  
(c) the form and manner in which the budget and reports are to be prepared by the Council;  
(d) the manner in which the accounts of the Council are to be maintained; and  
(e) any  other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
23. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Council may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make 
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and the r ules generally to carry out the purposes 
of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following mat ters, namely: — 
(a) regulating the  meetings of the Council and the procedure for conducting business thereat;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Council;  12 
 (c) regulating the meetings of the Executive Committee and the procedure for  conducting bus iness 
thereat;  
(d) the area of concern, the constitution, and powers and functions of the Board of Studies;  
(e) the region for which the Regional Committee be established and the constitution and functions of 
such Committee.  
24. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regula tion made under 
this Act  shall be  laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session, for a total peri od of thirty days which may be c omprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, a nd if, before the expiry of the  session imme diately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses agree that 
the rule or regula tion should not be made, the rule or regulation  shall thereafter have ef fect only in such   
modi fied form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
25. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of th e 
Act, the Central Government may, by order , published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may  appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no  order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it  is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
 
--------------------------The Brentford Electric (India) Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE BRENTFORD ELECTRIC (INDIA) LIMITED (ACQUISITION  
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1987  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF THE COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the Company.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Company to be liable for certain prior liabilities.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings of the Company in              
Andrew Yule.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount.  
8. Payment of further amounts.  
 
CHAPTE R IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company.  
10. Duty of persons incharge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Continuance of employees.  
13. Provident fund and other funds.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments.  
15. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
16. Certain powers  of the Central Government or Andrew Yule.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
18. Priority of claims  2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Examination of claims.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims.  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect.  
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Andrew Yule.  
26. Penalties.  
27. Offences by companies.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
29. Delegation of powers.  
30. Power to make rules.  
31. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
  THE BRENTFORD ELECTRIC (INDIA) LIMITED (ACQUISITION  
AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS) ACT, 1987  
 ACT NO. 36 OF 1987  
[15th September , 1987 .] 
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of the Brentford Electric 
(India) Limited, with a view to securing the proper management of  such undertakings so as to 
subserve the interests of the general public by ensuring the continued manufacture and 
production of electrical equipments which are essential to the needs of the economy of the 
country and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Br entford Electric (India) Limited had been engaged in the manufacture and 
production of articles mentioned in the First Schedule to the Industries (Develo pment and Regulation) 
Act, 1951  (65 of 1951) , namely, electrical equipments;  
AND WHEREAS  the management of the undertakings of the Brentford Electric (India) Limited was 
taken over by the Central Government under section 18AA of the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951);  
AND WHEREAS  it is necessary to acquire the unde rtakings of the Brentford Electric (India) Limited to 
ensure that the interests of the general public are served by the continuance, by the undertakings of the 
Company, of the manufacture and production of the aforesaid articles, which are essential to the  needs of 
the economy of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eight Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Brentford  Electric (India) 
Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1987.  
(2) The provisions of sections 26 and 27 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day of April,  1986.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Andrew Yule ” means the Andrew Yule and Company Limited, Calcutta, a company formed 
and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(b) “appointed day ” means the 1st day of April, 1986;  
(c) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 14;  
(d) “Company ” means the Brentford Electric (India) Limited, a company within the meaning of 
the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , and having its registered  office at 8, Clive Row, Calcutta, in the 
State of West Bengal;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “specified date ”, in relation to any provision of  this Act, means such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify for the purposes of that provision and different dates may 
be specified for different provisions of this Act;  
(h)  words and expressions used herein and not defined but def ined in the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956) , shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
  4 
 CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE UNDERTAKINGS OF  THE  COMPANY  
3. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the undertakings of the           
Company .—On the appointed day, the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of 
the Company in rela tion to its undertakings, shall , by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, 
the Central Government.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings of the Company shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property, movable  and immovable, 
including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments, machinery and equipment, cash balances, cash 
on hand, cheques, demand drafts, reserve funds, investments, book debts, and all other right and interests 
in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, 
possession, power or control of the Company, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, 
registers, records and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto.  
(2) All properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 shall, by 
force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien and all 
other incumbrances affecting them, and any attac hment, injunction, decree or order of any court, tribunal 
or other authority restricting the use of such properties in any manner shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn.  
(3) Every mortgagee of any property which has vested under this Act in the Central Gov ernment and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such property, shall give, 
within such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, a n intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other in terest.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any such 
property shall be entitled to clai m, in accordance with his rights and interests, payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in whole or in part, out of the amount specified in section 7 and also out of the 
amounts determined under section 8, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other i nterest shall be 
enforceable against any property which has vested in the Central Government.  
(5) Any licence or other instrument granted to the Company in relation to any undertaking which has 
vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time b efore the appointed day and in force 
immediately before that day shall continue to be in force on and after such day in accordance with its 
tenor in relation to and for the purposes of such undertaking, and on and from the date of vesting of such 
undertaki ng under section 6, in Andrew Yule, that Company shall be deemed to be substituted in such 
licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been granted to Andrew Yule and 
that Company shall hold it for the remainder of the period for  which the Company would have held it 
under the terms thereof.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
property which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or prefe rred by or against 
the Company is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially 
affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of the Company or of anything contained in this 
Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against the 
Central Government or where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in 
Andrew Yule, by or against Andrew Yule.  
5. Company to be liable for certain prior li abilities .—(1) Every liability of the Company, other 
than the liabilities specified in sub -section  (2), in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be 
the liability of the Company and shall be enforceable against it and not against the Centr al Government, 
or, where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in Andrew Yule , against 
Andrew Yule . 
(2) Any liability arising in respect of advances made to the Company for the supply of articles, or in 
respect of materials  supplied to the Company, after the management of the undertakings of the Company 
had been taken over by the Central Government shall, on and f rom the appointed day, be the liability of 5 
 the Central Government or of Andrew Yule, as the case may be, and shal l be discharged by that 
Government or Andrew Yule, as and when payment for such advances or supplies becomes due and 
payable.  
(3) For the removal of doub ts, it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any oth er provision of this Act, no 
liability of the Company, in respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable 
against the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under 
section 6, to vest in Andrew Yule,  against Andrew Yule;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to the 
undertakings of the Company, passed after the appointed day in respect of any matter, claim or 
dispute, which arose before that day, shall be e nforceable against the Central Government or where 
the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section  6, to vest in Andrew Yule, against 
Andrew Yule;  
(c) no liability incurred by the Company before the appointed day for the contravention of any 
provision of law for the time being in force shall be enforceable against the Central Government or 
where the undertakings of the Company are directed, under section 6, to vest in Andrew Yule, against 
Andrew Yule.  
6. Power of Central Government to direct ves ting of the undertakings of the Company in 
Andrew Yule.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3 and 4 , the  Central Government 
may, subject to such terms and conditions as it may think fit to impose, direct, by notification, that the 
undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation to its 
undertakings, which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing 
to vest in the Central Government , vest in Andrew Yule, either on the date of the notification or on such 
earlier or later date (not being a date earlier than the appointed day) as may  be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Where the right, title and interest, and the liabilities referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, of 
the Company in relation to its undertakings vest in Andrew Yule under sub -section ( 1), Andrew Yule 
shall, on and  from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the owner in relation to such 
undertakings and all the rights and liabilities of the Central Government in relation to such undertakings 
shall, on and from the date of such vesting be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities, 
respectively, of Andrew Yule.  
CHAPTER II I 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
7. Payment of amount .—For the transfer to, and vesting, in the Central Government, under             
section 3, of the undertakings of the Company, and the right, title and interest of the Company in relation 
to its undertakings, there shall be paid by the Central Government to the Company in cash, and in the 
manner specified in Chapter VI, an amount of rupees thirty -seven lakhs and fifty thousand.  
8. Payment  of further amounts .—(1) For the deprivation of the Company of the management of its 
undertakings, there shall be paid by the Central Government to the Company in cash, an amount 
calculated at the rate of five thousand rupees per annum for the period comme ncing on the date on which 
the management of the undertakings of the Company was taken over in pursuance of the order made by 
the Central Government under section 18AA of the Industries (Development and Regulation)                       
Act, 1951 (65 of 195 1), and ending on the appointed day.  
(2) In consideration of the retrospective operation of the provisions of sections 3, 4 and 5, there shall 
also be paid by the Central Government to the Company in cash, an amount calculated at the rate of five 
thousand rupees per annum for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
(3) The amounts specified in section 7, and the amounts determined in accordance with the provisions 
of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), shall carry simple intere st at the rate of four per cent.  per annum for the period 6 
 commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of such amounts is made by 
the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(4) The amoun ts determined in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) shall be 
paid by the Central Government to the Company in addition to the amount specified in section 7.  
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilit ies of the Company, in relation to 
its undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall be discharged from 
the amount referred to in section 7, and also from the amounts determined under sub -sections ( 1), (2)                           
and ( 3), in accordance with the rights and interests of the creditors of the Company.  
CHAPTE R IV 
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF THE UNDERTAINGS OF THE COMPANY  
9. Management, etc., of the undertakings of the Company .—The general superintende nce, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the undertakings of the Company, the 
right, title and interest in relation to which have vested in the Central Government under section 3, shall, 
where a direction has been made b y the C entral Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, vest in 
Andrew Yule, and thereupon Andrew Yule shall be entitled to exercise, to the exclusion of all other 
persons, all such powers and do all such things as the Company was authorised to exercise and do in 
relation to its undertakings.  
10. Duty of persons incharge of management of the undertakings of the Company to deliver all 
assets, etc. —(1) On the vesting of the management of the undertaking s of the Company in Andrew Yule, 
all persons in charge of t he management of the undertakings of the Company immediately before such 
vesting shall be bound to deliver to Andrew Yule all assets, books of account, registers or other 
documents in their custody relating to the undertakings of the Company.  
(2) The Centr al Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to Andrew Yule as to its powers and duties and Andrew Yule may also, if it so desires, apply 
to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which the management of the 
undertakings of the Company shall be conducted by it or in relation to any other matter arising in the 
course of such management.  
11. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession .—(1) Any person who  has, on 
the appointed day, in his possession or under his control, any assets, books, documents, or other papers 
relating to any undertaking owned by the Company, which have vested in the Central Government or in 
Andrew Yule under this Act and which belon g to the Company or would have so belonged, if the 
undertakings owned by the Company had not vested in the Central Government or Andrew Yule, shall be 
liable to account for the said assets, books, documents and other papers to the Central Government or 
Andrew Yule and shall deliver them to the Central Government or Andrew Yule or to such person or 
persons as the Central Government or Andrew Yule may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Central Government or Andrew Yule may take or cause to be taken all necessary  steps for 
securing possession of the undertakings of the Company which have vested in the Central Government or 
Andrew Yule under this Act.  
(3) The Company shall, within such period as the Central Government may allow in this behalf, 
furnish to that Gover nment a complete inventory of all its properties and assets, as on the appointed day, 
pertaining to the undertakings which have vested in the Central Government under section 3 and for this 
purpose, the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall afford to the  Company all reasonable facilities.  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE EMPLOYEES OF THE COMPANY  
12. Continuance of employees .—(1) Every person who has been, immediately before the appointed 
day, employed in any undertakin gs of the Company shall become, — 
(a) on and from the appointed day, an employee of the Central Government, and  7 
 (b) where the undertakings of the C ompany are directed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 to vest 
in Andrew Yule, an employee of Andrew Yule on an d from the date of such vesting,  
and shall hold office or service under the Central Government of Andrew Yule, as the case may be, with 
the rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other matters admissible to him immediately before 
the appointed day, as modified by the Memoranda  of Settlement signed by the representatives of the 
management and the employees of the Company on the 28th day of January, 1986 and the 30th day of 
January, 1986, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under the Central Government 
or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, is duly terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of 
service are duly altered by the Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes A ct, 19 47 (14 of 1947) , or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other person employed 
in any undertaking of the Company, to the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall not entitle such 
officer or other  employee to claim any compensation under this Act or under any other law for the time 
being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
13. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where the Company has established a provident fund, 
superannuation fund, welfare fund or any other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in any of its 
undertakings, the moneys relatable to the officers or other employees, whose services have become 
transferred by or unde r this Act to the Central Government or Andrew Yule shall, out of the moneys 
standing, on the appointed day, to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation fund, welfare fund or 
other fund, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government or  Andrew Yule, as the case may be.  
(2) The moneys which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Central Government or Andrew 
Yule, as the case may be, shall be dealt with by that Government or Andrew Yule in such manner, as may 
be prescribed.  
CHAPTER  VI 
COMMISSIONER OF PAYMENTS  
14. Appointment of Commissioner of Payments .—(1) The Central Government shall, for the 
purpose of disbursing the amounts payable under sections 7 and 8 to the Company, by notification, 
appoint a Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) Th e Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and diff erent persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
15. Payment by t he Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commission er, for payment to the 
Company, — 
(a) an amount equal to the amount specified in section 7; and  
(b) further amount equal to the amounts payable to the Company under section 8.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government in favour of the Commissioner in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commission er shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of the undertakings of the Company 
in relation to whic h payments have been made to him under this Act.  8 
 (4) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in              
sub-section ( 2) shall en ure to the benefit of the Company.  
16. Certain powers of the Central Gov ernment or Andrew Yule .—(1) The Central Government or 
Andrew Yule, as the case may be, shall be entitled to receive up to the specified date, to the exclusion of 
all other persons, any money due to the Company, in relation to its undertakings which have ve sted in the 
Central Government or  Andrew Yule, and realised after the appointed day notwithstanding that the 
realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The Central Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, may make a claim to the  
Commissioner with regard to every payment made by that Government or Andrew Yule, after the 
appointed day, for discharging any liability of the Company, not being any liability specified in                   
sub-section ( 2) of section 5, in relation to an y period prior to the appointed day; and every such claim 
shall have priority in accordance with the priorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in relation to 
which such liability has been discharged by the Central Government or Andrew Yule.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities of the Company, in respect of any 
transaction prior to the appointed day, which have not been discharged on or before the specified date, 
shall be the liabilities of the Company.  
17. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the Company 
with regard to any of the matters specified in the Schedule, pertaining to any of its undertakings, shall 
prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirty days from the specified d ate: 
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days, but not thereafter.  
18. Priority of claims .—The claims made under section 17 shall have priorities in accordance with 
the following principles, na mely:— 
(a) Category I shall have precedence over all other categories and Category II shall have 
precedence over Category III, and  so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories shall rank equally and be paid in full, but, if the 
amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal proportions and be paid 
accordingly; and  
(c) the question of discha rging any liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in the immediately higher 
category.  
19. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims made und er section 17, the 
Commissioner shall arrange the claims in the order of priorities specified in the Schedule and 
examine the same in accordance with such order of priorities.  
(2) If, on an examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of opinion that the  amount paid to 
him under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities specified in any lower category, he shall not 
be required to examine the claims in respect of such lower category.  
20. Admission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the cl aims with reference to the 
priorities set out in the Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before which every 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim.  
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by adv ertisement in one 
issue of any daily newspaper in the English language having circulation in the major part of the 
country and one issue of any daily newspaper in such regional language as the Commissioner may 
consider suitable, and every such notice shall  call upon the claimant to file the proof of his claim with 
the Commissioner within the period specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the period specified by the 
Commissioner shall be excluded fro m the disbursements made by the Commissioner.  9 
 (4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and 
after giving the Company an opportunity of refuting the claim and after giving the claimant a 
reasonable opportunity  of being heard, by order in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in 
part. 
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising 
out of the discharge of his functions, including the place or places at which he may hold his sittings 
and shall, for the purpose of making an investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are 
vested in a civil court under th e Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in 
respect of  the following m atters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner sha ll be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195, and Chapter XXVI, of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner, may prefer an appeal 
against such decision to  the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the registered office of the Company is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to be the Commissioner, 
the appeal shall lie to the High Court at Calcutta, and such appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not 
less than two Judges of that High Court.  
21. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in re spect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such amount is due and on such payment, the liability of the Company in respect of 
such claim shall stand discharged.  
22. Disbursement of amounts to the Company .—(1) If, out of the moneys paid to him in relation to 
the undertakings of the Company, there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities specified in the 
Schedule, the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the Company.  
(2) Where the possession of any mac hinery, equipment or other property has vested in the Central 
Government or Andrew Yule under this Act, but such machinery, equipment or other property does not 
belong to the Company, it shall be lawful for the Central Government or Andrew Yule, to continu e to 
possess such machinery or equipment or other property on the same terms and conditions under which 
they were possessed by the Company immediately before the appointed day.  
23. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue acco unt.—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed on the date immediately 
preceding the date on which the office of the Commissioner is finally wound up, shall be transferred by 
the Commissioner, before his office is finally wo und up, to the general revenue account of the Central 
Government; but a claim to any money so transferred may be preferred to the Central Government by the 
person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been made, and t he 
order, if any, for payment of the claim, being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
  10 
 CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith con tained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
25. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the Central Government or Andrew 
Yule .—Every contract entered into by the Company in relation to its undertakings which has vested in the 
Central Government under section 3, for any service, sale or supply and in force immediately before the 
appointed day,  shall, on and from the expiry of a period of one hundred and eighty days from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the 
expiry of that period, ratified, in writing, by the Cen tral Government or Andrew Yule in which such 
undertakings have been vested under this Act, and in ratifying such contract, the Central Government or 
Andrew Yule may make such alter ation or modification therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central  Government or Andrew Yule shall not permit to ratify a contra ct and shall 
not make any alter ation or modification in a contract — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the  interests of the Central Government or Andrew Yule, and  
(b) except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the c ontract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein.  
26. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Company, wrongfully with -holds such property from the Central Government or Andrew Yul e; or 
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Company; or  
(c) willfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or Andrew Yule or any 
person or body of persons specified by that  Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, any 
document relating to the undertakings, which may be in his possession, custody or control; or  
(d) fails to deliver to the Central Government or Andrew Yule or any person or body of persons 
specified by th at Government or Andrew Yule, as the case may be, any assets, books of account, 
registers or other documents in his possession custody or control relating to the undertakings of the 
Company; or  
(e) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part o f the undertakings of the 
Company or prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to believe to be 
false or grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may  
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
27. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company, for  the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such  person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any o ffence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company , such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  11 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or Andrew Yule or other 
person authorised by that Government or Andrew Yule for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any officer of that 
Government of Andrew Yule or other person authorised by that Government or Andrew Yule for any 
damage caused or likely to be cause d by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
29. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferr ed by this section and 
sections 30 and 31, may also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall a ct under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
30. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the gen erality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, n amely:— 
(a) the time within which, and the manner in which, an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 shall be given;  
(b) the manner in which the moneys in any provident fund or other fund, referred to in section 13 
shall be dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid,  as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediatel y following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effec t, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
31. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision s of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which this Act receives the a ssent of the President.  
 
 
 
 
 12 
  
THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 17, 19( 1), 20( 1) and 22( 1)] 
ORDER OF PRIORITIES  
Category I — 
(a) Wages, salaries and other dues payable to the employees of the Company.  
(b) Deductions made from the salaries and wages of the employees of the Company for the provident 
fund, the Employees ’ State Insurance Fund, premium relating to the Life Insurance Corporation of India 
or for any other purpose.  
(c) Arrears in relation to contributions to be made by the Company to the provident fund, the 
Employees ’ State Insurance Fund or under any other law for the time being in force providing for such 
contributions.  
Post-take-over management period  
Category II — 
Princi pal amount of loans advanced by — 
(i) the Central Government;  
(ii) a State Gov ernment;  
(iii) banks and financial institutions;  
(iv) any other sources . 
Category  III— 
(a) Any credits availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations, other than those specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(b) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government or semi -Government institutions 
against supply of goods or services, ot her than those specified in section ( 2) of section 5.  
(c) Arrears of interest on loans and advances.  
Category  IV— 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to the Central Government, a State Government or any 
local authority.  
(b) Any other dues.  
Pre-take-over management period  
Category  V— 
Principal amou nt of secured loans advanced by — 
(i) the Central Government ; 
(ii) a State Government;  
(iii) banks and financial institutions.  
Category  VI— 
Principal amount  of unsecured loans advanced by — 
(i) the Central Government;  
(ii) a State Government;  
(iii) banks and financial institutions.  13 
 Category  VII— 
(a) Any credit availed of by the Company for the purpose of carrying on any trading or 
manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any dues of State Electricity Boards or other Government or semi -Government institutions 
against supply of goods or services.  
(c) Arrears of interest on l oans and advances.  
(d) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or other dues to Central Government, a State Government or any 
local authority.  
(e) Any other loans or dues.  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
 
 
--------------------------The Cotton, Copra and Vegetable Oils Cess (Abolition) Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE COTTON, COPRA AND VEGETABLE OILS CESS (ABOLITION) ACT, 1987  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. [Repealed .] 
3. [Repealed .] 
4. [Repealed .] 
5. [Repealed .] 
6. [Repealed .] 
7. [Repealed .] 
8. [Repealed .] 
9. [Repealed .] 
10. [Repealed .] 
CHAPTER  IV 
REPEAL OF THE  COPRA  CESS ACT, 1979 AND THE VEGETABLE  OILS CESS ACT, 1983  
11. Repeal of Act 4 of 1979 . 
12. Repeal of Act 30 of 1983 . 
CHAPTER  V 
COLLECTION  OF ARREARS OF DUTIES OF EXCISE  
13. Collection and payment of arrears of duties of excise . 
 
  2 
 THE COTTON, COPRA AND VEGETABLE OILS CESS (ABOLITION) ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 4 OF 1987  
[21st March , 1987 .] 
An Act further to amend the Produce Cess Act, 1966 and the Coconut Development Board Act, 
1979 and to repeal the Copra Cess  Act, 1979 and the Vegetable Oils Cess Act, 1983.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Cotton, Copra and Vegetable Oils Cess  (Abolition )     
Act, 1987.   
1*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER  IV 
REPEAL OF THE  COPRA  CESS ACT, 1979 AND THE VEGETABLE  OILS CESS ACT, 1983  
11. Repeal of Act 4 of 1979 .—The Copra Cess Act, 1979 is hereby repealed.   
12. Repeal of Act 30 of 1983 .—The Vegetable Oils  Cess  Act, 1983 is hereby repealed.   
CHAPTER  V 
COLLECTION  OF ARREARS OF DUTIES OF EXCISE  
13. Collection and payment of arrears of duties of excise .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the amendments made to the Produce Cess Act, 1966 (15 of 1966) or the repeal of the Copra Cess Act, 
1979 (4 of 1979) or the Vegetable Oils Cess Act, 1983  (30 of 1983) , by this Act, any duty of excise, 
levied under any of the said Acts immediately before the commencement of this Act, but has not been 
collected before s uch commencement, shall be liable to be collected after such commencement in 
accordance with the provisions of the said Acts for being paid into the Consolidated Fund of India as if 
this Act had not been enacted.  
 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 10 rep. by Act 30 of 2001, s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f.3 -9-2001)  
--------------------------The Expenditure-tax Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE EXPENDITURE -TAX ACT, 1987  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Application of the Act.  
4. Charge of expenditure -tax. 
5. Meaning of chargeable expenditure.  
6. Tax authorities.  
7. Collection and recovery of expenditure -tax. 
8. Person responsible for collecting tax to furnish prescribed return.  
9. Assessment.  
10. Best judg ment assessment . 
11. Chargeable expenditure escaping assessment.  
12. Rectification of mistake.  
13. Time limit for completion of assessment and reasses sment.  
14. Interest on delayed payment of expenditure -tax. 
15. Penalty for failure to collect or pay expenditure -tax. 
16. Penalty for failure to furnish prescribed return.  
17. Penalty for concealme nt of chargeable expenditure.  
18. Penalty for failure to comply with notice . 
19. Penalty not to be imposed in certain cases.  
20. Notice of demand.  
21. Revision of orders by the Commissioner.  
22. Appeals to the Commission er (Appeals).  
23. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal.  
24. Application of provisions of Income -tax Act.  
25. Wilful attempt to evade tax, etc.  
26. Failu re to furnish prescribed returns.  
27. False statement in verification, etc.  
28. Abetment of false return, etc.  
29. Certain offences to be non -cognizable.  
30. Institution of proceedings and composition of offences.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Power to remove diffi culties.  
33. [Repealed .] 
  2 
 THE EXPENDITURE -TAX ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 35 OF 1987  
[14th September , 1987.]  
An Act to provide for the levy of a tax on expendit ure incurred in certain hotels 1[or 
restaurants and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto ]. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of t he Republic India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called  the Expenditure -tax                  
Act, 1987.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State  of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “assessee ” means a person responsible for collecting the expenditure -tax payable un der the 
provisions of this Act;  
(2) “assessment year ” means the period of twelve months commencing on t he 1st day of April 
every year;  
(3) “Board ” means the Central Board of Direct Ta xes constituted under the Central Boards of 
Revenue Act, 1963 (54 of 1963);  
(4) “chargeable expenditure ” means the expend iture referred to in section 5;  
(5) “expenditure -tax” or “tax” means the tax chargeable un der the provisions of this Act;  
(6) “hotel ” includes a building or part of a building where residential accommodation is, by way 
of business, provide d for a monetary consideration;  
(7) “Income -tax Act ” means the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961);  
(8) “person responsible for collecting ” means a pers on who is required to collect tax under this 
Act or is required to pay any other sum of mon ey under this Act and includes — 
(a) every person in respect of whom any proceedings unde r this Act have been taken, and  
(b) every person who is d eemed to be an assessee -in-default u nder any provision of this Act;  
(9) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
3[(9A) “restaurant ” means any premises, not being a restaurant situated in a hotel referred to in               
clause ( 1) of section 3, in  which the business of sale of food or drink to the public is carried on and 
such premises, at the beginning of any month, are equipped with, or have access to, fac ilities for                        
air-conditioning;]  
(10) “room charges ” means the charges for a unit of residential accommodation in a hotel  and 
includes the charges for —  
(a) furniture, air -conditioner, refrigerator, radio, mu sic, telephone, television, and  
(b) such other services as are normally included by a hotel in room rent,  
but does not include charges for food, drinks and any services other  than those referred to in                         
sub-clauses ( a) and ( b); 
(11) all other words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined in the Income -tax 
Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 49 of  1991, s. 113 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1991).  
2. 1st November, 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 919(E), dated 14th October, 1987, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 1991, s. 114 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1991). 3 
 1[3. Application of the Act .—This Act shall apply in relation to any chargeable expenditure — 
(1) 2[incurred before the 1st day of June, 2003 in a hotel ] wherein the room charges for any unit 
of residential accommodation at the time of incurring of such expenditure are  3[three  thousand rupees 
or more per day] and where, — 
(a) a composite charge is payable in respect of such unit and food, the room charges included 
therein shall be deter mined in the prescribed manner;  
(b) (i) a composite charge is payable in respect of such unit, food, drinks and other services, 
or any of them, a nd the case is not covered by the p rovisions of sub -clause ( a), or 
(ii) it appears to the Assessing Officer that the charges for such unit, food, drinks or other 
services are so arranged that the room charges are understated and the other charges are 
overs tated,  
the Assessing Officer shall, for the purposes of this clause determine the room charges on such reasonabl e 
basis as he may deem fit; and  
(2) incurred in a restaurant 4[before the 1st day of June, 1992.]  
4. Charge of expenditure -tax.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, there  shall be charged on and 
from— 
(a) the commencement of this Act  5[but not after the 31st day of May, 2003 ], a tax at the rate of 
6[ten per cent. ] of the chargeable expenditure incurred in a hotel referred  to in clause ( 1) of section 3:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in the case of a hotel referred to in 7[clause ( a) of            
sub-section ( 7) of section 80 -IB] of the Income -tax Act during the period beginning on the 1st day of 
April, 1991 and ending on the  31st day o f March, 2001:  
8[Provided further that nothing in this clause shall apply in the case of a hotel referred to in 
9[clause ( a) of sub -section ( 7) of section 80 -IB] of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (4 3 of 1961) during the 
period beginning on the 1st day of April, 1998 and ending on the 31st day of March, 2008].  
(b) the 1st day of October, 1991, 10[but not after the 31st day of May , 1992] a tax at the rate of 
fifteen per cent. of the chargeable expenditur e incurred in a restaurant referred to in clause ( 2) of 
section 3.  
5. Meaning of Chargeable expenditure .—For the purposes of this Act, chargeable expenditure, — 
(1) in relation to a hotel referred to in clause ( 1) of section 3, means any expenditure incurred in, 
or payments made to, the hotel in connection with the provisio n of— 
(a) any accommodatio n, residential or otherwise; or  
11*   *   *   *  *  
(c) any accommodation in such hotel on hire or lease; or  
12*   *   *   * *  
but does not include — 
(i) any  expenditure which is incurred, or payment for whi ch is made, in foreign exchange  
13[before the 1st day of October, 1992;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 49 of 1991, s. 115, for section s 3 to 5 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1991). 
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 102 , for “incurred in a hotel” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2003).  
3. Subs. by Act 20 of 2002, s. 115, for “two thousand rupees or more per day per individual” (w.e.f. 1 -6-2002).  
4. Ins. b y Act 18 of 1992, s. 105 (w.e.f 1 -6-1992).  
5. Ins. by Act 32 of 2003, s. 103 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2003).  
6. Subs. by Act 32 of 1994, s. 57, for “twenty per cent.” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
7. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999 , s. 98, for “clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 5) of section 80-IA” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2000).  
8. Ins. by Act 26 of 1997, s. 61 (w.e.f. 1 -4-1998).  
9. Subs. by 27 of 1999, s. 98, for “clause ( iia) or sub -section ( 5) of section 80 -1A” (w.e.f. 1 -4-2000).  
10. Subs.  by Act 18 of 1992, s. 106, for “the commencement of this Act” ( w.e.f. 1 -6-1992).   
11. Sub -clause ( b) omitted by Act 20 of 2002, s. 116 (w.e.f. 1 -6-2002).  
12. Sub -clause ( d) omitted by s. 116, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -6-2002).  
13. Ins. by Act 18 of 1992, s. 107 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1992).  4 
 (ii) any expenditure incurred by persons within the purview of the Vienna Convention on 
Diplomatic Relations, 1961 or the Vienna Conve ntion on Consular Relations, 1963;  
(iii) any expenditure incurred in any shop or in any office which is not owned or managed 
by the person who carr ies on the business of a hotel;  
(iv) any expenditure by way of any tax, including tax under this Act.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, — 
(a) expenditure incurred or any payments made in Indian currency obtained by 
conversion of foreign exchange into Indian currency shall in such cases and in such 
circumstances as may be prescribed be deemed to have been incurred or, as the case may be , 
made in foreign exchange; and  
(b) “foreign exchange ” and “Indian currency ” shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in clauses ( h) and ( k) of section 2 of the Foreign Exchange Reg ulation Act, 
1973 (46  of 1973);  
(2) in relation to a restaurant referred to in clause ( 2) of section 3, means any expenditure incurred 
in, or payments made to, a restaurant in connection with the provision of food or drink by the 
restaurant, whether at the restaurant or outsid e, or by any other person in the restaurant, but does not 
include any expenditure referred to in sub -clauses ( ii) and ( iv) of clause ( 1).]  
6.Tax authorities .—1[(1) Every Director General of Income -tax, Chief Commissioner of Income -tax, 
tax, Director of Income -tax, Commissioner of Income -tax, Commissioner of Income -tax 
(Appeals)  2[Additional Director of Income -tax, 3[Joint Director of Income -tax, Joint Commissioner  of 
Income -tax] Deputy Director ] of Income tax, Deputy Commissioner of Income -tax, Assistant Director 
Income -tax, Assistant Commissioner of Income -tax, Income -tax Officer, Tax Recovery Officer and 
Inspector of Income -tax shall have the like powers and perform the like functions under th is Act as he has 
and performs under the Income -tax Act, and for the exercise of his powers and the performance of his 
functions, his jurisdiction under this Act shall be the same as he has under the Income -tax Act.]  
(2) All officers and persons employed in  the execution of this Act shall observe and follow the orders, 
instructions and directions of the Board:  
Provided that no such orders, instructions or directions shall be issued — 
(a) so as to require any tax authority to make a particular assessment or to  dispose of a 
particular case in a particular manner; or  
(b) so as to interfere with the discretion of the 4[Chief Commissioner or Commissioner ] 
(Appeals) in the exercise of his appellate functions.  
(3) Every  5[Assessing Officer] employed in the execution of this Act shall observe and follow the 
the orders, instructions and directions issued for his guidance by the  6[Director General or Director or 
by the Chief Commissioner or Commissioner] or by the  7[Additional Commissioner of Income -tax 
or]  8[Joint Commissi oner] within whose jurisdiction he performs his functions.  
9[7. Collection and recovery of expenditure -tax.—(1) Where any chargeable expenditure is 
incurred in a hotel referred t o in clause ( 1) of section 3, — 
(a) if such expenditure relates to any of the services, specified in sub -clauses ( a) to ( d) of              
clause ( 1) of section 5, provided by the hotel, the person who carries on the business of such hotel; 
and 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 26 of 1988, s. 73, for sub -section ( 1)  (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 1994, s. 58 , for “Deputy Director” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
3. Subs. by Act 21 of 1998, s. 82, for “Additional Commissioner of Income -Tax” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1998).  
4. Subs. by Ac t 26 of 1988, s. 72, for “Commissioner” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
5. Subs. by , s. 72, ibid., for “Inc ome-tax Officer” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988). 
6. Subs. by Act 26 of 198 8, s. 73 , for “Director of Inspection or by the Commissioner” (w.e.f 1 -4-1988). 
7. Subs. by Act 32 of  1994, s. 58 , for “Deputy Commissioner” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  
8. Subs. by Act 21 of 1998, s. 82, for “Deputy Commissioner” (w.e.f 1 -10-1998).  
9. Subs. by Act 49 of 1991, s. 116, for section 7 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1991).  5 
 (b) if such expenditure relates to any of the services, specified in sub -clause ( b) or s ub-clause ( d) 
of clause ( 1) of section 5, provided by the other person referred to therein, such other person,  
shall collect the expenditure -tax at the rate specified in clau se (a) of section 4.  
(2) Where any chargeable expenditure is incurred in a restaurant referred to in clause ( 2) of section 3 
1[before the 1st day of June, 1992] in relation to any services specified in clause ( 2) of section  5 and 
where such services are — 
(a) provided by the restaurant, the person who carries on the business of su ch restaurant; and  
(b) provided by the other person, such other person,  
shall collect the expenditure -tax at the rate specified in clause ( b) of section 4.  
(3) The tax collected during any calendar month in accordance with the provisions of                            
sub-sections ( 1) and  (2) shall be paid to the credit of the Central Government by the 10th of the month 
immediately fol lowing the said calendar month.  
(4) Any person responsible for collecting the tax, who fails to collect the tax in accordan ce with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall, notwithstanding such failure, be liable to pay the tax 
to the credit of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3).] 
8. Person responsible for collecting tax to furnish prescribed return .—(1) Every person 
responsible for collecting the tax shall before the expiry of four months from the 31st day of March in 
each year, furnish or cause to be furnished to the 2[Assessing Officer] in the prescribed form and ve rified 
in the prescribed manner, a return in respect of the immediately pr eceding financial year showing— 
(a) the aggregate of the payments received in res pect of chargeable expenditure;  
(b) the amount of the tax collected;  
(c) the amount of the tax paid t o the credit  of the Central Government; and  
(d) such other pa rticulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) In the case of any pers on who, in the opinion of the 2[Assessing Officer], is responsible for 
collecting tax under this Act and who has not furnished a return under sub -section ( 1), the  2[Assessing 
Officer] may, before the expiry of the financial year in which the return is to be furnished, issue a notice 
to him and serve the same upon him, requiring him to furnish within thirty days from the date of service 
of the notice the return in the prescribed form and verified in the prescribed manner setting forth such 
other pa rticulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any person responsible for collecting the tax who has not furnished the return within the time 
allowed under sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), or having furnished a return under sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) discovers any omission or wrong statement therein, may furnish a return or a revised 
return, as the case may be, at any time before the assessment is made.  
9. Assessment. —(1) For the purpose of making an assessment under this Act, the 2[Assessing 
Office r] may serve on any person who has furnished a return under section 8 or upon whom a notice has 
been served under sub -section ( 2) of section 8 (whether a return has been furnished or not) a notice 
requiring him on a date therein to be specified, to produce  or cause to be produced such accounts or 
documents or other evidence as the 2[Assessing Officer ] may require for the purposes of this Act and 
may, from time to time, serve further notices requiring the production of such further accounts or 
documents or o ther evidence as he may require.  
(2) The 2[Assessing Officer], after considering such accounts, documents or other evidence, if any , as 
he has obtained under sub -section ( 1) and after taking into account any relevant material which he has 
gathered, shall, by an order in writing, assess the chargeable expenditure and the amount of tax payable 
on the basis of such assessment.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 1992, s. 108 (w.e.f. 1 -6-1992).  
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 1988, s. 72 , for “Income -tax Officer” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  6 
 10. Best judgment assessment .—If— 
(a) any person fails to make the return required by any notice given under sub -section ( 2) of 
section  8 and has not made a return or a revised return under sub -section ( 3) of that section, or  
(b) any person having made a return fails to comply with all the terms of a notice issued under              
sub-section ( 1) of section 9, or  
(c) the  1[Assessing Officer] is not satisfied with the correctness or the completeness of the 
accounts of the assessee,  
the 1[Assessing Officer ], after taking into account all the relevant material which he has gathered, shall, 
by an order in writing, make the asse ssment of the chargeable expenditure to the best of his judgment and 
determine the sum payable by the assessee or refundable to the assessee on the basis of such assessment.  
11. Chargeable expe nditure escaping assessment. —If— 
(a) the 1[Assessing Officer] has reason to believe that by reason of omission or failure on the part 
of the assessee to make a return under section 8 for any assessment year or to disclose wholly and 
truly all material facts necessary for his assessment for any ass essment year, chargeable expenditure 
for that year has escaped assessment or has been under -assessed, o r 
(b) notwithstanding that there has been no omission or failure as mentioned in clause ( a) on the 
part of the assessee, the 1[Assessing Officer ] has, in consequence of information in his possession, 
reason to believe that chargeable expenditure assessable in any assessment year has escaped 
assessment or has been under -assessed,  
he may, in cases falling under clause ( a), at any time, and in cases falling under clause ( b), at any time 
within four years from the end of that assessment year, serve on the assessee a notice containing all or any 
of the requirements which may be included in a notice under section 8 and may proceed to assess or 
reassess the charg eable expenditure, and the provisions of this Act shall, so far as may be, apply, as if the 
notice was a no tice issued under that section.  
12. Rectification of mistake .—(1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, 
the tax authority r eferred to in section 6 which passed any order under the provisions of this Act may, 
within four years of the date on which such ord er was passed, amend the order.  
(2) Where any matter has been considered and decided in any proceeding by way of appeal or 
revision relating to an order referred to in sub -section ( 1), the authority passing such order may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, amend the order under that 
sub-section in relation to any matter other than the m atter which has been so considered and decided.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this sec tion, the authority concerned — 
(a) may make an amendment under sub -section ( 1) of its own motion, and  
(b) shall make such amendment if any mis take is brought to its notice, — 
(i) by the assessee; or  
(ii) where the authority concerned is the 2[Chief Commissioner or Commissioner ] (Appeals) , 
by the 1[Assessing Officer].  
(4) An amendment, which has the effect of enhancing an assessment or reducing a refund or 
otherwise increasing the liability of the assessee, shall not be made under this section unless the authority 
concerned has given notice to the assessee of its intentio n so to do and has allowed the assessee a 
reasona ble opportunity of being heard.  
(5) Where an amendment is made under this section, an order shall be passed in writing by the tax 
authority concerned.  
(6) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, where a ny such amendment has the effect of reducing 
the assessment, the  1[Assessing Officer] shall make any refund whi ch may be due to such assessee.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1988, s. 72, for “Income -tax Officer” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “Commissioner” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  7 
 (7) Where any such amendment has the effect of enhancing the assessment or reducing the refund 
already made, the 1[Assessing Officer ] shall serve on the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed 
form specifying the sum payable and such notice of demand shall be deemed to be issued under              
section 20 and the provisions of this Act shall apply accordingl y. 
13. Time limit for completion of assessment and reassessment .—(1) No order of assessment shall 
be made under section 9 or section 10 at any time after the expiration of a period of four years from the 
end of the assessment year in which the chargeable expenditure was first assessable, or one year from the 
date of the filing of the return or revised return under  section 8, whichever is later.  
(2) No order of assessment or reassessment s hall be made under section 11, — 
(a) where the assessment or reassessm ent is to be made in a case falling within clause ( a) of             
section 11 for which a notice has been served upon the assessee, at any time after the expiration of a 
period of four years from the end of the assessment year in wh ich the said notice wa s served;  
(b) where the assessment or reassessment is to be made in a case falling within clause ( b) of 
section 11, for which a notice has been served, after the expiration of a period of — 
(i) four years from the end of the assessment year in which the cha rgeable expen diture was 
first assessable, or  
(ii) one year from the date of service of s uch notice,  
whichever is later.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), an order of fresh assessment in 
pursuance of an order passed under section 21, section 22 or section 23, setting aside or cancelling an 
assessment, may be made at any time before the expiry of four years from the end of the financial year in 
which the o rder under section 21 is passed by 2[the Commissioner, or the order is received by the Chief 
Commissioner or Commissioner, as the case may be, under section 22 or section 23] shall be substituted.  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall not a pply to the assessment or reassessment made 
in consequence of, or to give effect to, any finding or direction contained in an order under section 21, 
section 22, section 23 3[or any order of the National Tax Tribunal or of a High Court ] or Supreme Court 
in a proceeding by way of reference or appeal under this Act or any order of any court in a proceeding 
otherwise than by way of an appeal or reference under this Act and such assessment or reassessment may, 
subject to the provisions of  sub-section  (3), be c ompleted at any time.  
Explanation. —In computing the period of limitation for the purposes of this section, the period 
during which the assessment proceeding is stayed by an order or injunction of any court shall be 
excluded.  
14. Interest on delayed payment  of expenditure -tax.—Every person responsible for collecting 
expenditure -tax and paying it to the credit of the Central Government in accordance with the provisions of 
section 7, who fails to credit the tax to the account of the Central Government within t he period specified 
in that section, shall pay simple interest at the rate of 4[one per cent. ] for every month or part of a month 
by which such crediting of tax is delayed.  
5[15. Penalty for failure to collect or pay expenditure -tax.—Any person responsibl e for collecting 
expenditure -tax in accordance with the provisions of sub -section  (1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 7,  
who— 
(a) fails to collect such tax; or  
(b) having  collected the tax, fails to pay such tax to the credit of the Central Government in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of that section,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1988, s. 72 , for “Income -tax Officer” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 74, ibid., for “the Commissioner, or, as the case may be, the order under section 22  or section 23 is received by the 
Commissioner ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1998).  
3. Subs. by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30 and t he Schedule, for “or any order of a High Court” (w.e.f. 28 -12-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 54 of 2003, s. 22, for “one and one -fourth  per cent.” (w.e.f. 8 -9-2003).  
5. Subs. by Act 49 of 1991, s. 117, for section 15 (w.e.f. 1 -10-1991).  8 
 shall pay, — 
(i) in the case referred to in clause ( a), in addition to paying tax in accordance with the  
provisions of sub -section ( 4) of that section, by way of penalty, a sum equal to the amount of tax  
that he failed to collect; and  
(ii) in the case referred to in clause ( b), in addition to paying interest in accordance with the 
provisions of section 14, b y way of penalty, a sum which shall not be less than one hundred rupees 
but which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which the failure continues, so, 
however, that the penalty under this clause shall not exceed the amount  of tax that he failed to pay.]  
16. Penalty for failure to furnish prescribed return. —If a person fails to furnish in due time the 
return which he is required to furnish under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 or by notice given under          
sub-section ( 2) of that section, he shall pay, by way of penalty, a sum which shall not be less than one 
hundred rupees, but which may extend to two hundred rupees for every day during which the failure 
continues.  
17. Penalty for concealment of chargeable expenditure .—If the 1[Assesing Of ficer] or the 2[Chief 
Commissioner or Commissioner ] (Appeals) in the course of any proceedings under this Act is satisfied 
that any person has concealed particulars of chargeable expenditure or has furnished inaccurate 
particulars of such chargeable expend iture, he may direct that such person shall pay by way of penalty, in 
addition to any               expenditure -tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be less than, but which 
shall not exceed twice, the amount of tax sought to be evaded by reason of con cealment of particulars of 
chargeable expenditure or the furnishing of inaccurate particulars of such chargeable expenditure:  
Provided that if the amount of chargeable expenditure (as determined by the 1[Assessing Officer] on 
assessment) in respect of which particulars have been concealed or inaccurate particulars have been 
furnished exceeds a sum of twenty -five thousand rupees, the 1[Assessing Officer] shall not issue any 
direction for payment by way of penalty without the previous approval of the 3[Additional Commissioner  
or, as the case may be, of the Deputy Commissioner ]. 
18. Penalty for failure to comply with notice. —If the 1[Assessing Officer] in the course of any 
proceedings under this Act is satisf ied that any person has failed to comply with a notice under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 9, he may direct that such person shall pay, by way of penalty, in addition to 
any tax payable by him, a sum which shall not be less than ten per cent. but which shall not exceed fifty 
per cent. of the amount of the tax, if any, which would ha ve been avoided if the chargeable expenditure 
returned by such person had been accepted as the correct chargeable expenditure.  
19. Penalty not to be imposed in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
provisions of section 15, section 16, s ection 17 or section 18, no penalty shall be imposable on the 
assessee for any failure referred to in the said provisions if he proves that there was reasonable cause for 
the said failure.  
20. Notice of demand. —When any tax, interest, penalty or any other sum is payable under this Act, 
the 1[Assessing Officer] shall serve upon the assessee a notice of demand in the prescribed form, 
specifying the sum so payable and the amount of chargeable expenditure in relation  to which such sum is 
payable.  
21. Revision of orders by the Commissioner. —(1) The Commissioner may, either of his own 
motion or on application by the assessee for revision, call for the record of a proceeding under this Act 
which has been taken by the 1[Assessing Officer] subordinate to him and may make such enquiry or cause 
such enquiry to be made and, subject to the provisions of this Act, may pass such order thereon as he 
thinks fit.  
(2) No order which is prejudicial to the assessee shall be passed unde r this section unless the assessee 
has been given  an opportunity of being heard.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1988,  s. 72 , for “Income -tax Officer ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by s. 72, ibid., for “Commissioner” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
3. Subs. by Act 32 of 1994, s. 59, for “Deputy Commissioner” (w.e.f. 1 -6-1994).  9 
 (3) No order under this section shall be passed by the Commissioner, if an appeal against the notice of 
demand issued by the 1[Assessing Officer ] under section 20 is pending b efore the Co mmissioner 
(Appeals).  
(4) No order under this section shall be passed after the expiry of two years from the end of the 
financial year in which the order sought to be reviewed has been passed.  
2[(6) On every application by an assessee  for revision under this sub -section, made on or after the 1st 
day of October, 1998, an order shall be passed within one year from the end of the financial year in which 
such application is made by the assessee for revision.  
Explanation .—In computing the p eriod of limitation for the purposes of this sub -section, the time 
taken in giving an opportunity to the assessee to be re -heard under the proviso to section 24 and any 
period during which any proceeding under this section is stayed by an order or injunct ion of any court 
shall be excluded.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 6), an order in revision under that sub -section 
may be passed at any time in consequence of or to give effect to any finding or direction contained in an 
order of the Appellate Tribunal,  3[the National Tax Tribunal,] the High Court or the Supreme Court.]  
22. Appeals to the Commissioner (Appeals) .—(1) Any person objecting to the amount of 
expenditure -tax for which he is assessed by the 1[Assessing Officer], or denyin g his liability to be 
assessed under this Act, or objecting to an order levying penalty under this Act, may appeal  to the 
Commissioner (Appeals).  
4[(2) Every appeal shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the prescribed manner  and 
in respect of appeals filed on or after the 1st day of October, 1998, shall be accompanied by a fee of two 
hundred and fifty rupees. ] 
(3) An appeal shall be presented within thirty days of the receipt of the notice of demand relating to 
tax, inte rest or penal ty under this Act:  
Provided that the Commissioner (Appeals) may admit an appeal after the expiration of the said period 
if he is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not pr esenting it within that period.  
(4) The Commissioner (Appeals) shal l hear and determine the appeal and, subject to the provisions of 
this Act, pass such orders as he thinks fit and such orders may include an order enhan cing the assessment 
or penalty.  
5[(4A) In every appeal, the Commissioner (Appeals), where it is possible, may hear and determine 
such appeal within a period of one year from the end of the financial year in which such appeal is filed 
under sub -section ( 1)]. 
Provided that an order enhancing the assessment or penalty shall not be made unless the person  
affected thereby has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against such enhancement.  
(5) The procedure to be adopted in the hearing and determination of the appeals shall, with any 
necessary modification, be in accordance with the pro cedure  applicable in relation to income -tax. 
23. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal. —(1) Any assessee aggrieved by an order passed by a 
Commissioner under section 21, or an order passed by a Commissioner (Appeals) under any provision of 
this Act, may appeal to the Ap pellate Tribunal a gainst such order.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 o f 1988, s. 72, for “Income -tax Officer” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 199 8, s. 83  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1998).  
3. Ins. by Act 49 of 2005, s. 30  and t he Schedule (w.e.f. 20 -12-2005).  
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 1998 , s. 84, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e ..f. 1-10-1998).  
5. Subs. by Act 27 of 1999 , s. 99, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -6-1999 ). 10 
 (2) The Commissioner may, if he objects to any order passed by the Commissioner (Appeals) under 
any provision of this Act, direct the 1[Assessing Officer] to appeal to the Appellate Tribunal against the 
order.  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be filed within sixty days of the date 
on which the order sought to be appealed against is communicated to the assessee or to the 
Commissioner, as the case may be.  
(4) The 1[Assessing Officer] or the assessee, as the case may be, on receipt of a notice that an appeal 
against the order of the Commissioner  (Appeals) has been preferred under sub -section ( 1) or                 
sub-section ( 2) by the other party may, notwithstanding that he may not have  appealed against such order 
or any part thereof, within thirty days of the receipt of the noti ce, file a memorandum of cross -objections, 
verified in the prescribed manner, against any part of the order of the Commissioner  (Appeals), and such 
memorandum sh all be disposed of by the Appellate  Tribunal as if it were an appeal presented within the 
time specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal may admit an appeal or permit the filing of a memorandum of                  
cross -objections after the  expiry of the relevant period referred to in sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4), if 
it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not pr esenting it within that period.  
(6) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be in the prescribed form and shall  be verified in the 
prescribed manner and shall, except in the case of an appeal referred to in sub -section ( 2) or a 
memorandum of cross -objections referred to in sub -section ( 4), be accompanied by 2[a fee of one 
thousand  rupees  in the case of appeals file d on or after the 1st day of October, 1998 .] 
(7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, in hearing and making an order on any appeal under this 
section, the Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the same powers and follow the same procedure as it 
exercises and  follows in hearing and making a n order on any appeal under the I ncome -tax Act.  
24. Application of provisions of Income -tax Act.—The provisions of the following sections and 
Schedules of the Income -tax Act and the  Income -tax  (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 1962, as in force 
from time to time, shall apply with necessary modifications as if the said provisions and the rules referred 
to expenditure -tax instead of to income -tax:— 
3[2(44), 118, 120, 129, 131 to 136 (both inclusive)] 138, 4[139A, 140, 144A,  145], 159 to 163 (both 
inclusive), 166, 167, 170, 171, 173 to 179 (both inclusive), 187, 188, 5[188A] 189, 220  to 227 (both 
inclusive), 229, 6*** 232, 237 to 245 (both inclusive), 254 to 262 (both inclusive), 265, 266, 268, 269, 
278B, 278C, 278D, 278E, 5[279B], 281, 281B, 282, 283, 284, 287, 288, 288A, 288B, 289 to 293 (both 
inclusive), the Second Schedule and the Third Schedule:  
Provided that references in the said provisions and rules to the “assessee ” shall be construed as 
references to an assessee as defined in this Act.  
25. Wilful attempt to evade tax, etc. —If a person wilful y attempts in any manner whatsoever to 
evade collection or payment of any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or impos sible under this Act, or to 
understate the aggregate of the chargeable expenditure, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that 
may be imposable on him under any other provision of this Act, be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall no t be less than three months but which may exten d to seven years 
and with fine.  
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1988, s. 72, for “Income -tax Officer” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 1998, s. 85, for “a fee of two hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1998).  
3 Subs. by Act 26 of 198 8, s. 75, for “2(43B ) and (44), 118,125,125A,128 to 136 (both inclusive ) ” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988). 
4. Subs. by A ct 49 of 1991, s. 118, for “140,  144A”  (w.e.f. 1 -10-1991).  
5. Ins. by s. 118, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1991).  
6. The fig ures “231,” o mitted by Act 26 of 19 88, s. 75 (w.e.f 1 -4-1988).  11 
  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, a wilful attempt to evade collection or payment of any 
tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act shall i nclude a case where any person — 
(i) has in his possession or control any books of account or other documents (being books of 
account or other documents relevant to any proceeding under this Act) containing  a false entry or 
statement; or  
(ii) makes or cause s to be made any false entry or statement in such books of  account or other 
documents; or  
(iii) wilful ly omits or causes to be omitted any relevant entry or statement in such books of 
account or other documents; or  
(iv) causes  any other circumstances to exist which will have the effect of enabling such person to 
evade collection or payment of any tax, penalty or interest chargeable or imposable under this Act.  
26. Failure to furnish prescribed returns. —If a person fails to furn ish in due time the return which 
he is required to furnish under sub -section ( 1) of section 8 or by a notice given under sub -section ( 2) of 
that section, he shall, without prejudice to any penalty that may be imposable on him under any other 
provision of t his Act, be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
three months but which may extend to seven years and with fine.  
27. False statement in verification, etc. —If a person makes a statement in any verification under 
this Act or any rule made thereunder, or delivers an account or statement which is false, and which he 
either knows or believes to be false, or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with rigorous 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less th an three months but which may extend to seven years 
and with fine.  
28. Abetment of false return, etc .—If a person abets or induces in any manner another person to 
make and deliver an account or a statement or declaration relating to any chargeable expendit ure which is 
false and which he either knows to be false or does not believe to be true or to commit an offence under 
section 25, he shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
three months but which may extend to  seven years and with fine.  
29. Certain offences to be non -cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , an offence punishable under section 25 or section 26 or section 27 
or section 28 shall be deemed to be non -cognizable within the meaning of that Code.  
30. Institution of proceedin gs and composition of offences. —(1) A person shall not be proceeded 
against for any offence under section 25 or section 26 or section 27 or section 28, except with the 
previous sanction of the 1[Chief  Commissioner or Commissioner:]  
Provided that no such sanction shall be required where the complainant before the cou rt is a 
Commiss ioner  (Appeals).  
(2) The 1[Chief Commissioner or Commissioner] may, either before or after the institution of 
proceedings, compound any offence punishable under section 25 or section 26 or section 27 or section 28.  
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Board may, subject to the control of the Central Government, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the room charges may be determined under 2[sub-clause ( a) of clause ( 1) 
of section 3] in cases where composite charges are payable in respect of resi dential accommo dation 
and food;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 1988, s. 72, for “Commissioner” (w.e.f. 1 -4-1988).  
2. Subs. by Act 49 of 1991, s. 119, for “sub -section ( 2) of section 3” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1991).  12 
 (b) the cases and the circumstances in which payments made in Indian, currency by conversion of 
foreign exchange into Indian currency shall be deemed to have been made in foreign exchange for the 
purposes of clause ( a) of the Explanation to 1[clause ( 1) of section 5.]  
(c) the form in which returns under section 8 may be furnished, the manner in which they may be 
verified and the other partic ulars which a form may contain;  
(d) the form in which a notice of demand may be served on the assess ee under sub -section ( 7) of 
section 12;  
(e) the form in which appeals  under section 22 or under sub -section ( 6) of section 23 may be filed 
and the manner  in which they may be verified;  
(f) the  manner in which a memorandum of cross -objections under sub -section ( 4) of section 23 
may be verified;  
(g) any other matter which by this Act  is to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall on the first occasion o f the exercise 
thereof include the power to give retrospective effect to the rules or any of them from a date not earlier 
than the da te of commencement of this Act.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause every rule made under this section to be laid, as so on as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately follo wing the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as t he case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done 
under that rule.  
32. Power to remove difficulties. —If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of th is 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficul ty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
33 . [Consequential  amendments .]—Rep. by Repealing  and Amending Act , 2001 (30 of 2001),                
s. 2 and the First S chedule (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act  49 of 1991 . s. 119, for “section  5” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1991).  
--------------------------The Goa, Daman and Diu Mining Concessions (Abolition and Declaration as Mining Leases) Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU MINING CONCESSIONS (ABOLITION AN D 
DECLARATION AS MINING LEASES) ACT, 1987  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Act to override all other enactments, etc . 
CHAPTER  II 
ABOLITION OF MINING CONCESSIONS AND DECLARATION AS MINING LEASES UNDER  
THE MINES AND MINERALS  ACT 
4. Abolition, etc., of mining concessions . 
5. General effect of declaring the mining concessions to be mining leases . 
CHAPTER  III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
6. Payment of amounts to concession holders . 
7. Payment of further amount . 
CHAPTER  IV 
COMMISSIONER OF  PAYMENTS  
8. Commissioner of Payments to be appointed . 
9. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner . 
10. Claims to be made to the Commissioner . 
11. Liability of Central Government to end on payment of claim . 
12. Disputes how to be dealt with . 
13. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account . 
 
CHAPTER  V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. [Repealed .] 
15. Penalties.  
16. Offences by companies.  
17. Protection of action taken in good faith. 
18. Delegation of powers . 
19. Declaration as to the policy of the State . 
20. Power to make rules.  
21. Power to remove difficulties . 
22. Validation . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
 
  2 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU MINING CONCESSIONS (ABOLITION AN D 
DECLARATION AS MINING LEASES) ACT, 1987  
 
ACT NO. 16 OF 1987  
[23rd May , 1987.]  
An Act to provide for the abolition of the mining concessions in operation in the Union territory 
of Goa, Daman and Diu and specified in the First and the Second Schedules, and for the 
declaration of such mining concessions as mining leases under the Mines and Minerals 
(Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 with a view to the regulation of the mines to which 
such concessions relate and for the development of minerals under the control of the Union 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  certain mining concessions have been granted in perpetuity under the former Portuguese 
Mining Laws (Decree of 20th day of September, 1906) in the territories now included in the Union 
territory of Goa, Dam an and Diu by the former Portuguese Government and by the Government of Goa, 
Daman and Diu:  
AND WHEREAS  the aforesaid mining laws have ceased to be in force and doubts have been expressed 
as to whether such mining concessions are mining leases within the m eaning of the Mines and Minerals 
(Regulation and Development) Act 1957  (67 of 1957) : 
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient in the public interest to abolish such mining concessions and declare 
them as mining leases under the aforesaid Act for the purpose of making the provisions of that Act 
applicable to the mines to which such concessions relate with a view t o the regulation of such mines and 
for the development of minerals under the control of the Union so as to subserve the common good:  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follow s:— 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title.—This Act may called the Goa, Daman and Diu Mining Concessions (Abolition and 
Declaration as Mining Leases) Act, 1987.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context other wise requires, — 
(a) ―appointed day ‖ means the 20th day of December, 1961;  
(b) ―Commissioner ‖ means the Commissioner of Payments appointed under section 8;  
(c) ―concession holder ‖ means a person who has been granted a mining concession;  
(d) ―date of assent ‖ means the date on which the assent is given by the President to this Act;  
(e) ―Goa, Daman and Diu ‖ means the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu;  
(f) ―mines and Minerals Act ‖ means the Mines and Minerals (Regulation and Develop ment)  
Act, 1957  (67 of 1957) ; 
(g) ―mining concession ‖ means a mining concession granted under the Por tuguese Colonial 
Mining Laws, 1906 (Decree of 20th September, 1906);  
(h) ―notification ‖ means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(i) ―prescribed ‖ means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(j) ―specified date ‖ means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any 
provision of this Act, by notification, specify; and different dates may be specified for different 
provisions of this Act;   3 
 (k) words and expressions used and not defined, but defined in the Mines Act, 1952  (35 of 1952)  
or the Mines and Minerals Act, shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.  
3. Act to override all other enactments, etc .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything in consistent therewith contained in any enactment (other than this Act), or any 
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority or any instrument having effect by 
virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
CHAPTER  II 
ABOLITION OF MINING CONCESSIONS AND DECLARATION AS MINING LEASES UNDER  
THE MINES AND MINERALS  ACT 
4. Abolition , etc., of mining concessions .—(1) Every mining concession specified in the First 
Schedule shall, on and from the appointed day, be deemed to have  been abolished, and shall, with effect 
from that day, be deemed to be a mining lease granted under the Mines and Minerals Act, and the 
provisions of that Act shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act, apply to such mining lease.  
(2) Every mining conce ssion specified in the Second Schedule shall, on and from the day next after 
the date of grant of the said concession and specified in the corresponding entry in the eighth column of 
the said Schedule, be deemed to have been abolished and shall, with effec t from that day, be deemed to be 
a mining lease granted under the Mines and Minerals Act, and the provisions of that Act shall, save as 
otherwise provided in this Act, apply to such mining lease.  
(3) If, after the date of assent, the Central Government is satisfied, whether from any information 
received by it or otherwise, that there has been any error, omission or misdescription in relation to the 
particulars of any mining concession or the name and residence of any concession holder specified in the 
First or the Second Schedule, it may, by notification, correct such error, omission or misdescription, and 
on the issue of such notification, the First or the Second Schedule, as the case may be, shall be deemed to 
have been amended accordingly.  
5. General effe ct of declaring the mining concessions to be mining leases .—(1) Where a mining 
concession has been deemed to be a mining lease under section 4, the concession holder shall, on and 
from the day mentioned in that section, be deemed to have become the holder of such mining lease under 
the Mines and Minerals Act in relation to the mine to which the mining concession relates, subject to the 
condition that the period of such lease shall, notwithstanding anything contained in that Act, extend up to 
a period of six  months from the date of assent.  
(2) On the expiry of the period of any mining lease under sub -section ( 1), it may, if so desired by the 
holder of such lease and on an application being made by him in accordance with the provisions of the 
Mines and Mineral s Act and the rules made thereunder, be renewed on such terms and conditions, and up 
to the maximum period for which, such lease can be renewed under the provisions of that Act and the 
rules made thereunder.  
CHAPTER  III 
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
6. Payment of amounts to concession holders .—Every concession holder specified in the second 
column of the First and the Second Schedules shall be given by the Central Government, in cash, and in 
the manner specified in Chapter IV, for the abolition of the mining conces sions held by him, and 
declaring it as a mining lease, under section 4, an amount equal to the amount specified against him in the 
corresponding entry in the eighth column of the First Schedule and the ninth column of the Second 
Schedule, as the case may b e. 
7. Payment of further amount .—(1) There shall also be given by the Central Government, in cash, 
to every concession holder specified in the second column of the First and the Second Schedules, simple 
interest at the rate of four per cent . per annum on the amount specified against such concession holder in 
the corresponding entry in the eighth column of the First Schedule and the ninth column of the Second 
Schedule, as the case may be, for the period commencing on the date of assent and ending on the date of 
payment of such amount to the Commissioner.  4 
 (2) The amount referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be in addition to the amount specified in the First 
Schedule or the Second Schedule, as the case may be.  
CHAPTER  IV 
COMMISSIONER OF  PAYMENTS  
8. Commissioner of Payments to be appointed .—(1) For the purpose of disbursing the amounts 
payable to the concession holders under this Act, the Central Government shall appoint such person as it 
may think fit to be the Commissioner of Payments.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons as it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Commissioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercisable by him under this Act and differ ent persons may be 
authorised to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any of the powers exercisable by the 
Commissioner may exercise those powers in the same manner and with the same effect as if they have 
been conferred, on that person directly by this Act and not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appointed under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
9. Payment by the  Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Government 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay, in cash, to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
concession holders, a sum equal to the sum specified against the mining concessions  in the First and the 
Second Schedules, together with the amount of interest referred to in section 7.  
(2) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government, in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid und er this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account and the said deposit account shall be operated 
by the Commissioner.  
(3) Records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of each of the concession  holder in 
relation to which payments have been made to him under this Act.  
(4) Interest accruing on the amount standing to the credit of the deposit account referred to in  
sub-section ( 2) shall enure to the benefit of the concession holders.  
10. Claims to be made to the Commissioner .—(1) Every concession holder, having a claim for the 
payment of the amount referred to in section 6, shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within 
thirty days from the specified date : 
Provided that if the Commissione r is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days, but not thereafter.  
(2) The Commissioner shall fix a cert ain date on or before which every claimant shall file the proof of 
his claim.  
(3) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of the daily newspaper in the English language and one issue of any daily newspaper in the regional 
language as the Commissioner may consider suitable, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant 
to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.  
(4) Every claimant, who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commissioner, shall be excluded from the disbursement made by the Commissioner.  
(5) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the concession holder, a reasonable opportunity of be ing heard, by order in writing admit or reject 
the claim in whole or in part.  
(6) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of h is functions, including the place or places at which he will hold his sittings and shall, for 5 
 the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit in respect of t he following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other materia l object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) the issuing of any commission for the examination of any witnesses.  
(7) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Ind ian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(8) A claimant, who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissi oner, may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the relevant mine is situated.  
11. Liability of Central Government to end on payment of claim .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be paid by the Commissioner to the person or 
persons to whom such amount is due, and, on such payment, the liability of the Central Government in 
respect of such claim shall st and discharged.  
12. Disputes how to be dealt with .—In the event of there being a doubt or dispute as to the right of a 
person to receive the whole or any part of the amount referred to in section 6 or section 7, the 
Commissioner shall refer the matter to t he court for a decision, and shall make the disbursement in 
accordance with the decision of the court.  
Explanation .—In this section ―court ‖, in relation to a mining concession, means the principal civil 
court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the mines relating to such 
concession is situated.  
13. Undisbursed or unclaimed amount to be deposited to the general revenue account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed after such payment  for a 
period of three years shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the general revenue account of the 
Central Government; but a claim to any money transferred may be preferred to the Central Government 
by the concession holder entitled to such paymen t and shall be dealt with as if such transfer had not been 
made, the order, if any, for the payment of the claim being treated as an order for the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER  V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. [Amendment of Act 67 of 1957 .]—Rep. by Rep ealing  and Amending Act , 2001  (30 of 2001 ), s.2 
and The First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
15. Penalties .—Any person who contravenes the provisions of this Act shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend to two thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
16. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this  Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the of fence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished accordingly : 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that  he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  6 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed w ith the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) ―company ‖ means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) ―director ‖, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
17. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or other employee of that Government, or any 
person authorised by that Government for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or any officer or other 
employee of that Government or any person authorised by that Government f or any damage caused or 
likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
18. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the powers conferred by sections 20 and 21,may 
also be exercised by such person or persons as may be specified in the notificat ion. 
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the direction, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
19. Declaration as to the policy of the State .—It is hereby declared that this Act is for giving effect 
to the policy of the State towards securing the principles specified in clauses ( b) and ( c) of Article 39 of 
the Constitution.  
Explanatio n.—In this section, ―State ‖ has the same meaning as in Article 12 o f the Constitution.  
20. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the succe ssive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, howe ver, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
21. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
assent.  
22. Validation .—(1) Notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force or any 
judgment, decree or order of any court , tribunal or other authority, — 
(a) every concession holder shall, for the period commencing on and from the date when his 
mining concession had been declared to be a mining lease and ending with the date of expiry of the 
period of his lease under the provisions of this Act (hereafter in this section referred to as the said 
period), be liable to pay the dead rent or, as the case may be, royalty, due in respect of such lease 
under the provisions of the Mines and Minerals Act and the rules made thereunder, and such amount 
shall, save as otherwise provided in this section, be recoverable fr om him;  7 
 (b) any amount paid by the concession holder for the said period, either as a fixed tax or as a 
proportional tax, or both, or as a royalty under protest shall be deemed to have been dead rent or, as 
the case may be, royalty, paid in accordance with  law and such amounts shall not be liable to be 
refunded; and  
(c) due credit of all such amounts paid by a concession holder under clause ( b) shall be given to 
him in determining the dead rent or, as the case may be, royalty payable by him under clause ( a), as if 
this Act and the Mines and Minerals Act and the rules made thereunder had been in force at all 
material times, and accordingly — 
(i) no suit or other proceeding shall be instituted, maintained or continued in any court or 
other authority against the  Government or any person or authority whatsoever for the refund of 
any amounts paid by a concession holder under clause ( b); and  
(ii) no court shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any amounts so paid, on 
the ground that the mining con cession is not a mining lease.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be const rued 
as preventing any person, — 
(a) from  questioning, in accordance with the provisions of the Mines and Minerals Act and the 
rules made thereunder, the assessment of any dead rent or royalty for the said period; or  
(b) from claiming refund of any dead rent or royalty paid by him in excess of th e amount due 
from him under the Mines and Minerals Act and the rules made thereunder.  
  8 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 4( 1), 6, 7 and 9( 1)] 
DETAILS OR MINING CONCESSIONS ABOLISHED AND DECLARED AS MINING LEASES ON 
AND FROM THE APPOINTED DAY  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
1. Maria Severina 
Fernandes ora 
Camilo Agostinho 
Elias Fernandes, of 
Aldona 
(cabesacasal).  Anvalitembo  Fe/ 
Mang  Vadem  Sanguem  2 of 30 -1-1929  14,300  
2. Domingos Jose 
Fernandes , of 
Aldona.  Paicatembo  Ditto  Netorlim  Ditto  1 of 26 -8-1931  13,900  
3. Naria Alice Sodder 
Pereira of Vasco da 
Gama.  Aili Vagurbem  Ditto  Sancordem  Ditto  1 of 4 -4-1937  14,300  
4. Timblo Irmaos 
Ltda, of Margao . Bandodongor 
Cumbiadongor  Ditto  Verlem  Ditto  1 of 19 -3-1941  9,300  
5. Xeo Abdul Kadat , 
of Sanguem.  Cudoitembo  Ditto  Bati Ditto  3 of 19 -3-1941  7,900  
6. Maria Seani 
Rephael , of 
Curchorem.  Amvandongor  Ditto  Curpem  Ditto  5 of 19 -3-1941  12,500  
7. Maria 
SeaniReph ael, of 
Curchorem.  Nidgulamoll  
dongor  Iron Calem  Ditto  6 of 19 -3-1941  11,900  
8. Empresa Minero 
Comercila, of Goa . Choriacho tembo  
dongor  Ditto  Bimbol of 
Calem  Ditto  7 of 19 -3-1941  13,900  
9. Gangadhar N. 
Agrawal, of 
Margao.  Huldool dongor  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  8 of 19 -3-1941  14,300  
10. Companhia 
Nacional Agency , 
of Ponda.  Mollo or Moroda  Fe/ 
Mang  Darbandora  Ditto  9 of 19 -3-1941  14,300  
11. Rajarama Naraina 
X Bandecar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Nundem 
deulavoril  
dongor  Ditto  Nundem  Ditto  10 of 20-8-1941  14,200  
12. Comphan ia Mineira 
Dempo and Souza 
Ltda, of Goa.  Lamgao  Iron Lamgao  Bicholim  11 of 20 -8-1941  14,300  
13. Comphania Minei ra 
Dempo and Souza 
Ltda, of Goa.  Vagachiper  Ditto  Bicholim  Ditto  12 of 20 -8-1941  14,300  
  9 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
14. ComphaniaMin eira 
Dempo and Souza 
Ltda, of Goa.  Gaotoor  Iron Bordem  Bicholim  13 of 20 -8-1941  14,300  
15. Comphania Mineira 
Dempo & Souza 
Ltda, of Goa.  Toticho mor 
dongor  Ditto  Mulgao  Ditto  14 of 20 -8-1941  14,300  
16. Comphani a Mineira 
Dempo and Souza 
Ltda, of Goa . Mandurbaga  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  15 of 20 -8-1941  14,300  
17. Firm  Elesbao 
Pereira and Sons 
Ltda, of Mormugao.  Padepanos  Fe/ 
Mang  Sancordem  Sanguem  17 of 22 -10-1941 2,900  
18. Kurnool M.V. 
Maneer , of Bellery.  Vaguem  Ditto  Melauli  Satari  1 of 8 -7-1942  14,400  
19. Hiri BomboGaunco, 
of Margao.  Santana tembo  Ditto  Vichundrem  Sanguem  1 of 6 -10-1947  2,900  
20. CompanhiaNaciona
l Agency , of Penda.  Gonoxirem  Ditto  Verlem  Ditto  2 of 24 -4-1949  13,400  
21. Firm S. Kantilal & 
Cia. Ltda,  of 
Margao.  Shirgal Muddi  Ditto  Salauli  Ditto  3 of 13 -6-1949  14,300  
22. Shri Rajaram N.X.  
Bandekar, of Vasco.  Monte de Sirigao  Iron Sirigao  Bicholim  4 of 17 -6-1949  14,300  
23. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltd, 
ofMarmagao.  Cudplegaicho - 
Guer –Dongor  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  5 of 8 -7-1949  14,300  
24. Hiralal Khodidas , of 
Goa. Gogoro or Gulcan 
Dongor  Fe/Man
g Colomba  Sanguem  6 of 11 -7-1949  10,100  
25. Lidia Belinda 
Simoes, of Goa.  Vagatto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  7 of 5 -8-1949  9,900  
26. Bascora Seguna 
Corpo, ofVasco . Cuncdacho Gholl  Ditto  Gudnem  Bicholim  8 of 12 -8-1949  14,000  
27. Sociedade Mineira 
Goesa, of Panaji . Macarxendo & 
Mauling -todcho 
Dongor  Ditto  Maulinguem  Ditto  9 of 23 -9-1949  13,300  
28. Sociedade Mineira 
Goesa, of Panaji . Chireachea 
Ambeacodil 
Dongurli and 
Cantonachi tembo  
 Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  10 of 23 -9-1949  11,300  10 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
29. Gurudas Timblo, of 
Margao.  Gogolatembo  Ditto  Malcornem  Quepem  11 of 4 -11-1949  9,400  
30. Firm Chowgule 
&Cia. Ltd, of 
Marmagao.  Goigonem  Iron Mahem  Bicholim  13 of 18 -11-1949  10,400  
31. Eurico da Silva 
Ataide e T. De 
Noronha , of Maem.  Orpale 
Anturlichem, etc.  Fe/ 
Mang  Ditto  Ditto  14 of 18 -11-1949  13,800  
 
 
32. Firm S. Kantilal & 
Cia. Ltd., of 
Margao.  Molhadvona, 
Concramoli  Iron Sancordem  Sanguem  16 of 23 -12-1949  12,200  
33. Atmarama X. Poi 
Palondicar, of 
Margao.  Hunantlo Dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Colomba  Ditto  17 of 23 -12-1949  6,400  
34. Aleixo Caetano 
Cardoso, of Raia.  Sem denom , esp. Ditto  Navelim  Ditto  1 of 13-1-1950  3,200  
35. Gopinata Sinai 
Garco, of S. 
Lourenco.  Arembata  Ditto  Aturli  Bicholim  3 of 13 -1-1950  3,000  
36. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltd., of 
Marmagao.  Govala  Ditto  Gautona  Ditto  4 of 13 -1-1950  7,300  
37. Firm S. Kantilal & 
Cia. Ltd., of 
Margao.  Paicatembo  Ditto  Villiena  Sanguem  5 of 23 -1-1950  10,400  
38. Quiteria Maria 
Gonsalves Noronha.  Godhodo  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  6 of 27 -1-1950  5,600  
39. Firm V.S. Dempo & 
Cia. Ltd., of Goa.  Culnavoril Sodo  Ditto  Dudal  Ditto  7 of 30 -1-1950  5,600  
40. Rajaram Rangaji 
Poinguincar, of 
Ponguinim.  Chiraband e Vali  Ditto  Patiem  Ditto  8 of 24 -2-1950  11,800  
41. Mahamed Osman 
Muhamed Hashan, 
of Margao.  Cuditembo  Ditto  Curpem  Ditto  10 of 24 -2-1950  8,900  
42. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia . 
Ltd., of Goa.  Costimol  Ditto  Costi  Ditto  11 of 24 -2-1950  4,900  
43. Xec Abdul Kadar, 
of Sanguem.  
 Usqui Mordi  Ditto  Netorlim  Ditto  12 of 27 -2-1950  14,300  11 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
44. Xec Abdul Kadar , 
of Sanguem.  Chinchigalchi 
Calmati  Fe/ 
Mang  Tudou  Sanguem  13 of 27 -2-1950  14,200  
45. Firm Me tha & Cia . 
Ltd., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Tilo dongor, etc.  Ditto  Curdi  Ditto  14 of 27 -2-1950  4,900  
46. Roguvir Naraina 
Lotlecar, of 
Margao.  Bandadongor  Ditto  Verlem  Ditto  15 of 13 -3-1950  10,100  
47. Roguvir Naraina 
Lotlecar, of 
Margao.  Bonquidongor or 
Bonquitembo  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  16 of 13 -3-1950  8,100  
48. Gurudas Timblo, of 
Margao.  Ondea Cail Mol, 
etc. Ditto  Pale Bicholim  17 of 27 -3-1950  13,200  
49. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia . 
Ltd., of Goa.  Maulingmolo  Ditto  Carapur  Ditto  19 of 21 -4-1950  3,100  
50. Quiteria Maria 
Gonsalves Noronha, 
of Margao.  Udo Dongor  Ditto  Colomba  Sanguem  20 of 21 -4-1950  14,300  
51. Firm Chowgule 
&Cia. Ltd., of 
Margao.  Deureamvoilo 
tembo  Ditto  Vichundrem  Ditto  21 of 5 -5-1950  7,400  
52. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltd., of 
Margao.  Paratembo 
Dongurli, etc.  Ditto  Costi  Ditto  22 of 5 -5-1950  9,000  
53. Mandyan A. 
Parthasarthy, of 
Pernem.  Sem denominacao 
especial  Ditto  Zorulem  Pernem  23 of 8 -5-1950  14,300  
54. Firm V.M. 
Salgaoncar e Irmao 
Ltd., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Dudaliacha 
Gauntonavoril 
Sodo e 
Gitoneasoda  Iron Dudal Sanguem  24 of 12 -5-1950  13,000  
55. Sociedade Shri 
Mahalaximi Cia. 
Mineira Ltd., of 
Netorlim.  Maccdeatolem 
Mamatembo  Fe/ 
Mang  Jaqui of 
Netorlim  Ditto  27 of 5 -6-1950  10,400  
56. Marcos Marcel ino 
P. De Souza, of 
Pileme.  Tasmsurly  Ditto  Dandola  Ponda  28 of 12 -6-1950  12,900  
57. Marcos Marcelino 
P. De Souza, of 
Pilerne.  Calamatembi  Ditto  Tiurem  Ditto  29 of 12 -6-1950  13,800  
58. Prafula Rajarama 
Hede, of Goa.  Godcavadea 
Javalachem Upor 
& Nagonim 
Buroda  Iron Colem  Sanguem  30 of 16 -6-1950  11,800  12 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
59. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltd. , of 
Margao.  Devandongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Rivona  Sanguem  31 of 7 -7-1950  8,900  
60. Firm V.M. 
Salgaoncar e Irmao 
Ltd., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Motto  Ditto  Revora  Bardez  32 of 7 -7-1950  4,900  
61. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Borga  Ditto  Rivona  Sanguem  34 of 2 -10-1950  12,800  
62. Gangadhar 
Narsingdas 
Agrawal, of 
Margao.  Chandsuriacho 
Fatravoril dongor  Ditto  Netorlim  Ditto  35 of 2 -10-1950  14,200  
63. Raia Porobo 
Baticar, of 
Sanguem.  Perchotembo  Ditto  Batie  Cumbari  Ditto  37 of 10 -10-1950  10,000  
64. Nilconta Jaganata 
Coulecar, of 
Mapusa.  Codeachem 
Devonavoril 
Molentil Zaga  Ditto  Sanvordem  Satari  38 of 10 -11-1950  14,300  
65. Manohar H.N. 
Naik, Parulekar.  Gundegally or 
Chendo  Ditto  Dargalim  Pernem  39 of 11 -12-1950  14,300  
66. Vishwasrao D. 
Chowgule, of Vasco 
da Gama.  Citeiros que ficam 
de ambos os lados 
de linha ferrea , etc. Iron Calem  Sanguem  40 of 22 -12-1950  12,300  
67. Lidia Belinda 
Simoes , of Goa.  Molietembo 
Maquerim  Fe/ 
Mang  Rivona  Ditto  42 of 29 -12-1950  7,300  
68. Xec Mohamed 
Issac, of Goa.  Devapan or 
Devadongor  Ditto  Caurem  Quepem  1 of 8 -1-1951  14,300  
69. Madeva Upendra 
Sinai Talaulikar, 
Panaji.  Saniem  Iron Sancordem  Sanguem  2 of 8-1 -1951  7,200  
70. Firm V.S. Dempo & 
Cia. Ltd., of Goa.  Cantor  Fe/ 
Mang  Curpem  Ditto  3 of 19 -1-1951  14,000  
71. Vassudeva N. 
Sarmalkar, of 
Margao.  Vagagholl  Ditto  Molcornem  Quepem  4 of 2 -2-1951  3,800  
72. Dinanata Mucunda 
S. Cuvelcar, of 
Raia.  Zamblimol  
&Cicilitembo  Ditto  Colomba  Sanguem  5 of 2 -2-1951  7,200  
73. Gurudas Timblo, of 
Margao.  Chivanritembo or 
Chivaridogor  
 Ditto  Dongor  Ditto  7 of 9 -2-1951  13,300  13 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
74. Gurdas Timblo, of 
Margao.  Paicapanacho 
dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Pirla  Quepem  8 of 9 -2- 1951  13,900  
75. Bhanudas Bablo S. 
Cossombo, of 
Sanguem.  Convorzoritem bo 
Motatembo 
Bandoli dongor  Ditto  Curpem  Sanguem  9 of 12 -2-1951  14,200  
76. Haider Caximo Can 
of Sanguem.  Vangi Bindi 
Advona, etc.  Ditto  Sulcorna  Quepem  10 of 23 -2-1951  11,900  
77. Zoirama Bicaji 
Neugui, of Mapuca.  Avaliadongor  Ditto  Molcornem  Ditto  11 of 23-2-1951  11,400  
78. Francisca Sequeira 
ofNuvem.  Gorditembo  Ditto  Netorlim  Sanguem  12 of 26 -2-1951  6,700  
79. Vishwasrao D. 
Chowgule, of Vasco 
da Gama.  Cararemdongor  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  14 of 2 -3-1951  14,300  
80. Vishwasrao D. 
Chowgule, of Vasco 
da Gama.  Partimsodo, etc.  Iron Molem  Ditto  15 of 2 -3-1951  11,500  
81. Vishwasrao D. 
Chowgule, of Vasco 
da Gama.  Pundavamgavoril 
Sodo  Iron Dudal  Ditto  16 of 2 -3-1951  11,800  
82. S. Kantilal & Cia. 
Ltd., of Margao.  Gottovo Dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Netorlim  Ditto  17 of 2-3-1951  6,300  
83. Xec. Alub, of 
Sanguem.  Zambutolem  Ditto  Tudou of 
Verlem  Ditto  19 of 9 -3-1951  11,500  
84. Tulxidas Madeva X. 
Deulcar of Calem.  Careacodil Upri, 
Adam Tembo, etc.  Ditto  Maulinguem  Ditto  20 of 9 -3-1951  12,500  
85. Zoiram Bhicaji 
Neugmi of Mapuc a Madiacho tembo 
Candalanche mol 
or Gormodi  Ditto  Cauremi  Quepem  21 of 19 -3-1951  12,400  
86. Roguvir Sinai 
Garco, of S. 
Lourenco de 
Agacaim.  Casarman  Ditto  Salguinim 
Verlem  Sanguem  22 of 30 -3-1951  4,700  
87. Gurudas Timblo, 
of Margao.  Moliadongor  Ditto  Tudou of 
Verlem  Ditto  23 of 30 -3-1951  10,000  
88. Horichondra 
Saunlo N. Tari, of 
Sanguem.  Sadezamotil Rica  Ditto  Cumbari  Ditto  26 of 6 -4-1951  11,900  
89. Firma Sesa Goa 
Ltd., of Goa.  Botvadeacho 
dongor  Ditto  Pissurlem  Satari  28 of 6 -4-1951  3,500  14 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
90. Damum Naique, of 
Curchorem.  Cosmoichem Mola  Fe/ 
Mang  Sulcorna  Quepem  29 of 13-4-1951  3,500  
91. Mineira 
Prometedora Ltd., 
of Netorlim.  Folsadando or 
Vadvol  Ditto  Netorlim  Sanguem  32 of 13 -4-1951  5,400  
92. Xec Adam Xac. 
Abubakar, of 
Margao.  Nissorval  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  34 of 20 -4-1951  14,000  
93. Gajanana P.N. 
Cormoli of Cacora  Chiunim Dongor, 
etc. Ditto  Rivona  Ditto  35 of 20 -4-1951  11,500  
94. Xec Abdul Gofur 
X.A. Agis of 
Sanguem.  Cumartolem 
Dongor, etc.  Ditto  Curpem  Ditto  37 of 20 -4-1951  5,300  
95. Firm Chowgule 
and Cia, Ltd., 
ofMarmagao.  Casana, Costimola, 
etc. Iron Costi  Ditto  38 of 20 -4-1951  14,300  
96. Narahari S.S. 
Narvenkar, of Goa.  Pandava Xetavoilo 
Soddo & Vozro 
Sodo  Ditto  Santona of 
Quirlapale  Ditto  40 of 27 -4-1951  14,200  
97. Roguvir R. 
Poinguincar, of 
Poinguinim.  Gurmulem  Fe/ 
Mang  Cudnem  Bicholim  41 of 11 -5-1951  9,600  
98. Firm Shantilal 
Kushaldar Irmaos, 
of Margao  Gotton Sorad 
tembo  Ditto  Netorlim  Sanguem  42 of 18 -5-1951  9,100  
99. Firm V.S. Denpo 
and Cia, Ltd., of 
Goa.  Navientil Galivoril 
Advona Nagona, 
etc. Ditto  Aglote  Ditto  43 of 18 -5-1951  14,300  
100. Sociedade 
Shantilal 
Kushaldas & 
Irmaos, of Margao.  Joleracho dongor  Ditto  Maina  Quepem  44 of 18 -5-1951  8,800  
101. Xembu Zoideva X. 
Moratto, of 
Sanguem.  Dhabella mola  Ditto  Undorna  Ditto  45 of 8 -6-1951  13,300  
102. Vassantaram G. 
Metha, of Vasco 
da Gama.  Vatasur  Ditto  Colomba  Sanguem  46 of 15 -6-1951  3,100  
103. Ramacrishna Dottu 
P. Loundo, of 
Sanquelim.  Goddibaim  Ditto  Navelim  Bicholim  47 of 18 -6-1951  5,500  15 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
104. Vicente J. F. 
Figeiredo, of 
Loutulim.  Madda -xeta-Jetona  Fe/ 
Mang  Netorlim  Sanguem  48 of 25 -6-1951  14,300  
105. Sociedade Mineira 
N. Ltd., of 
Margao.  Poicul Compro  Ditto  Melauli  Satari  49 of 6 -7-1951  10,100  
106. Vassudeva N. 
Sarmalcar, of 
Margao.  Gola dongor  Ditto  Sulcorna  Quepem  50 of 6 -7-1951  12,600  
107. Gurdas Timblo, of 
Margo.  Bhutabaincho 
dongor  Ditto  Verlem  Sanguem  51 of 20 -7-1951  9,700  
108. Roguvir R. 
Poinguincar, of 
Poinguinim.  Thatatem Soddo  Iron Darbandora  Ditto  52 of 23 -7-1951  14,300  
109. Aec Abdul Gofur 
X.A. Agis, of 
Sanguem.  Pola dongore 
Dongore  Fe/ 
Mang  Curpem  Ditto  53 of 3 -8-1951  4,400  
110. Jeos Azavedo 
Duarte, 
ofSanguem.  Zamblidando  Ditto  Verlem  Ditto  54 of 3 -8-1951  5,200  
111. Manchar H.N. 
Parulecar, of 
Mapusa.  Guellieme Gaval  Iron Pissurlem  Satari  55 of 24 -8-1951  12,600  
112. Daue Khan, of 
Sanguem.  Matta Conda  Fe/ 
Mang  Rivona  Sanguem  58 of 3 -9-1951  12,600  
113. Zoiram B. Neugui, 
of Mapuca.  Iembechc dongor  Ditto  Maina  Quepem  59 of 3 -9-1951  14,200  
114. Minguel 
Mascarenhas, of 
Sanvordem.  Canelidongor  Ditto  Vichundrem  Sanguem  60 of 14 -9-1951  11,800  
115. Mineira Nacional 
Ltd. of Panaji.  Cuddeagalivoril 
Sodo dongor  Iron Santona 
Quirlapale  Ditto  62 of 1 -10-1951  13,100  
116. Chandracanta 
F.Naigue, of 
Curchorem.  Gobaim or 
Cuntiem  Fe/ 
Mang  Curpem  Ditto  63 of 19 -10-1951  10,000  
117. Amalia Rodrigues 
G. Figueiredo, of 
Loutulim.  Polo Dongor & 
Dongor  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  65 of 7 -12-1951  8,400  
118. Firm S. Kantilal & 
Cia Ltd., 
ofMargao.  Poxelacho Sodo  Ditto  Maida of 
Colem  Ditto  66 of 14 -12-1951  14,200  16 
  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.) 
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
119. Firm S. Kantilal 
& Cia Ltd., of 
Margao  Gonesgudi Dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Rumademo of 
Netorlim  Sanguem  67 of 14 -12-1951  4,900  
120. Mingoa 
Sociedade 
Mineira Goesa, 
SARL, ofGoa.  Maindvol icho 
Sodo & 
Codeculnavoril 
Sodo  Iron Codli  Ditto  69 of 14 -12-1951  14,300  
121. Ramakanta Xetie 
of Bicholim.  Deulem  Ditto  Pissurlem  Satari  70 of 17 -12-1951  14,300  
122. Firma V.M. 
Salgaoncar & 
Irmao Ltd., of 
Vasco da Gama.  Madei  Fe/ 
Mang  Vantem  Ditto  71 of 21 -12-1951  11,400  
123. Firm S. Kantilal 
and Cia, of 
Margao.  Anavla dongor  Ditto  Molcorrnem  Quepem  1 of 4 -1-1952  5,500  
124. Quiteria Maria 
Gonsalves, 
Noronha, of 
Mapusa  Connol -dad dongor  Ditto  Colomba  Sanguem  3 of 11 -1-1952  12,900  
125. Firm S. Kantilal 
& Cia, 
Ltd.,Margao.  Melcadongor  Ditto  Sancordem  Ditto  4 of 1 -2-1952  10,600  
126. Ailiabhai S. 
Cacodcar, of 
Cacora.  Vancali temb  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  5 of 1 -2-1952  3,200  
127. Arnaldo Reis 
Cruz of Bena 
alim.  Fondiatolia -
voridongor  Ditto  Netorlim  Ditto  7 of 1 -2-1952  4,100  
128. Gopal Visvonata 
Godekar de 
Councolim.  Ubefatracodi -I 
dongri  Ditto  Maina  Quepem  8 of 1 -2-1952  8,000  
129. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Santona Guro  Ditto  Sigao  Sanguem  9 of 1 -2-1952  11,000  
130. Esvonta Datatraia 
Sadecar, of 
Margao.  Pandavamsodo  Ditto  Rivona  Ditto  10 of 1 -2-1952  4,600  
131. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia. 
Ltd., of Goa.  Dobdobo  Ditto  Bicholim  Bicholim  11 of 4 -2-1952  7,200  
132. Narahari S.S. 
Narvenkar of 
Goa.  Mainant il Murdi  Ditto  Santana of 
Quirlapale  Sanguem  12 of 8 -2-1952  11,100  17 
         
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
133. Rucminibai S. 
Bhobe, wite of 
late Krishna 
Bhobe or 
Quexarbai, of 
Mapusa.  Apteachem -boroda  Fe/ 
Mang  Onda  Satari  13 of 22 -2-1952  3,700  
134. Badrudin Bavani, 
of Margao.  Nomoxitembo  Ditto  Rivona  Sanguem  14 of 22 -2-1952  14,300  
135. Sadassiva D. 
Tiroder Margao.  Pistem  Ditto  Latambarcem  Bicholim  15 of 22 -2-1952  8,900  
136. Sociedade Timbio 
Irmaos Ltd. , of 
Margao.  Ambegal Jeddit 
moddi  Ditto  Salginim of 
Verlem  Sanguem  16 of 25 -2-1952  9,000  
137. Firm S. Kantilal 
& Cia Ltd., of 
Margao.  Toliavolli, 
Zambod, etc.  Ditto  Villiena  Ditto  17 of 29 -2-1952  13,600  
138. Firm S. Kantilal 
& Cia. Ltd., of 
Margao.  Kairad & Talaoili  Ditto  Villiena of Bati  Ditto  18 of 29 -2-1952  6,700  
139. Firm V.M. 
Salgaocar Irmao 
Ltd., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Molcornem  Ditto  Aglote  Ditto  19 of 29 -2-1952  14,300  
140. Harichandra S.N. 
Tari, of Sanguem.  Vagamollofo -
daguir, etc.  Ditto  Vichundrem  Ditto  21 of 29 -2-1952  8,700  
141. Roque Santana 
Baneto, of 
Lout im. Zambeamollo  Ditto  Rivona  Ditto  25 of 21 -3-1952  7,100  
142. Firm Shantilal K. 
&Bros., of 
Margao  Chumimolo 
orXissoria tembo  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  28 of 28-3-1952  6,200  
143. Vasudeva D.S. 
Cosombo of 
Sanguem.  Borgadongrachem 
Fall, etc. Ditto  Rivona  Ditto  29 of 28 -3-1952  10,200  
144.*                
145. Vassantaram G. 
Metha of Vasco 
da Gama.  Navelem  Ditto  Curpem  Ditto  33 of 28 -3-1952  8,200  
146. Firm V.S. Dempo 
& Cia. Ltd., of 
Goa.  Tambessodo  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  35 of 4 -4-1952  14,100  18 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
147. Firm V. S. 
Dempo & Cia. 
Ltd., of Goa.  Candulgo  Iron Codali or 
Carapur  Bicholim  37 of 4 -4-1952  14,300  
148. Hiru Bombo 
Gaunco, of 
Margao.  Santonatembo 
Bandaxe tachem  Fe/ 
Mang  Vichundrem  Sanguem  38 of 14 -4-1952  14,300  
149. Vammona M. 
Zoixi, of Oxel.  Tialachem temba 
B. dongor, etc.  Ditto  Ozorim  Pernem  39 of 18 -4-1952  14,300  
150. Roguvir S. Garco, 
of S. Lu urencorde 
Agacaim.  Margamodil 
Dongor  Ditto  Salginem  Sanguem  40 of 18 -4-1952  6,300  
151. Tucarama P. X. 
Parcar, of Colem.  Malia dongor  Ditto  Vadem  Ditto  41 of 21 -4-1952  10,400  
152. Kamlanata N. 
Xetio, of Goa.  Batolem 
Dramafalential  Ditto  Betqui  Ponda  42 of 21 -4-1952  1,500  
153. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Vagini dongor or 
Vagini Tembo  Ditto  Salginem  Sanguem  44 of 5 -5-1952  3,200  
154. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Cormolem 
&Brog  Ditto  Cudnem  Bicholim  45 of 5 -5-1952  5,800  
155. Joao Santana 
Gomes, Margao.  Bomaoatto  Ditto  Malauli  Satari  46 of 5 -5-1952  5,100  
156. Joao Hugo 
Eduardo 
Seque ria, of Goa.  Chiudiadvona, 
etc. Ditto  Darbandora  Sanguem  47 of 5 -5-1952  14,300  
157. Xec. Mohamed 
Issac, of 
Sanguem.  Undirgala or 
Temache -
avadiachem 
advona, etc.  Ditto  Cotarli  Ditto  48 of 30 -5-1952  5,000  
158. Firm S. Kantilal 
& Cia. Ltd., of 
Margao.  Nansaconda or 
Nassaconda  Ditto  Naiquinim  Ditto  50 of 2 -6-1952  6,900  
159. Roguvir Sinai 
Garco, of S. 
Lourenco de 
Agacaim.  Cazreanchem 
Culde Adj.  Iron Cudnem  Bicholim  51 of 6 -6-1952  11,400  
160. Raia Dotu S. 
Lade, Sanvordem.  Navelem dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Curpem  Sanguem  53 of 13 -6-1952  4,500  
161. Raia Porobo 
Baticar,Sanguem.  Perchotembo  Ditto  Batie Cumbari  Ditto  54 of 13 -6-1952  6,000  19 
  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
162. Shantilal 
Khushaldas 
&Bros., of 
Margao.  Rumadolem  Fe/ 
Mang  Curdi  Sanguem  55 of 20 -8-1952  13,200  
163. Visvasrao D. 
Chowgule, Vasco 
da Gama.  Khirnimdongor  Ditto  Salginim  Ditto  584 of 11 -7-1952  3,000  
164. Quexcwa Sinai 
Cundo, of 
Margao.  Patiafala  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  59 of 18 -7-1952  14,000  
165. Firm S Kantilal & 
Cia. Ltd., of 
Margao.  Asni dongor  Ditto  Curdi  Ditto  60 of 18 -7-1952  6,300  
166. Firm S. Kantilal 
& Cia. Ltd. , of 
Margao.  Zamsodo or 
Capiacodichem  Ditto  Bati & 
Cumbari  Ditto  61 of 18-7-1952  7,300  
167. Vassudeva 
Madeva 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Matte Dando  Iron Velguem  Bicholim  62 b of 18 -7-1952 7,600  
168. D.B. Bandodkar 
of Panjim.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  62 of 18 -7-1952  7,000  
169. Atchuta Vishnu S. 
Velinge ar, of 
Velinga.  Vansvolatembo 
or ximevoril 
dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Vichundrem & 
Netorlim  Sanguem  67 of 18 -8-1952  8,600  
170. Malbe Madeva 
S.R. Sar Dessai of 
Verem.  Vitcantor  Ditto  Virdi  Bicholim  68 of 18 -8-1952  14,000  
171. Mingoa 
Sociedade 
Mineira Goesa, of 
Goa.  Gurmel  Ditto  Codli of 
Quirlapale  Sanguem  70 of 18 -8-1952  14,300  
172. Firm Damodar 
Mangalj. & Cia. 
Ltd., of Goa.  Zambol & terr. 
adj. Ditto  Villiena  Ditto  71 of 18 -8-1952  4,300  
173. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltd. , of 
Margao.  Dobar, Tanca & 
Aglote Sodo  Ditto  Aglote  Ditto  73 of 18 -8-1952  13,800  
174. Sociedade 
Verencar & Cia. 
Ltd., of Surla.  Dabo  Ditto  Surla  Bicholim  74 of 22 -8-1952  14,300  
175. Voicunt a 
Cadnekar of 
Margao.  Chunimolo or 
Gotifondatembo  Ditto  Colomba  Sanguem  75 of 29 -8-1952  12,600  
176. Firm Sesa Goa Orasso dongor  Iron Adolpale  Bicholim  76 of 8 -9-1952  14,200  20 
 Ltd., Goa.  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
177. Firm V.M. 
Salgaoncar & 
Irmoas Ltd., of 
Vasco da Gama.  Pet Pagedongor, 
Bainem  Fe/ 
Mang  Doro of 
Sanvordem  Sanguem  77 of 12 -9-1952  8,600  
178. Soid Adam, of 
Quepem.  Deudongro  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  78 of 19 -9-1952  3,800  
179. Mineira 
Prometadora Ltd., 
Netorlim.  Eroca Ditto  Netorlim  Ditto  81 of 26 -9-1952  5,200  
180. Roguvira S. 
Garco, of S. 
Lourenco de 
Agacaim.  Pedamolla  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  82 of 26 -9-1952  14,300  
181. Firm V.M. 
Salgaoncar & I. 
Ltd., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Mardando 
&Barcati  Iron Surla  Bicholim  83 of 26-9-1952  13,500  
182. Rajaram Narayan 
X. Bandekar of 
Vasco da Gama.  Jaquel or 
Jacadevicho 
dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Pale Ditto  84 of 3 -10-1952  14,300  
183. Mussa Usman 
Ali, of Goa.  Gadichem 
Advona  Ditto  Curpem  Sanguem  85 of 10 -10-1952  10,800  
184. Visnum S. 
Curchorcar, of 
Chandor.  Moscaurem of 
Cornol  Ditto  Rivona  Ditto  86 of 18 -10-1952  13,700  
185. Firm V.S. Dempo 
& Cia. Ltd., of 
Goa.  Chedeudongor & 
Dardongor  Iron Nuem  Canacon a 87 of 13 -10-1952  13,300  
186. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmoas Ltd. of 
Margao.  Copila gaichem 
Paul Ditto  Sigao  Sanguem  88 of 7 -11-1952  13,500  
187. Sociedade 
Litheferro Ltd., of 
Mapusa.  Calsanichoma to 
de Oilmol  
Devac hem udic 
& Golicoilo, etc.  Iron Advolpale  Bicholim  89 of 7 -11-1952  6,800  
188. Balkrishna Porob 
Padgaoncar of 
Saligao.  Bamnavado e 
outros  Ditto  Latambarce m Ditto  90 of 7 -11-1952  7,100  
189. Babol Sanvlo N. 
Tari of Sanguem.  Ambadasorvo  Fe/ 
Mang  Cotarli & 
Xeldem  Sanguem  91 of 7 -11-1952  13,500  
190. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltd., of Dignem  Iron Cudnem  Bicholim  92 of 14-11-1952  5,800  21 
 Margao.  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
191. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltd., of 
Marmagoa.  Monte Udo  Fe/ 
Mang  Colemba  Sanguem  93 of 14 -11-1952  10,600  
192. Firm V. S. 
Dempo & Cia. 
Ltd., of Goa.  Marsoddo  Ditto  Pissurlem  Satari  95 of 14 -11-1952  14,200  
193. Firm S. Kantilal 
& Cia. Ltd., of 
Margao.  Cajucodil mola, 
Calia Mordi 
Magdiatemboe 
out. ter  Ditto  Viliena of Bati  Sanguem  96 of 14 -11-1952  4,600  
194. Balcrisna Bahirji 
Patil, of Margao.  Sisso Calli 
dongor, etc.  Ditto  Curpem  Ditto  97 of 5 -12-1952  8,400  
195. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltd., of 
Marmagoa.  Cazchemrame 
outros ter adj.  Iron Onda  Satari  98 of 5 -12-1952  10,700  
196. Gangadhar 
Narsingdas 
Agrwal, of 
Margao.  Borchem 
Daticho 
Dongracho, etc.  Ditto  Sarvon a Vicholim  99 of 5 -12-1952  14,300  
197. Gangadhar 
Narsingdas 
Agrawal, of 
Margao.  Apteachea 
Dativorli dongor  Ditto  Bordem  Ditto  100 of 5 -12-1952  4,900  
198. Vamona Govinda 
Sinde, of Mapuc a. Caratuti de 
Deulvado  Fe/ 
Mang  Morlem Satari  102 of 15 -12-1952  13,200  
199. Roguvira N. 
Lotlecar, of 
Margao.  Paicatembo or 
Cotlam da  Ditto  Netorlim  Sanguem  103 of 15 -12-1952  7,100 
200. Viswasrao D. 
Chowgule, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Toliachem 
advona  Ditto  Aglote  Ditto  1 of 9 -1-1953  11,200  
201. Viswasrao D. 
Chowgule, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Massana Moddi 
de Cammol uem 
dongor  Ditto  Candola  Ponda  2 of 9 -1-1953  3,200  
202. Firm V. M. 
Salgaocar Irmaos 
Ltd. of Vasco da 
Garaa.  Poicul of 
Congorem  Ditto  Melauli & 
Conquirem  Satari  4 of 6 -2-1953  11,400  
203. Martinho 
Coutinho 
Cuncolim.  Sem 
denominacao 
especial  Ditto  Tudou & 
Patiem  Sanguem  5 of 6 -2-1953  13,600  
204. Crisna Mucunda 
Camotim of 
Assolna.  Bencremdando 
& Cadiabanda 
avoril  dongor  Ditto  Jaqui of 
Netorlim  Ditto  6 of 6 -2-1953  8,400  22 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
205. Shantilal Kushal -
das &Bros, of 
Margao.  Magmepan & 
Satarcarachem, 
etc. Fe/ 
Mang  Maina  Quepem  9 of 13 -2-1953  3,300  
206. Lidia Belinda 
Simoes, of Goa.  Cotidongor  Ditto  Pirla  Ditto  10 of 13 -2-1953  11,300  
207. Voicunt a 
Canecar, of 
Margao.  Bateagal or 
Bateaxembugal  Ditto  Maina  Ditto  12 of 20 -2-1953  4,500  
208. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Soddo  Iron Surla  Bicholim  13 of 20 -2-1953  12,700  
209. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmoas Ltd., of 
Margao.  Quelchem Tour, 
Tambdi Mati  Ditto  Cudnem  Ditto  14 of 20 -2-1953  10,600  
210. Firm Oriente Ltd., 
of Margao.  Bibel Pata  Fe/ 
Mang  Netorlim  Sanguem  15 of 2 -3-1953  8,400  
211. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia. 
(India) Ltd., of 
Goa.  Conquirem 
Canvavoril 
dongor  Iron Conquirem  Satari  18 of 6 -3- 1953  12,900  
212. Abdul Satar 
Abdul Kadar 
Soudagar, of 
Margao.  Undr dvona & 
Odlotembo  Fe/ 
Mang  Netorlim  Sanguem  20 of 6 -3-1953  7,500  
213. Gangadhar 
Narsingdas 
Agrawal, of 
Margao.  Passariatembo  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  21 of 9 -3-1953  4,600 
214. Damodar 
Jaganata 
Amoncar, of 
Margao.  Ordolo dongor  Ditto  Sancordem  Ditto  22 of 13 -3-1953  3,300  
215. Empresa Minero 
Commercial de 
Goa Ltd., 
ofMargao.  Choriancho 
tembo dongor  Iron Bimbol of 
Colem  Sanguem  23 of 6 -4-1953  13,200  
216. Joao Santana 
Gomes, Junior of 
Margao.  Xelnemtembo, 
Costiadvona  Fe/ 
Mang  Aglote of 
Sancordem  Ditto  25 of 10 -4-1953  14,000  
217. Atchuta 
Panduronga P. 
Dessai, of Netor -
lim. Borcotea dongor  Ditto  Vichundrem  Ditto  26 of 13 -4-1953  10,800  
218. Firm V. M. 
Salgaocar & I. 
Ltd., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Tanque de 
Bonconem  Ditto  Aglote  Ditto  27 of 13 -4-1953  11,200  23 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
219. Narayan Ganesh 
Prabhu Zantye 
Bicholim.  Ontichem ran or 
Ponecanem  
&Bagaeta 
Ticana, etc.  Iron Sarvona  Bicholim  28 of 24 -4-1953  10,300  
220. Narayan Ganesh 
Prabhu Zantye 
Bicholim.  Conosiavoril, 
Gonesi 
achedativoril 
dongrachem 
Cutumbona, etc.  Fe/ 
Mang  Ditto  Ditto  29 of 24 -4-1953  11,300  
221. SociedadeTimblo 
Irmaos Ltd., of  
Margao.  Bonvorfonditem
bo e outros  Ditto  Netorlim  Sanguem  30 of 24 -4-1953  4,500  
222. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltd., of 
Marmagoa.  Pale dongor  Iron Pale Bicholim  31 of 24 -4-1953  12,000  
223. Narahari Shivram 
X. Narvadednear 
of Goa.  Palietembo 
&Baqueriz  Fe/ 
Mang  Curdi  Sanguem  32 of 24 -4-1953  9,800  
224. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia., 
Ltd. of Goa.  Marsodo   Ditto  Surla  Bicholim  33 of 24 -4-1953  11,200  
225. Nalini Camotim  
Sancoalkar or 
Nalini Manohar 
Kamat, Cacora.  Metacodil 
Anvlitembo  Ditto  Vadem & 
Siggonem  Ditto  35 of 15 -5-1953  4,400  
226. Esvonta Visnum 
P. Raiturcar, of 
Margao.  Bagueatembo  Ditto  Netorlim  Ditto  36 of 15 -5-1953  6,300  
227. Esvonta Visnum 
P. Raiturcar, of 
Margao.  Murmeatembo of 
Anvalicodop  Ditto  Curdi  Ditto  37 of 15 -5-1953  4,600  
228. Marcos Marcelino  
P. de Souza of 
Pilerne.  Sem 
denominacao 
especial  Ditto  Mopa  Pernem  38 of 15 -5-1953  9,400  
229. Lekhraj 
Nathurmal of 
Goa.  Oilem Anvalem  Ditto  Arvalem  Bicholim  39 of 15 -5-1953  12,300  
230. Xec Mahidin Xec 
Daud, of Vasco 
da Gama.  Khoiricho 
dongor  Ditto  Sancordem  Sanguem  40 of 15 -5-1953  4,800  
231. Vassantram 
Ganpatram Mehta 
of Vasco da 
Gama.  Caliemola ou 
Calzarigogo  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  41 of 22 -5-1953  9,900  24 
  
SI. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
232. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji &Cia., 
(India) Ltd., of 
Goa.  Oriemola  Fe/ 
Mang  Mocalem 
(Colem)  Sanguem  42 of 25 -5-1953  10,000  
233. Xec Abdul Gofor, 
Xec Abdul Aziz 
of Curchorem.  Oiteiro Divodgal  Ditto  Curpem & 
Curdi  Ditto  43 of 25 -5-1953  4,900  
234. Vincente Joao 
Filomeno 
Figueredo, of 
outulim.  Ganali dongor  Ditto  Varlem  Ditto  44 of 29 -5-1953  6,700  
235. Jorge Anibal de 
Matos sequeira, 
of Goa.  Gungurem 
Belagal, etc.  Ditto  Mirancal  Ponda  46 of 1 -6-1953  13,200  
236. Damodar 
Dundolica 
Moncar, of 
Ponchovadi.  Bogvota 
Cumiatembo  Ditto  Quiriapale  Sanguem  47 of 1 -6-1953  9,100  
237. Sayad Issac, of 
Sanguem.  Deucol Cunbasai 
Escapaco  Ditto  Adcolna  Ponda  49 of 8 -6-1953  11,300  
238. Firm V. M. 
Salgaocar & 
India, Ltda., of 
Vasco da Gama.  Madiem  Ditto  Sigao  Sanguem  50 of 8 -6-1953  6,900  
239. Sripada Voicunta 
Naique of 
Bicholim.  Laquerem e out 
ter adj.  Ditto  Bordem  Bicholim  54 of 12 -6-1953  9,700  
240. Zacarias Antao, 
of Petalbatim.  Monte Iranqui  Ditto  Potrem  Sanguem  55 of 19 -6-1953  11,300  
241. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Vasco da Gama.  Khuntiemolem  Ditto  Sulcorna  Quepem  57 of 19 -6-1953  14,200  
242. Vishvasrao D. 
Chowgule, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Ganvancodil tod, 
etc. Ditto  Gavancodil  Satari  59 of 26 -6-1953  12,200  
243. Surlaji Sinari 
Cacodkar.  Cunt iemola 
Buido  Ditto  Molcornem  Quepem  60 of 26 -6-1953  13,800  
244. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Bondradvona 
Daucona & 
Tanca  Iron Codli & 
Darbandora  Sanguem  61 of 3 -7-1953  11,800  
245. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Zanodem Soda  Fe/ 
Mang  Molcornem  Quepem  62 of 3 -7-1953  13.300  
  25 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
246. Sripada Voicunta 
Naique, of 
Bicholim.  Medianchem ran 
or etc.  Fe/ 
Mang  Cotorem  Satari  64 of 10 -7-1953  11 ,000  
247. Firm Sesa Goa 
Ltda., of Goa.  Potvol, 
Modlovado, etc.  Ditto  Velgem  Ditto  65 of 17 -7-1953  11,200  
248. Anibal Gabriel 
Pereira of 
Margao.  Guladvona  Ditto  Codar  Pond a 67 of 17 -7-1953  7,700  
249. Vicente 
Fernandes of 
Merces.  Mortegal Mordi  Ditto  Uguem  Sanguem  68 of 17 -7-1953  10,100  
250. Firm S. Kantilal 
&Cia., Ltda., of 
Margao.  Dobacho Dongor 
e ter, adj.  Ditto  Netorlim  Ditto  70 of 31 -7-1953  3,200  
251. Vinaeca Naraina 
Bandekar, of 
Panaji.  Dongorvdao & 
Curd ado Ditto  Sanco dem  Ditto  71 of 31 -7-1953  11,500  
252. Jaganata 
Crisnanala P. 
Mambro, Mapusa.  Gantcaracho 
Dongor  Ditto  Bordem  Bicholim  72 of 10 -8-1953  9,000  
253. Erasmo de Jesus 
Sequcira, of Goa.  Quegdicho Cono 
& Toleachem 
Advona  Ditto  Cotorem  Satari  73 of 10 -8-1953  13,300  
254. Crisna Butu 
Saunto, of Borim.  Careadega 
Advona  Ditto  Codar  Ponda  75 of 10 -8-1953  12.200  
255. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia 
(I) Ltda., of Goa.  Biptamol  Ditto  Sanvordem  Sanguem  76 of 10 -8-1953  3,200  
256. Nalini Camotim 
Sancoalcar, of 
Cacova.  Tirtha  Ditto  Naroa  Bicholim  77 of 10 -8-1953  14,000  
257. Rauji Raja Sinai 
Quirtonim, of 
Goa.  Hedultembo  Iron Pissurlem  Satari  80 of 14 -8-1953  8,100  
258. Firm Shantilal K. 
&Bros. ofMargao.  Goiband Mattem  Fe/ 
Mang  Velguem  Bicholim  81 of 28 -8-1953  4,600  
259. Gasa Goa Ltda.,of 
Margao.  Suctoli 
Chimtecala voril  Ditto  Sangod  Sanguem  82 of 28 -8-1953  13,900  
260. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia 
(I) Ltda.,  of Goa.  Solla  Ditto  Colomba  Ditto  84 of 28 -8-1953  11,800  
261. Vassudeva 
Madeva 
Salgaocar of 
Vasco da Gama.  Purmar 
andParvedhat, 
etc. Iron Pale Bicholim  86 of 4 -9-1953  13,600  26 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
262. M/s. Sociedade 
Timblo Iramao's 
Ltd., of Margao.  Advona 
Tolemata & 
Caliguro  Iron Sigao  Sanguem  87 of 7 -9-1953  7,200  
263. Sociedade Timblo 
(I) Ltda.,  of 
Margao.  Cornol  Fe/ 
Mang  Colomba  Ditto  88 of 11 -9-1953  7,700  
264. Sociedade Timblo 
(I) Ltda., of 
Margao.  Chanfiadongor 
Vagantto  Ditto  Verlem  Ditto  89 of 11 -9-1953  13,100  
265. Sociedade Timblo 
(1) Ltda. 
ofMargao.  Nassamordie ter 
adj. Ditto  Salginem  Ditto  90 of 11 -9-1953  13,000  
266. Sociedade 
Javerbai & Cia. 
Ltd., of Margao.  Vegrea ugundo  Ditto  Maina  Quepem  91 of 11 -9-1953  8,200  
267. Fulgencio 
Francis co Monte, 
D'silva, Margao.  Dadiavoril Sodo, 
etc. Ditto  Xelpi of 
Birondem  Satari  92 of 11 -9-1953  14,200  
268. Viswasrao D. 
Chowgule, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Khind dongor & 
Uro tembo  Iron Vaguriem  Ditto  93 of 21 -9-1953  8,900  
269. Motiram Data 
Gound olcar, 
ofMargao.  Gudiemola  Fe/ 
Mang  Nirancal  Ponda  95 of 2 -10-1953  12,700  
270. Sociedade Timblo 
(I) Ltda.,  of 
Margao.  Bonquivol of 
Bonquivola -
dongor  Ditto  Rivona  Sanguem  96 of 2 -10-1953  4,900  
271. Vassudeva 
M.Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Calafondicho 
sodo, etc.  Ditto  Sigao  Ditto  97 of 2 -10-1953  8,600  
272. Sadassiva Sinai, 
Gaitondo, of Goa.  Conatto  Iron Surla  Bicholim  98 of 2 -10-1953  14,200  
273. Rosario 
Mascar enhas of 
Xeivona Quepem.  Jacolichem 
Battavoril 
dongor or 
Nagzor  Fe/ 
Mang  Boma  Ponda  99 of 9 -10-1953  5,900  
274. Raia Dotu sinai 
Dade Sarvordem.  Canv orem 
Dongrachem 
advona or 
Navelim 
Dongrachem 
Palsona  Ditto  Canvorem of 
Colomba  Sanguem  100 of 9 -10-1953  3,200  27 
  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
275. Balcrisna Bhairji, 
of Margao.  Vagem  Fe/ 
Mang  Siroda  Ponda  102 of 9 -10-1953  4,500  
276. Sripada Voicunta 
Naique of 
Bicholim.  Godecondichem
mola  Ditto  Bordem  Bicholim  104 of 16 -10-1953  7,400  
277. Sripada Voicunta 
Naique, of  
Bicholim.  Baga e Murvo ou 
Borga 
Cudguichea, etc. Ditto  Piligao  Ditto  105 of 16 -10-1953  9,500  
278. Vishwasrao D. 
Chowgule, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Ximechi Muddi 
Sopandta  Iron Surla  Ditto  106 of 16 -10-1953  12,800  
279. Vishwasrao D. 
Chowgule of 
Vasco da Gama.  Chicuchemmol  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  107 of 16-10-1953  11,000  
280. V.N. Bandekar, of 
Panaji.  Curado e 
Potcalem  Ditto  Sancordem  Sanguem  108 of 16 -10-1953  4,800  
281. Jose Cosme da 
Costa, of 
Curtorim.  Gavall Iron Pissurlem  Satari 110 of 16 -10-1953  9,800  
282. Jaganata Genekar, 
of Panda.  Godacho dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Dabolim of 
Siroda  Ponda  111 of 16 -10-1953  7,900  
283. Ismail bin adulaif, 
of Goa.  Santlaunem  Ditto  Sancordem  Sanguem  112 of 23 -10-1953  14,100  
284. Firm V.M. 
Salgeocar & 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Vasco da Gama.  Issoriem 
Vanganavoril 
dongor  Iron Melauli  Satari  115 of 30 -10-1953  13,000  
285. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia Ltda., 
Margao.  Bandavoril 
Tueda  Fe/ 
Mang  Vagurbem  Ponda  116 of 30 -10-1953  8,900  
286. Xec Cadar Xec 
Usman, of Goa.  Carva Sorio 
Carva Advona  Ditto  Vichundrem  Sanguem  120 of 2 -11-1953  5,500  
287. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Mata of 
Velquemcho 
dongor  Iron Velguem Bicholim  121 of 13 -11-1953  6,700  
288. Vicente Joao 
Filomeno de 
Sequeiredo, of 
Loutulim.  Tarcem Moli  Fe/ 
Mang  Quirlapalee 
Codli  Sanguem  123 of 4 -12-1953  14,100  
289. Vicente Joao 
Filomeno de 
Sequeredo, of 
Loutulim.  Codguicho 
Dongor etc.  Ditto  Quirlapale  Ditto  124 of 4 -12-1953  14,200  28 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
290. Vicente Joao 
Filomeno de 
Sequeiredo, of 
Loutulim.  Bigsorvo or 
Bissorvo  Fe/ 
Mang  Cormonem  Sanguem  125 of 4 -12-1953  14,100  
291. Mingoa 
Sociedade 
Mineira Goesa, of 
Goa.  Caodia Soddo  Iron Codli  Ditto  126 of 4-12-1953  14,300  
292. Pundolica P. Xete 
Narvencar, of 
Sanguem.  Gorbata e ter adj.  Fe/ 
Mang  Salauli  Ditto  128 of 4 -12-1953  6,400  
293. Pundolica P. Xete 
Narvencar, 
Sanguem.  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  128 of 4 -12-1953  6,400  
294. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Margao.  Nos aforamentos 
particulares de 
Dinacor 
Amencar  Ditto  Madapsi of 
Orgao  Ponda  130 of 18 -12-1953  4,500  
295. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Margao.  Bibiamordi  Ditto  Vichundrem  Sanguem  132 of 18 -12-1953  13,600  
296. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Margao.  Manbea Gudo e 
Alvantini mollo  Ditto  Verlam  Ditto  133 of 18 -12-1953  14,000  
297. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Margao.  Navetem Don gor Ditto  Salginem  Ditto  135 of 18 -12-1953  9,400  
298. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Margao.  Chanfeadongor  Ditto  Verlem  Ditto  137 of 18 -12-1953  14,300  
299. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Margao.  Pigadapada  Ditto  Verlem of 
Netorlim  Ditto  138 of 18 -12-1953  13,600  
300. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Margao.  Murmunem  Ditto  Melauli  Satari  139 of 18 -12-1953  13,200  
301. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Margao.  Ghottimolli  Ditto  Surla  Bicholim  140 of 18 -12-1953  6,700  
  29 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
302. Firm Oriente 
Limitada, of 
Margao.  Soutigundo  Fe/ 
Mang  Nanuz  Bicholim  141 of 18 -12-1953  4,200  
303. Baburao Anta 
Raicar, of 
Margao.  Temculi & 
Santorem  Ditto  Siroda  Ponda  142 of 18 -12-1953  4,400  
304. Sociedade Timhlo 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Sailetembo  Iron Sangod  Sanguem  143 of 18 -12-1953  14,300  
305. Narahari Siuram 
Shet Narvehkar, 
of Goa.  Vacanlitil 
Temculi  Fe/ 
Mang  Vacoli of 
Cimada  Ponda  144 of 18 -12-1953  12,200  
306. Vicente Jaso F. de 
Figueirodo  Arvodem  Ditto  Loutulim  Salcete  1 of 4 -1-1954  6,000  
307. Sucilabal Anan da 
Keni of Goa.  Purnicoda & 
Pevanchem 
Conn.  Ditto  Advoi  Satari  2 of 4 -1-1954  5,600  
308. Mingoa Soc. 
Mineira Goesa, 
SARL., of Goa.  Cancagalleu 
Tolope 
Borchemtemb  Iron Maulinguem  Bicholim  3 of 15-1-1954  4,600  
309. Mablu Saunto 
Gaunco Dessai, of 
Xeldem  Fdutembo ou 
Edumola  Fe/ 
Mang  Bati Sanguem  4 of 15 -1-1954  12,700  
310. Firm V. S. 
Dempo & Cia 
Ltda., of Goa.  Onvalienchi 
Math  Ditto  Onvaliem  Satari  5 of 22 -1-1954  13,900  
311. Firm Shantilal 
Kushaldas 
&Bros., of 
Margao.  Oxelavoril 
dongor  Ditto  Naundem  Sanguem  7 of 1 -2-1954  2,500  
312. Raia Porobo 
Baticar, of 
Sanguem.  Pedadongor  Ditto  Mangal  Quepem  8 of 5 -2- 1954  6,200  
313. Atchuta Visnum 
S Velingcar, of 
Velinga.  Dovormeacodil 
doirem e outs  Ditto  Rivona  Sanguem  11 of 16 -2-1954  11,200  
314. Jorge Anibal de 
Matos Sequeira, 
of Goa.  Chanfericho 
Advo dongor  Ditto  Govaneni  Satari  12 of 16 -2-1954  4,900  
315. Ramabai Ananta 
Avde, of 
Quepem.  Moiandega e 
penota  Ditto  Curdi  Sanguem  13 of 19 -2-1954  4.300  
316. Visnudas 
Narotemdes, of Raigodda Ambe 
Botacho  Ditto  Ussopa  Bicholim  14 of 19 -2-1954  12,800  30 
 Goa.  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
317. Vassudeva 
Madeva 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Caraichem Mol, 
Aforamento do 
Mourose 
Godeachi 
Mosone  Fe/ 
Mang  Siroda  Ponda  15 of 19 -2-1954  7,000  
318. Sociedade Timblo 
I. Ltda., of 
Margao.  Edumola ou 
Visnumgal  Ditto  Rivona  Sanguem  16 of 22 -2-1954  13,800  
319. Sociedade Timblo 
I. Ltda., of 
Margao.  Godmadongor 
Aram Mordi  Ditto  Salginem  Ditto  17 of 22 -2-1954  13,400  
320. Gangadhar 
Naringdas 
Agrawal, of 
Margao.  Ambeacho - 
dongor   Ditto   Bordem  Bicholim  18 of 1 -3-1954  6,700  
321. Roguvir Sinai 
Garco, 
ofAgacaim.  Culnamol or 
Culna.   Ditto   Tudou  Sanguem  19 of 1 -3-1954  12,000  
322. Firma V. S. 
Dempo & Cia 
Ltda., of Goa.  Onvaliechem 
Paltona   Iron  Ouvaliem  Satari  20 of 5 -3-1954  13,000  
323.  Firm V. S. 
Dempo & Cia 
Ltda., of Goa.  Tolpi e 
Mardando   Ditto  Cudnem e 
Surla  Bicholim  21 of 5 -3-1954  9,400  
324. Voicunta 
Srinivassa 
Dempo, of Goa.  Borcotem  Ditto   Colem  Sanguem  22 of 5 -3-1954  10,000  
325. Hari Visnum 
Lotlecar, 
ofMargao.  Vitalachem 
Xetavorchi 
Maddi e Nila ula  Ditto   Talauli  Ditto  23 of 8-3-1954  9,700  
326. Vassudeva M. 
Salgaocar, of 
Marmagao.  Pedichem Tour   Ditto   Vantem  Satari  25 of 19 -3-1954  7,500  
327. Crispino 
Rodrigues, of 
Sanguem.  Dando 
Cajumolaoilo 
Soddo   Ditto   Muguli  Sanguem  27 of 22 -3-1954  12,900  
328. Firma Shantilal 
Kushaldas e 
Irmao s of 
Margao.  Ponsivadivoril 
Advona   Ditto   Aglote  Ditto  28 of 9 -4-1954  3,300  
329. V.M. Salgaocar e 
Irmao, of Vasco Mardando   Iron  Surla  Bicholim  29 of 19 -4-1954  10,500  31 
 da Gama.  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
330. Firma Chowgule & 
Cia Ltda., of 
Vasco da Gama.  Dongrado 
Goleacho don gor 
Matae Carhal   Iron  Nadora  Bardez  30 of 19 -4-1954  11,200  
331. Viswasrao D. 
Chowgule, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Semdenominacao 
especial   Fe/ 
Mang   Sancordem  Sanguem  31 of 4 -6-1954  12,300  
332. Firma Caxinata D. 
Naique Ltda., of 
Margao.  Suriagalivoril 
Mordi   Ditto   Talauli  Ditto  32 of 23 -7-1954  9,300  
333. Gangadhar N. 
Agrawal, of 
Margao.  Culnamol e 
outros terren os  Ditto   Muguli  Ditto  33 of 6 -6-1954  14,100  
334. Caetano Jose Hugo 
V. Rodri gues, of 
Sanguem.  Ambdeabuttiho 
tembo or 
Penchem   Ditto   Salauli  Ditto  35 of 6 -9-1954  11,800  
335. Minguel Santana 
T. de Souza, 
ofSancdcuelim  Tambdeama -
ticho tembo or 
navigal  Iron Carapur  Bicholim   37 of 15 -10-1954  6,700  
336. Firm Damodar 
Nangaljie Irmoas 
Ltda., of Goa.  Baladongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Candeapar  Ponda   38 of 18 -10-1954  10,300  
337. Firm Shantilal 
Kushaldas &Bros., 
of Margao.  Rameago lli 
talsaie topiagal  Iron Sancordem e 
Darbandora  Sanguem  39 of 22 -10-1954  8,000  
338. Firma V. S. 
Dempo & Cia. 
Ltda., of Goa.  Sem 
denominacao 
especial  Fe/ 
Mang  Curpem  Ditto   40 of 22 -10-1954  7,300  
339. Ailiabai Dessai, of 
Goa.  Culna Soddo  Iron Cormonem  Ditto   41 of 5 -11-1954  11,800  
340. Sociedade Timbl o 
I. Ltda., of 
Margao.  Caximordid e 
caxidongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Salginem  Ditto   42 of 26 -11-1954  7,400  
341. Firm S. Kantilal 
Cia. &Ltda., of 
Margao.  Doro  Iron Nanora de 
Latambarcem  Bicholim   44 of 6-12-1954  13,400  
342. Bhalchandra A. 
Avde, of Quepem.  Odamolla  Ditto  Sangod  Sanguem   45 of 6 -12-1954  12,300  
343. Viswasrao D. 
Chowgule, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Chinvor Ghol  Ditto  Pirna  Bardez   46 of 6 -12-1954  14,200  
  32 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amoun t 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
344. Vassudeva M. 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Calafondicho 
soddo, etc.  Iron Sigao  Sanguem   47 of 6 -12-1954  8,100  
345. Salvador 
Femandes, of 
Sanguem.  Gholl dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Curpem  Sanguem   48 of 6 -12-1954  11,500  
346. Vassudeva M. 
Salgaocar, of 
Marmagao.  Moitem 
Cumarvado e 
xaimartodd  Iron Advolpale, 
Latambar -
cem e 
Moitem  Bicholim   49 of 6 -12-1954  8,600  
347. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia. 
Ltda., Goa.  Ambe avelem 
Boroda  Fe/ 
Mang  Surla  Ditto   1 of 14 -1-1955  4,200  
348. Vinaeca Naraina 
Bandecar, Panaji.  Ocambo  Ditto  Piliem  Sanguem   2 of 14 -1-1955  10,000  
349. Firm V. M. 
Salgamcar e Irmaos 
Ltda., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Datimola  Ditto  Sancordem  Ditto   3 of 31 -1-1955  13,400  
350. Sociedade Marzok 
& Cadar Ltda., of 
Margao.  Devachi Raim  Iron Darbandora  Ditto   4 of 7 -2-1955  11,100  
351. Narandas Popotlal, 
of Goa.  Countemdongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Sigonem  Ditto   5 of 11 -2-1955  8,800  
352. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmao Ltda., of 
Margao.  Mareta ou 
Marasoddo, etc.  Iron Onda  Satari 6 of 18 -2-1955  3,900  
353. Metelo X. Diniz.  Mandaadvona  Fe/ 
Mang  Calem  Sanguem  8 of 26 -3-1955  5,600  
354. Sociedade 
Mineinro Goesa 
Ltda., of Goa.  Maulingtodcho 
dongor  Iron Maulinguem  Bicholim  9 of 2 -4-1955  4,800  
355. Firma N. B. Kamat 
& Filhos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Chanfericho 
advo  Fe/ 
Mang  Malpona  Satari  10 of 16 -4-1955  14,000  
356. Abubakar Noor 
Mohamed (Buda 
Shet) of Panaji.  Sanvri batacho 
sodo  Iron Velguem  Bicholim  12 of 30 -4-1955  5,000  
357. Firma V.M. 
Salgaocar e Irmao 
Ltda., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Visnuporba -
chem Ariagall 
Iron e Chondra 
Vito ba Dessai  Ditto  Sigaoe  Sanguem  13 of 30 -4-1955  10,100  33 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
358. Abubaker Noor 
Mahomed (Budda 
Xete) of Goa.  Banastarime 
adacen tes  Fe/ 
Mang  Banastarim  Ponda  14 of 14 -5-1955  3,200  
359. Francisco Xavier 
Patrocinio Furtado, 
of Benaulim.  Tollem e 
Cazumodi  Ditto  Ambeli  Satari  15 of 21 -5-1955  14,100  
360. Vassudeva Guiri 
Quenim, of Goa.  Semdenomin 
acao especial  Iron Sonus Von 
Voliem  Ditto  16 of 18 -6-1955  8,200  
361. Lidia Belinda 
Simoes, of Goa.  Ponsanadongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Codi  Sanguem  17 of 25 -6-1955  14,300  
362. Firm V. M. 
Salgaocar & Irmao 
Ltda., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Malpona 
Vanganvoril 
dongor  Ditto  Malpona  Satari  18 of 2 -7-1955  12,100  
363. Sociedade Tim blo 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Bondumollo  Iron Molen  Sanguem  19 of 9-7-1955  14,200  
364. Sociedade Tim blo 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Siroli Culna  Ditto  Darban dora  Ditto  20 of 9 -7-1955  14,100  
365. Sociedade Tim blo 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Ordosoddo  Ditto  Cormonem 
E Codli  Ditto  21 of 9 -7-1955  14,000  
366. Sociedade Tim blo 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Odavoril tour  Ditto  Quirlapale  Ditto  22 of 9 -7-1955  14,200  
367. Ramacrisna 
Bandari, of Goa.  Unia dongor  Iron Querim  Ponda  23 of 9 -7-1955  10,300  
368. Caxinata 
Panduronaga Xete 
Parcar, of 
Curchorem.  Vellem Poicul e 
Daisaunto  Fe/ 
Mang  Darbandora  Sanguem  25 of 9 -7-1955  9,900  
369. Firma Sesa Goa 
Ltda., of Goa.  Cajumolla, etc.  Ditto  Sancordem  Ditto  26 of 9 -7-1955  6,200  
370. Firm S. Kantilal & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Margao.  Udolxem e 
Madia vangana  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  28 of 16 -7-1955  13,900  
371. Atchuta Vishum S. 
Velingcar, of 
Velinga.  Lacavelem 
uporgaovatta  Ditto  Agllote Ditto  29 of 23 -7-1955  7,500  
372. Quessova Sinai 
Cundo, of Mar gao. Zorla ou Zolla  Ditto  Xellpem  Ditto  30 of 30 -7-1955  7,100  34 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
373. Firma Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Vasco da Gama.  Dangarvado 
outroz  Iron Gavanem  Satari  31 of 30 -7-1955  14,100  
374. Fir Sesa Goa 
Limiteda, of Goa.  Semdenom 
inacao especial  Fe/ 
Mang  Pirna 
Nadora   Bardez  32 of 30 -6-1955  6,200  
375. Antonio Franci sco 
Sales de An drade, 
of Sanguem.  Eduando ou mad 
everin  Ditto  Tudou  Sanguem  33 of 6 -8-1955  14,200  
376. Gajanan 
Panduranga Xete 
Parcer.  Santonachi Upri  Iron Dabal  Ditto  34 of 13 -8-1955  14,100  
377. Sociedade Timbl o 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Mauco eatodichi 
Nuli Ditto  Pale Bicholim  35 of 13 -8-1955  13,000  
378. Sociedade Timbl o 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  UmoriemTican  Ditto  Surla  Surla  36 of 13 -8-1955  5,100  
379. Sociedade Timbio 
Irmaos Ltd., of 
Margao.  Kirmolachem  Iron Ditto  Bicholim  37 of 13 -8-1955  8,700  
380. Sociedade Mineira 
Goesa Ltd., of 
Goa.  Millem dongor  Ditto  Darbonora  Sanguem  38 of 3 -9-1955  14,300  
381. Sociedade Mineira 
Goesa Ltd., of 
Goa.  Xirvolculna  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  39 of 3 -9-1955  17,800  
382. V. M. Salgaoncare 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Vasco da Gama.  Quella  Ditto  Tivim  Bardez  41 of 5 -11-1955  11,000  
383. Caetano F. 
Ciprianode Souza 
of Sanquelim.  Deulacodil tour  Fe/ 
Mang  Nirancal  Ponda  1 of 18 -1-1956  14,000  
384. Eurico da Silva d e 
Ataide e Teive de 
Noronha, of 
Porvorim.  Bicholicho Choll  Iron Mahem  Bicholim  2 of 18 -1-1956  14,100  
385. Firm V. M. 
Salgaocar Irmaos 
Ltda., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Goteacho tembo 
ougoteacho molli  Fe/ 
Mang  Malpona  Satari  3 of 1 -2-1956  14,300  
  35 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
386. Shantilal 
Khushaldas and 
Bros. of  Margao.  Baburli sodo  Fe/ 
Mang  Cormonem  Sanguem  4 of 1 -2-1956  14,300  
387. S. Kantilal & Cia. 
Ltda., of Margao.  Niulitembo, 
Fatratembo  Iron Bati,Valcem  Ditto  5 of 8 -2-1956  14,300  
388. Marcos Marcelino 
P. de Souza, of 
Goa.  Gogal  Fe/ 
Mang  Usgao  Bicholim  7 of 21 -3-1956  14,000  
389. Badrudin 
Hussenbhai 
Ramjee, of Goa.  Coro Pimpla codil 
Borod, etc.  Iron Bordem  Ditto  8 of 28 -3-1956  3,200  
390. Shantilal 
Kushaldas Bros., 
of Margao.  Aforamento de 
Burculo Sounsar  Fe/ 
Mang  Arvalem  Ditto  9 of 28 -3-1956  10,600  
391. Gopinata Sinai 
Garco, of 
Agacalm.  Gauntona ou 
Undorna e 
cormal, etc.  Ditto  Molcornem  Quepem  11 of 11 -4-1956  13,500  
392. Maria Anamal ia V. 
B. Mascarenhas 
Baganza, 
ofMargao.  Mida  Ditto  Naiquinim  Sanguem  12 of 11 -4-1956  7,500  
393. Jaising Maganalal, 
of Goa.  Derguna  Ditto  Vagurim  Satari  14 of 11 -4-1956  6,500  
394. Marzook Cadar 
Ltda., of Margao.  Borgall e Ditto  Colomba  Sanguem  18 of 18 -4-1956  12,600  
395. Sociedade 
Lithoferro Ltda., of 
Mapusa.  Deugotimolavoril
dongor  Iron Sangod  Ditto  19 of 18 -4-1956  12,100  
396. Hirabai Hegde, of 
Margao.  Bencre dando  Fe/ 
Mang  Cumbari  Ditto  20 of 25 -4-1956  7,600  
397. Roguvir Naraina 
Lotle ecar, of 
Margao.  Paicachi Zor, etc.  Ditto  Maina  Quepem  21 of 2 -5-1956  8,600  
398. Roguvir Naraina 
Lotle ecar, of 
Margao.  Xeme-Vain 
anchea dongor  Ditto  Gangem  Satari  22 of 2 -5-1956  13,900  
399. Roguvir Naraina 
Lotle ecar, of 
Margao.  Lalbag ou 
Maticho Zaga  Ditto  Carapur  Bicholim  23 of 2 -5-1956  3,600  
  36 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
400. Badrudin 
Hussenbhai 
Ramjee, of 
Margao.  Evalem 
Deulamol  Fe/ 
Mang  Costi  Sanguem  24 of 16 -5-1956  13,000  
401. Sheik Kadar Sheik 
Husman, of Goa.  Carpadegga etc.  Ditto  Codli  Ditto  25 of 16 -5-1956  5,800  
402. Pedro Nolasco 
D'Souza, of Vasco 
da Gama.  Vis a Vis de 
estacao de ferro  Iron Colem  Ditto  27 of 27 -6-1956  8,900  
403. S. Kantilal & Cia. 
Ltda., of Margao.  Vilipiares  Ditto  Bati Ditto  29A of 22 -8-1956  14,100  
404. S. Kantilal & Cia. 
Ltda., of Margao.  Gonsumoddi  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  30 of 22 -8-1956  12,100  
405. Vinaeca Naique of 
Margao.  Madiencho 
Soddo  Ditto  Saigao  Ditto  31 of 22 -8-1956   14,100  
406. Damodar Mangalji 
& Cia. Ltda., of 
Goa.  Quitalmotta, etc.  Ditto  Arvalem  Bicholim  33 of 22 -8-1956  14,000  
407. Damodar Mangalji 
& Cia Ltda., of 
Goa.  Dob e adjacentes  Ditto  Saigao  Sanguem  34 of 22 -8-1956  7,500  
408. S. Kantilal & Cia 
Ltda., of Margao.  Bamanulcadem e 
outres  Ditto  Talauli 
Cumbari e 
Bati Ditto  36 of 29-8-1956  14,000  
409. Vassudeva 
Madeva Salgaocar 
of Vasco da Gama.  Aglotesoddo  Ditto  Aglote  Ditto  38 of 17 -10-1956  4,300  
410. V. M. Salgaocar 
&Bros. Pvt. Ltd.  Malpona 
Culnavoril 
dongor  Ditto  Malpona  Satari  39 of 17 -10-1956  7,700  
411. Firm V. M. Sal -
gaocar & I Ltda., 
of Vasco da Gama.  Gainvadd dongor  Ditto  Aglote  Sanguem  40 of 17 -10-1956  13,500  
412. Chowgule & Cia. 
Ltda., of 
Marmagao.  Cuntichem 
Tollem  Ditto  Ponocem  Satari  41 of 24 -10-1956  9,900  
413. Roguvir Sinai 
Garco, of Margao  Carcareatemba  Fe/ 
Mang  Tudoru  Sanguem  42 of 24 -10-1956  11,200  
414. Joao Hugo 
Eduardo Sequeira , 
of Goa.  Tolpavaddo,etc.  Iron Darbandora  Ditto  43 of 31 -10-1956  14,300  37 
  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
415. Firm V. M. Sal -
gaocar e Irmaos, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Surlavain 
ganacho 
Vandivoril  Iron Aglote  Sanguem  44 of 7 -11-1956  13,300  
416. Avelino Francis co 
Fernandes, of 
Curchorem.  Purna  e Gogoll  Ditto  Costi e 
Cananguinim  Ditto  45 of 12 -12-1956  14,300  
417. Damodar Mangalji 
& Cia. Ltd., of 
Goa.  Vaguna Kuddo  Iron Dabal  Ditto  46 of 12 -12-1956  9,200  
418. Prakash Rajaram 
Hede, of Goa  Moliem 
Mangaddo  Fe/ 
Mang  Corlim  Goa 48 of 19 -12-1956  10,200  
419. Firm S. Kantilal & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Margao.  Kariamola, etc.  Iron Bati Sanguem  49 of 19 -12-1956  12,100  
420. Jorge Anibal de 
Matos Sequeira of 
Goa.  Gorbatta 
Mattideviculna  Fe/ 
Mang  Maina  Quepem  50 of 19 -12-1956  9,100  
421. Martinho 
Coutinho, 
Cuncolim.  Ubeafatricho 
dongor  Ditto  Pirla e Maina  Ditto  1 of 2 -1-1957  9,200  
422. Roguvir S. Garco, 
of Margao  Zamblimollacho 
Soddo  Iron Muguli  Sanguem  2 of 16 -1-1957  13,000  
423. R.S. Garco, of 
Margao.  Anvaliamola, 
etc. Ditto  Patiem e 
Tudou  Ditto  3 of 28-1-1957  14,300  
424. Naraina R. X. 
Amoncar, of Goa 
(Seguna Sitaram) 
Sirasat Legal heir).  Oileamola -voril 
Soddo  Ditto  Velguem  Satari  5 of 6 -2-1957  12,400  
425. Atchuta Visnum 
Sinai Velingcar, of 
Velinga.  Purso Boto e 
Prediavoril 
Moddi  Fe/ 
Mang  Rivona  Sanguem  6 of 6 -2-1957  2,900  
426. Abdul Aziz 
Mohomed Jalal, of 
Goa.  Xelpem e 
Adjacents  Ditto  Xelpem Ditto  7 of 13 -2-1957  12,800  
427. Jose Maximiano S. 
O. Menezes Cota, 
of Agacaim.  Sem 
denominacao 
especial  Ditto  Marna 
Assagao, 
Cuchelim e 
Mapusa  Bardez  8 of 27-2-1957  13,900  
428. Shaik, Aiyula, of 
Sanguem.  Oiteiro Matir, 
etc. Iron Candola  Ponda  10 of 25 -3-1957  13,600  
  38 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amoun t 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
429. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia. 
Ltda., of Goa.  Periudoc e 
Masticulnachem 
Advona  Iron Santona  Sanguem  11 of 29 -4-1957  9,300  
430. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Mormugao.  Bozruguro , 
predio Pantovoril 
vall, etc.  Ditto  Costi Dudal  Ditto  12 of 29 -4-1957  2,900  
431. Sociedada Timbl o 
Irmos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Carela e Dandia 
dongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Xelpem  Ditto  13 of 6 -5-1957  10,000  
432. Francisco Cecilio 
Jorge Sequira, of 
Goa.  Dolicho don gor e 
ter. adjts  Ditto  Aturlie 
Naroa  Bicholim  14 of 6 -5-1957  10,000  
433. Joaquim Antonio 
Maria Baptista, of 
Silva.  Moticho Dongor  Ditto  Nanuz 
Ganguem  Ditto  18 of 13 -5-1957  14,900  
434. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Davoscoramolo 
Vaddo  Iron Carapur  Ditto  18A of 20 -5-1957  8,300  
435. Francisco Cecilio, 
Jorge Sequeira, of 
Goa.  Predio Ambexim  Ditto  Pale Ditto  19 of 20 -5-1957  14,300  
436. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Margao. Oiteiro 
Fanascantem e 
Mas galicho 
soddo  Ditto  Quirlaple  Sanguem  20 of 20 -5-1957  14,300  
437. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Suriagal Murdi  Ditto  Bati Ditto  21 of 20 -5-1957  8,500  
438. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Cancamolla e 
Halditembo  Fe/ 
Mang  Rivona  Ditto  22 of 20 -5-1957  3,900  
439. Krishna Vamona 
Keni, of Goa.  Don ou Dudo 
nem e Polpi 
entre si ligado s Ditto  Nanora  Bicholim  23 of 20 -5-1957  4,000  
440. Ramacanta 
Visnum Sinai 
Velingcar, of 
Velinga.  Corpadega, 
Valuco predio 
parna, etc.  Iron Darbandora  Sanguem  24 of 3 -6-1957  8,600  
441. Viswasra o 
DatajiChowgule, 
of Marmagoa.  Conquichem  Ran Fe/ 
Mang  Piocul e 
Darbandora  Satari 
Sanguem  25 of 3 -6-1957  10,800  
  39 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amoun t 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
442. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Marmagoa.  Bimbol dongor e 
ter adjits  Iron Xelopo 
Curado  Satari  26 of 3 -6-1957  14,300  
443. Mussa Xeque 
Usman, of Goa.  Dudagal culna, 
etc. Ditto  Colem  Sanguem  27 of 3 -6-1957  12,000  
444. Santana Fernandes, 
of Margao.  Soddo  Ditto  Curtorim  Salcete  28 of 1 -7-1957  14,300  
445. S. Kantilal & Cia. 
Ltda., of Margao.  Carimol 
Charidimol  Ditto  Cumbari  Sanguem  31 of 12 -8-1957  14,100  
446. S. Kantilal & Cia. 
Ltda., of Margao.  Mudanrica  Ditto  Bati Ditto  32 of 12 -8-1957  16,700  
447. Roguvir Sinai 
Garco, of S. 
Lourenoo.  Tolem Bibla,etc.  Ditto  Rudou  Ditto  33 of 12 -8-1957  13,800  
448. Firm Shantilal 
Kushaldas and 
Bros., of Margao.  Iranqui  Ditto  Potrem  Ditto  34 of 26 -8-1957  7,600  
449. Ghanaxama 
Naraher Thaker, 
Panji -Goa.  Tacaoilo  
dongor  Ditto  Pissurlem e 
Onda  Satari  37 of 9 -9-1957  5,500  
450. Firm Chow gule & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Margagoa.  Peguaca -Juncho 
Tembo  Ditto  Tudou  Sanguem  40 of 16 -9-1957  11,500  
451. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Margagoa.  Moransoddo 
Motto  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  42 of 16-9-1957  13,100  
452. Shri D.B. 
Bandodkar, of 
Panaji.  Goteacodlo Cud , 
etc. Fe/ 
Mang  Codqui  Satari  43 of 30 -9-1957  13,600  
453. Firm  Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia (I) 
Ltda., of Goa.  Madapor, 
Moson, etc.  Iron Oragao  Ponda  44 of 14 -10-1957  6,000  
454. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia. (I) 
Ltda., of Goa.  Sancodecho 
Dando, etc.  Fe/ 
Mang  Cormonem  Sanguem  45 of 14 -10-1957  13,500  
455. Hori P. 
Curchorcar, of 
Goa.  Chafer, etc.  Iron Querim  Ponda  47 of 14 -10-1957  10,700  
456. Hori P. 
Curchorcar, of 
Goa.  Canfendongor,  
etc. Fe/ 
Mang  Nirabaga  Sanguem  48 of 14 -10-1957  13,700  40 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
457. S. Kantilal & Cia. 
Ltda.,  of Margao.  Kalledongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Dongor  Sanguem  50 of 14 -10-1957  13,900  
458. Roguvir Sinai 
Garco, of 
Agacaim.  Cairik, 
Colleanchemped, 
etc. Iron Bordem  Bicholim  59 of 9 -12-1957  13,900  
459. Tilu Madeva Xete 
Parcar, of Ponda.  Godeasoddo e 
outros  Ditto  Calem  Sanguem  60 of 16 -12-1957  10,600  
460. Tito Trinidade P. 
Moraes, of 
Cuncolim.  Dapotcachem  Fe/ 
Mang  Curdi  Ditto  61 of 23 -12-1957  14,300  
461. Francisco C. Jorge 
Sequeria , of Goa.  Baucui Connan 
Dongor , etc. Iron Maem  Bicholim  62 of 25 -12-1957  12,700  
462. Francisco C. Jorge 
Sequeria , of Goa.  Vainguinim 
dongor e outros  Ditto  Vainguinim  Ditto  63 of 25 -12-1957  14,000  
463. Vicente Fernandes, 
of Merces  Talichem Molle 
outro s Ditto  Davem  Satari  1 of 6 -1-1958  14,300  
464. Joao Hugo 
Eduardo Sequeira, 
of Goa.  DangarvaddoSur
aguinchi  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  2 of 13 -1-1958  13,000  
465. Joao HugoEduardo 
Sequeira, of Goa.  Uro dongor e 
adjacentes  Ditto  Sanvordem  Ditto  3 of 13 -1-1958  13,900  
466. Sociedade 
Marzook & Cadar 
Ltda., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Nirancarichi  Ditto  Sonal  Ditto  4 of 13 -1-1958  14,300  
467. Caetona Fran cisco 
C. de Souza, of 
Sanguelim.  Vagler e outros  Ditto  Colem  Sanguem  7 of 20 -1-1958  13,800  
468. Venctexa Ananta 
P. Raicar, of 
Verem.  Cantor e 
Cantorli ,etc. Iron Verem  Ponda  8 of 20 -1-1958  14,300  
469. Nilconta Jaganata 
Coulecar, of Goa.  Sera denomin aco 
especial  Ditto  Davem  Satari  10 of 3 -2-1958  14,300  
470. Sitarama 
Atmarama Naique, 
of Mapusa.  Karidongor e 
outros  Fe/ 
Mang  Begalim  Pernem  12 of 10 -2-1958  14,300  
471. Shantaram, S. 
Samat, of Panaji.  Hoticho 
ondeav oril 
dongor.  Iron Ladpem  Bicholim  13 of 24 -2-1958  14,100  
  41 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
472. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Gaoteona e Dusri 
fall Iron Codil  Sanguem  14 of 24 -2-1958  5,900  
473. Firma Damodar M. 
(India) Ltda., of 
Goa.  Masticule 
nachem Advona  Ditto  Santona  Ditto  15 of 3 -3-1958  13,200  
474. Abdul Rajak, 
Panaji.  Pongrea  Holdim  Fe/ 
Mang  Calm  Ditto  16 of 10 -3-1958  14,300  
475. Tomas Caetano de 
Sousa, of Raia.  Godecoe e 
taradjts  Ditto  Ela Goa 17 of 24 -3-1958  13,800  
476. Sripad P. Dhungh 
at,of Margao.  Capila gaechem 
Guedd.  Iron Arvlem  Bicholim  18 of 9 -5-1958  14,300  
477. Vivian Coutinho of 
Margao.  Marsode achem 
Pal sona  Ditto  Sons Vono 
liem Satari  19 of 16 -6-1958  9,600  
478. Ramakrishna 
Bandari , of Goa . Unia dongor e 
adjacentes  Ditto  Querim  Ponda  21 of 13 -6-1958  14,300  
479. Dorotia E. E. 
Aldemira , Pereira 
of Diwar.  Magititem b Mat 
tidongor  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  22 of 13 -6-1958  14,300  
480. Raguvir Xamba 
Naique, of 
Mapusa.  Todguevoril 
Mordi  Fe/ 
Mang  Navelim  Bicholim  23 of 13 -6-1958  14,200  
481. Viruparapa 
Basappa, of 
Margao . Botvadie 
Vorvedeac odil  Iron Maem  Ditto  24 of 13-6-1958  14,300  
482. Shantilal 
Kushaldas &Bros., 
of Margao.  Aralimolacho 
Tembo  Ditto  Cananguinim  Quepem  27 of 21 -7-1958  14,300  
483. Adolfo Patrocinio 
E. Gomes of 
Margao.  Batimola e 
Zemblisoddo  Ditto  Bati Sanguem  28 of 28 -7-1958  12,300  
484. Heramba Ragoba 
Dolvi, of Pale.  Calguinicho 
Canno  Fe/ 
Mang  Pale Bicholim  30 of 28 -7-1958  6,400  
485. Bahol Saunlo 
Naique Tari, of 
Sanguem.  Choromoll e 
adjacentes  Iron Bati Sanguem  31 of 28 -7-1958  6,000  
486. Firm Shantilal 
Kushaldas &Bros., 
of Margao.  Page mol e 
Saunri -Moll  Ditto  Ugem e 
Cotarli  Ditto  33 of 11 -8-1958  1,000  
  42 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
487. Daiananda B. 
Bandorcar, of Goa.  Sorvoi e 
Ambleanchem 
Moll  Fe/ 
Mang  Boma  Ponda  34 of 11 -8-1958  14,300  
488. Daiananda B. 
Bandorcar, of Goa.  Dolcachem 
Tolop  Iron Mulgao  Bicholim  35 of 11 -8-1958  13,000  
489. Firm V. M. 
Salgaocar e Irmaos 
Ltda., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Foliadondongor  Ditto  Morlem  Satari  36 of 11 -8-1958  14,100  
490. Firm V. M. 
Salgaocar e Irmaos 
Ltda., of Vasco di 
Gama.  Unio de Zamboli  Ditto  Molem  Sanguem  37 of 11 -8-1958  14,000  
491. Firm Sesa Goa 
Ltda., of Goa.  Toleachi add , 
etc. Ditto  Arvelem  Bicholim  38 of 11 -8-1958  14,300  
492. Firm Sesa Goa 
Ltda., of Goa.  Ambaeculna  Ditto  Santona  Sanguem  39 of 11 -8-1958  13,200  
493. Vassudeva M. 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Kalascondichem , 
etc. Ditto  Latambar -
cem e sataro 
Ond-a Bicholim  40 of 11 -8-1958  14,200  
494. Vassudeva M. 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Durgea pan ou 
Durgaso  Fe/ 
Mang  Curpem  Sanguem  41 of 29 -8-1958  10,300  
495. Vassudeva M. 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Padispo -nnos 
Taria -Voilem , 
etc. Iron Sancor dem  Ditto  42 of 29 -8-1958  14,300  
496. Vassudeva M. 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Coirim olavoril 
advena  Ditto  Sigao  Ditto  43 of 29 -8-1958  8,300  
497. Vassudeva M. 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Cotgui nem, Va 
guriem e Deus 
uam Ditto  Melauli  Satari  44 of 29 -8-1958  13,500  
498. Vassudeva M. 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Agapuri xeta  Fe/ 
Mang  Amona  Bicholim  45 of 29 -8-1958  5,000  
499. Firm V. M. 
Salgaocar e Irmaos 
Ltda., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Gulapa slacho 
temb, etc.  Iron Melauli  Satari  46 of 29 -8-1958  14,200  
500. Caxinata Deu 
Saupto Talaulicar, 
of Ponda.  Cormola chem 
Molle Anio temb  Ditto  Cudnem  Bichol im 48 of 29 -8-1958  14,000  43 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
501. Firm V. M. 
Salgaocar e Irmaos 
Ltda., of Vasco da 
Gama.  Xedichem 
Advona  Fe/ 
Mang  Porie m e 
podoce m.  Satari  47 of 29 -8-1958  13,600  
502. Firm S. Kantilal & 
Cia Ltda., of 
Margao.  Paicatem -bo e 
adjacentes  Iron Bati Sanguem  49 of 12 -9-1958  4,300  
503. Mohanlal S. 
Rege. of Quepem.  Cotuevade achi 
tembo  Ditto  Colam  Ditto  50 of 12 -9-1958  4,800  
504. Firm Chowgule 
and Cia. Ltda., of 
Marmagoa.  Pateaoilo tembo, 
Co ridongrac 
hem Palso na e 
adjacentes  Ditto  Ambeli  Satari  51 of 29 -9-1958  14,300  
505. Firm Chowgule 
and Cia . Ltda., of 
Marmagoa.  Sastachoa dvo o 
ter adjts . Ditto  Navelim 
Amona  Bicholim  52 of 22 -9-1958  13,000  
506. Firm Chowgule 
and Cia. Ltda., of 
Marmagoa.  Godemsod -ddo 
eter adjts.  Ditto  Sigao 
Colem  Sanguem  53 of 22 -9-1958  11,300  
507. Ismail Bin  Abdul 
Latif, of Goa.  Camarali e 
adjacentes  Ditto  Codar  Ponda  55 of 22 -9-1958  4,600  
508. Rodolfo Gomes, of 
Margao  Tatode, Devichi 
Rain ,etc. Ditto  Darban dora  Sanguem  59 of 29 -9-1958  12,500  
509. Mineria Pro -
metedo -ra Ltda., of 
Natorlim.  Bonquitem ba  Ditto  Vichundrem  Ditto  66 of 17 -10-1958  14,200  
510. Vassudeva P. P. 
Velguencar, of 
Curchorem.  Madtudad e ter, 
adjts.  Ditto  Nirancal  Ponda  67 of 17 -10-1958  5,100  
511. Firm Chowgule & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Marmagao.  Godamsod -do 
Goule vadd , etc. Ditto  Sigao  Sanguem  70 of 24 -11-1958  8,700  
512. Firm Chowgule 
and Cia . Ltda., of 
Marmagoa.  Deunacho 
Dongor e ter 
adjts . Ditto  Sanvordem  Satari  71 of 28 -11-1958  8,200  
513. Firm Chowgule 
and Cia . Ltda., of 
Marmagoa.  Aldonaveddi e 
ter adjts . Ditto  Maem  Bicholim  73 of 28 -11-1958  14,300  
514. Gangadhar 
Narsingdas 
Agrawal, of 
Margao.  Sem deno 
Minacao especial  Ditto  Navelim  Ditto  74 of 28 -11-1958  14,100  44 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
515. Jaganata Ganecar, 
of Goa.  Cupadongor 
adam tembo , etc. Iron Sancordem  Sanguem  75 of 22 -12-1958  14,000  
516. Firm Shantilal 
Kushaldas &Bros., 
of Margao.  Novelim dar e 
ter adjts  Fe/ 
Mang  Arvalem  Bicholim  76 of 26 - 12-1958  5,500  
517. Vassudeva 
Panduronga 
Velguencar, of 
Curchorem.  Morancho tembo  Iron Sarvona  Ditto  1 of 9 -3-1959  11,000  
518. Ramakanta 
Rajarama 
Panguincar, of 
Margao.  Datachem 
Fatrimola , etc. Fe/ 
Mang  Sangordem  Satari  3 of 23 -3-1959  8,500  
519. D. Maria Georgina 
Correia M.e. Lopes 
of Goa.  Loban Molo  Iron Poriem  Ditto  4 of 6 -4-1959  12,500  
520. Rama Nilu Naique 
of Carambolim.  Bindimo la e ter 
adjts  Mang  Betqui  Ponda  5 of 27 -4- 1959  7,700  
521. Pundolica Poi 
Vernencar of 
Merces (c/o 
Manibai P.  
Varekar).  Ondolo e 
terrenos adjts . Iron Darba - 
ndora  Sanguem  7 of 9 -5-1959  4,100  
522. Sripada Gopinata 
Carco of Margao.  Marvan dega e 
ter adjts  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  8 of 9 -5-1959  12,900  
523. Xembu Govinda 
Sinai, Cuvelcar, of 
Goa.  Vatoli Mordi , 
etc. Fe/ 
Mang  Curdi  Sanguem  11 of 9 -5-1959  3,400  
524. Ranum Dottu P. 
Loundo, of Goa.  Damonehemcho 
advo e ter adj.  Iron Damocem 
Guleli  Satari  14 of 9 -5-1959  10,300  
525. Ranum Dottu P. 
Loundo, of Goa.  Santone soddo e 
ter adjits . Ditto  Advoi 
Paddoli  Ditto  15 of 9-5-1959  10,100  
526. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji & Cia. 
Ltda., of Goa.  Cott e ter adjts . Ditto  Betqui  Ponda  16 of 9 -5-1959  9,600  
527. Jaganata C. Port 
abo Mambro, of 
Mapusa.  Gantcarach 
dongor  Ditto  Bordem  Bicholim  17 of 9 -5-1959  7,200  
528. Xarachandra J. 
Zarapcar of 
Mapusa.  Querem 
Kapreacho Tan 
Deugui  Mang  Chorao  Goa 18 of 9 -5-1959  6,200  
  45 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
529. Panduronga Sinai 
Garco of Margao.  Mortimolavoril 
soddo e teri  
adjacentes  Iron Conquirem  Satari  21 of 9 -5-1959  12,500  
530. Tulxides Madeva 
Xete Deulcar of 
Calem.  Deugotimola, 
Pilagal, Gogala 
etc. Ditto  Maulinguem  Sanguem  22 of 8-6-1959  11,700  
531. Vinaeca Naique, of 
Margao.  Carada, 
Binditemba ,etc. Ditto  Codar  Ponda  24 of 8 -6-1959  13,400  
532. Antoni F. Querino 
Gomes of 
Cavellossim.  Margalicho 
soddo etc.  Ditto  Calam  Sanguem  29 of 29 -6-1959  14,300  
533. Narahari Siurama 
X. Narvencar of 
Goa.  Era 
Venganavoril 
Mordi  Fe/ 
Mang  Molcor nem  Quepem  30 of 29 -6-1959  11,500  
534. Narahari Siurama 
X. Narvencar of 
Goa.  Ambead eoc e  
out ros ter adj.  Iron Santona 
Rumbrem  Sanguem  31 of 29 -6-1959  13,000  
535. Sripada A. S. 
Sanvo 
Sanvordencar of 
Curchorem.  Tolichem advona 
e ter adjts.  Ditto  Bandoli 
Codli  Ditto  33 of 29 -6-1959  10,400  
536. JoaquimMilagres 
Piedade Dias of 
Goa.  Cott e parte de 
Chinchecho  
Soddo  etc. Ditto  Priol  Ponda  35 of 29 -6-1959  14,300  
537. Mucunda Sazu S. 
Salelcar of 
Sanguem.  Butermola Antre 
mola Dudemol 
etc. Ditto  Curdi  Sanguem  36 of 29 -6-1959  13,800  
538. Firm V. S. Dempo 
& Cia .Ltda., of 
Goa. Rajabaga e 
terrenos 
adjacentes  Fe/ 
Mang  Cananguin -
im (Cola)  Canacona  37 of 29 -6-1959  14,300  
539. Shantilal 
Kushaldas &Bros. 
Ltd., of Margao.  Duriamodi e 
terrenos 
adjacentes  Ditto  Antoriem  Sanguem  38 of 29 -6-1959  11,000  
540. Sociedade Mineira 
Explore dora of 
Sanguem.  Cargal Tervole 
Santonamorbi, 
etc. Ditto  Mugul i Ditto  43 of 31 -8-1959  14,300  
541. Narahari Siurama 
X. Narvencar of 
Goa.  Mata Nacional, 
Talsai, etc.  Ditto  Curdi  Ditto  44 of 31 -8-1959  10,500  
542. Firm Mineira 
Nacional Ltda., of 
Margao.  Pedicho soddo e 
Bomachem 
Vadio soddo  Iron Boma e 
Cunooliem  Ponda  47 of 21 -9-1959  12,200  46 
 Sl. 
No. Name of  the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
543. Xec Ayub, of 
Sanguem.  Vagulped ou 
Vaguemor di e 
ter adj.  Iron Curdi  Sanguem  49 of 21-9-1959  3,100  
544. Bascora Saguna 
Corpe of Valpoi.  Fofande, 
Cuzreacho 
tembo Zorioilo 
dongor e ter 
adjts.  Fe/ 
Mang  Massordem  Satari  50 of 21 -9-1959  9,300  
545. Caximo Can 
Moraji Can of 
Margao.  Pondichi Mat e 
golxi Dhat, etc. Iron Anmona  Bicholem  52 of 21-9-1959  7,100  
546. Manoharlal 
Damodar of Goa.  Oiteiro Tolto e 
adjacent es Ditto  Att. Estavan  Goa 54 of 21 -9-1959  4,600  
547.  Socied ade 
Lithoferro Ltda., of 
Mapusa.  Camanchem 
tembo e ter adjts.  Ditto  Pissusurlem  Satari  57 of 27 -9-1959  14,300  
548.  Sociedade 
Lithoferro Ltda., of 
Mapusa . Matiecho donger 
e eter adjts.  Ditto  Mololem  Sanguem  58 of 27 -9-1959  14,300  
549.  Ramcrisna Dattu 
Porab Loundo of 
Panaji.  Karut Umola 
panorcem Anio 
temb , etc. Ditto  Cudnem e e 
Navelim  Bicholem  59 of 27 -9-1959  14,200  
550.  Firm S. Kantilal & 
Cia. Ltda., of 
Margao.  Poini Salauli e 
ter adjacentes  Ditto  Selailauli  Sanguem  62 of 28 -9-1959  12,500  
551.  Firm Sesa Goa 
Ltda., of Goa . Santona Vadi 
Soddo e ter. 
adjts.  Ditto  Santona  Ditto  64 of 28 -9-1959  14,100  
552.  Sociedade S. 
Kantilal & Cia. 
Ltda., of Margao.  Dignem soddo 
Gantonamola  Ditto  Curdi  Ditto  65 of 28 -9-1959  13,900  
553.  Firm S. Kanti lal & 
Cia Ltda., of 
Margao.  Gogole Galli 
sorod  Ditto  Cumbari  Ditto  68 of 28 -9-1959  3,300  
554.  Mohanlal 
Vassudeva 
Salgaocar, of 
Vasco da Gama.  Govindachi Gatti 
e ter adjts.  Ditto  Fatorpa  Quepem  70 of 28 -9-1959  14,300  
555.  Lidia Bolinda 
Simoes, of Goa.  Edumolavoril 
dongri ou 
Cancuta  Fe/ 
Mang  Netorlim  Sanguem  71 of 28 -9-1959  5,700  
  47 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
556.  Manohar Sinai 
Quirtonim, of 
Margao. .  Sem denomina -
cao especial  Iron Colomba  Sanguem  72 of 28 -9-1959  14,300  
557.  Xarachandra 
Janardana 
Zarapoar, of 
Mapusa.  Bomacanto Dob e 
Matarimoli 
Deuguimol  Mang  Malauli e 
Agolte  Satari 
Sanguem  73 of 28 -9-1959  7,400  
558.  Lidia Belinda 
Simoes, of Goa.  Devabaga e ter 
adjts.  Iron Caurem  Quepem  74 of 28 -9-1959  11,900  
559.  Rauji Raia 
Quirtonim, of Goa.  Simeacha 
Molavoril dongor , 
etc. Ditto  Guleli  Satari  76 of 7 -10-1959  11,000  
560.  Lidia Belinda 
Simoes, of Goa.  Musfodavoril 
Mordi e ter adjts.  Fe/ 
Mang  Maina  Quepem  77 of 13 -10-1959  13,600  
561.  Firm Sesa Goa 
Ltda.,  of Goa.  Casulem 
Casuleancho 
Condo , etc. Ditto  Sancordem  Sanguem  78 of 13 -10-1959  9,300  
562.  Firm Sesa Goa 
Ltda., of Goa.  Vagacho don gor 
Marseanglacho , 
etc. Iron  Xelopa  Satari  79 of 7 -10-1959  14,200  
563. Jaising Maganlal, 
Panaji.  Careamol  Ditto  Pirla  Quepem  80 of 16 -11-1959  14,200  
564. Naracinva 
Purshottam  
Suquercar, of 
Margao.  Coladongor  Fe/ 
Mang  Piliem  Sanguem  81 of 16 -11-1959  10,400  
565. Loximona Porobo ’ 
Concar, of 
Margao.  Doro ou 
Camprempeda  Iron Cuncoliem  Ponda  82 of 30 -11-1959   13,200  
566. Vassude va 
Madeva Salgaocar, 
of Vasco da Gama.  Arunem e 
Vandimal -xeucar  Mang  Poriem e 
Moriem  Satari  83 of 14 -12-1959  12,100  
567. Krisna Vamona 
Keni of Goa.  Vissanvar shi Dhat 
etc. Fe/ 
Mang  Cuxirem  Ditto  84 of 14 -12-1959  6,700  
568. Loximona Concar, 
of Margao.  Pimpl amola 
Chmeterichem 
advona Datrem  Iron Dabal  Sanguem  85 of 14 -12-1959  6,300  
569. Tulxidas Madeva 
Deucar, of Calem.  Santona codil 
Raim , etc. Ditto  Sircodem de 
Calem  Ditto  3 of 18 -1-1960  14,000  
570. S. Kant ilal & Cia. 
Ltda., of Margao.  Matas de Sida  Ditto  Salauli  Ditto  5 of 29 -1-1960  13,500  48 
  
Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
571. Sesa Goa Ltda.,  of 
Goa.  Nagonem Borod  Iron Colem  Sanguem  6 of 29 -1-1960  9,600  
572. Sesa Goa Ltda., of 
Goa.  Bag Moitem de 
Palvel  Ditto  Advolpale e 
Assonora  Bichol im 
Bardes  7 of 5 -2-1960  14,300  
573. Loximona Crisna 
Saunto, of Ponda.  Semdenominacao 
especial  Fe/ 
Mang  Codar  Ponda  8 of 5 -2-1960  14,100  
574. Sociedade Timblo 
Irmaos Ltda., of 
Margao.  Cormolcantem  Iron Colem 
Sigao  Sanguem  10 of 22 -2-1960  10,700  
575. Rodolfo Gomes , of 
Margao.  Labala ou Dabala  Fe/ 
Mang  Dabal e 
Nicancal  Ponda  12 of 22 -2-1960  10,400  
576. Ananta Poi 
Polondicar of 
Margao.  Sem denominacao 
especial  Iron Sircodem de 
Calem  Sanguem  11 of 22 -2-1960  7,300  
577. Romeo lamartinho 
Gomes, of Margao.  Piliem e Ocambo  Ditto  Darbandora  Ditto  13 of 22 -2- 1960  11,400  
578. Firm Damodar 
Mangalji Cia. 
Ltda., of Goa.  Hoddo Codem 
Bindisodo  Ditto  Cormonem 
Calem  Ditto  15 of 29 -4- 1960  14,300  
579. V. S. Dempo & 
Cia. Ltda., of Goa.  Gorbaim Golacho 
tembe  Ditto  Navelim e 
Surla  Bichoiim  17 of 29 -4-1960  10,100  
580. S. Kantilal & Cia. 
Ltda., of Margao.  Madatembo e 
Tolietembo  Ditto  Bati Sanguem  20 of 17 -6-1960  13,300  
581. Esvonta Govinda 
X. Verencar  of 
Colem.  Cordaho Voll, 
Tiptachi Gali  Fe/ 
Mang  Revora  Bardez  22 of 17 -6-1960  3,900  
582. Raguvir 
P.Pissurlekar of 
Mapusa.  Bindichi Goll  Iron Vagalem  Satari  23 of 17 -6-1960  11,600  
583. Shantilal 
Kushaldas 
&Brothers Ltd., of 
Margao.  Tancamolavoilo 
soddo  Ditto  Quirlapale  Sanguem  24 of 17 -6-1960  4,200  
584. Rauji Raja Sinai 
Quirtonim of Goa.  Cunneatulea 
Xentatulo  Fe/ 
Mang  Netorlim  Ditto  25 of 20 -6-1960  9,500  
585. Damodar Mangalji 
& Cia. Ltd a., of 
Goa.  Teramola e 
Bandora tembo  Iron Codli  Ditto  26 of 22 -8-1960  14,300  
586. Shantilal 
Kushaldas &Bros. 
Ltd., of Margao.  Goinchem Molan 
Cassal Gali  Fe/ 
Mang  Curpem  Ditto  1 of 9 -1-1961  4,700  49 
 Sl. 
No. Name of the 
concession holder 
and his residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and date 
of title  Amount 
(in Rs.)  
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 
587. Xembu Govinda 
Sinai Cuvelcar of 
Goa.  Pelembata e 
outros  Iron Orgao e 
Tiurem  Ponda  3 of 10 -2-1961  6,400  
588. Panduronga N. 
Sanvordencar, of 
Sanvordem.  Sircodem Culna  Ditto  Sirco dem Sanguem  4 of 24 -8-1961  8,100  
589. Gangadhar 
Narsingdas 
Agrawal, of 
Margao.  Borchem mordi  Fe/ 
Mang  Maina  Quepem  6 of 24 -8-1961  14,300  
590. Cosme Simeao 
Moraes, Cuncolim.  Satiasmoli e 
Dongri  Iron Maina e 
Colombo  Ditto 
Sanguem  7 of 30 -8-1961  13,900  
591. Bhaskar Hari Dalvi 
Pale.  Madachem bata  Ditto  Pale Bicholim  8 of 30 -8-1961  9,300  
 
 
 
 50 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sections 4( 2), 6, 7 and 9( 1)] 
DETAILS OF MINING CONCESSIONS ABOLISHED AND DECLARED AS MINING LEASES ON AND FROM A DATE 
SUBSEQUENT TO THE APPOINTED DAY  
 
Sl. 
No Name of the 
concession 
holder and his 
residence  Denomination of 
the mine  Nature  Situation  Number and 
date of title  Date of 
abolition 
and 
declaration 
of any 
mining 
lease  Amount  
(in Rs.)   
Village  Taluka  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
1. GeorginaFilo
mena de 
Figueiredo , of 
Loutulim . Predico Oiteiral do 
Estadoe Outros  Fe/ 
Mang  Colem  Sanguem  2 of 11 -7-1963  12-7-1963  11,200  
2. Vassudeva 
Guiri Quenim, 
of Goa.  Culnasodd e 
outros  Iron Bali Quepem  3 of 11 -7-1963  12-7-1963  11,200  
3. FirmaMineria 
Nacmol L td., 
of Margao.  Vagmoloi 
Perisodo  Fe/ 
Mang  Curdi  Sanguem  4 of 11 -7-1963  12-7-1963  8,200  
4. Firma  Mineria 
Nacinal 
Ltd.,  of 
Margao.  Namosmodi  Ditto  Ditto  Ditto  5 of 11 -7-1963  12-7-1963  9,500  
5. Companhia     
Mineria 
Progresso   
limitada, of 
Sanguem.  Morga Foncul ou 
Chicolmolo  Ditto  Vichundrem  Ditto  6 of 10 -8- 1963  11-8-1963  11,600  
 
 
 
--------------------------The Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU REORGANISATION ACT, 1987  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
 
PART II  
REORGANISATION OF THE  UNION TERRITORY  OF GOA, DAMAN AND DIU  
3. Formation of State of Goa . 
4. Formation of Union territory of Daman and Diu . 
5. [Repealed ]. 
 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE  LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
6. [Repealed ]. 
7. Election to fill the seat allotted to the State of Goa . 
The House of the People  
8. Allocation of seats in the House of the People . 
9. Parliamentary constituency of the  Union territory of Daman and Diu . 
10. Parliamentary constituencies . 
11. Provisions as to sitting members . 
The Legislative Assembly  
12. Provisions as to Legislative Assembly . 
13. Provisional Legislative Assembly . 
14. [Repealed ]. 
15. Speaker of the provisional Legislative Assembly . 
16. Rules of procedure . 
Delimitation of constituencies  
17. Delimitation of constituencies . 
18. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up -to-date. 
19. [Repealed ]. 
 
  2 
 PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
SECTIONS  
20. Common High Court for Maharashtra, Goa, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu.  
21. Provision as to advocates . 
22. Practice and procedure in the common High Court . 
23. Custody of seal of the common High Court . 
24. Form of writs and other processes . 
25. Powers of Judges . 
26. Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High Court . 
27. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court . 
28. Transfer of proceedings to the common High Court . 
29. Interpretation, etc . 
30. Saving . 
 
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
31. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature . 
32. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory . 
33. Distribution of revenues . 
 
PART VI  
ASSESTS AND LIABILITIES  
34. Definition . 
35. Land and goods . 
36. Cash balance s. 
37. Arrears of taxes . 
38. Right to recover loans and advances . 
39. Investments in and loans, etc. , to certain corporate bodies . 
40. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings . 
41. Refund of taxes collected in excess . 
42. Certain deposits . 
43. Provident fund . 
44. Pensions granted by the Administrator, etc. 
45. Contracts . 
46. Liability in respect of actionable wrong . 
47. Liability as guarantor of co -operative societies . 
48. Items in suspense . 
49. Residuary provision . 
50. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement . 
51. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases . 
 3 
 PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO ARRANGEMENTS, CORPORATION AND  INTER -STATE  AGREEMENTS  
SECTIONS  
52. Continuance of certain arrangements . 
53. Provision as to co -operative banks . 
54. General provisions as to statutory corporations . 
55. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits . 
56. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases . 
57. Special provision as to income -tax. 
58. Continuance of existing facilities in certain institutions . 
 
PART VIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
59. Provisions relating to All India Services . 
60. Provisions relating to other  services . 
61. Provisions as to continuance of officers in the same posts . 
62. Powers of Central Government to give direction . 
 
PART IX  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
63. [Repealed ]. 
64. [Repealed ]. 
65.  [Repealed ]. 
66. Territorial extent of laws . 
67. Power to adapt laws . 
68. Power to construe laws . 
69. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc . 
70. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws . 
71. Power to remove difficulties . 
72. Power to make rules . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. [Repealed ]. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  [Repealed ]. 
  4 
 THE GOA, DAMAN AND DIU REORGANISATION ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 18 OF 1987  
[23rd May , 1987 .] 
An Act to provide for the reorganisation  of the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu and for 
matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eight Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY   
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Goa, Daman and Diu Reorganisation Act,  1987.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, unless the context  otherwise  requires,— 
(a) “Administrator ” means the administrator appointed by the President under article  239; 
(b) “appointed day ”1 means the day which the Central Government may, by notification, appoint ;  
(c) “article” means an article of the Constitution;  
(d) “assembly constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the same  meanings as in the 
Representation of the People Act,  1950  (43 of 1950) ; 
(e) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by the President under 
article  324; 
(f) “existing Union territory ” means the Union territory of Goa, Daman and Diu as existing 
immediately before the appointed day;  
(g) “law” includes any enactment,  ordinance, regulation,  order, bye -law, rule, scheme, 
notification or  other  instrument having immediately before the appointed day, the force of law in the 
whole or any part of the existing Union territory;  
(h) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette ; 
(i) “population ratio ”, in relation to the State of Goa and the Union,  means the ratio of  42: 3.25;  
(j) “sitting  member”, in relation to the House of the People or of the Legislative Assembly of the 
existing Union territory  means a person who, immediatel y before the appointed day, is a  member of 
that House or that Assembly;  
(k) “treasury” includes a  sub-treasury.  
PART  II 
REORGANISATION OF THE UNION TERRITORY OF  GOA, DAMAN  AND DIU 
3. Formation of State of Goa .—On and from the appointed day, there  shall be formed a new State to 
be known as the State of Goa comprising the territories which immediately before that day were 
comprised in the Goa district of the existing Union territory.  
4. Formation of Union territory of Daman and Diu .—On and from the appointed day, there  shall 
be formed a new Union territory to be known as the Union territory of Daman and Diu comprising the 
territories which, immediately before that day, were comprised in the Daman and Diu districts of the 
existing Union territory.  
  
                                                           
1. 30th May, 1987, vide notification No. S.O. 518 (E), dated 26th May, 1987 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3( ii). 5 
 5. [Amendment of First Schedule to the Constitution ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 
2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
6. [Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , 
ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
7. Election to fill the seat allo tted to the State of Goa .—As soon as may be after the appointed day, 
election shall be held to fill the seat allotted in the Council of States to the State of Goa.  
The House of the People  
8. Allocation of seats in the House of the People .—On and from the appointed day, there  shall be 
allotted two seats to the State of Goa, and one seat to the Union territory of Daman and Diu in the House 
of the People and the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act,  1950  (43 of 1950) shall be 
deemed to be amended accordingly.  
9. Parliamentary constituency of  the Union territory of Daman and Diu .—The whole of the 
Union territory of Daman and Diu shall form one parliamentary constituenc y to be called the Daman and 
Diu parliamentary constituency and as soon as may be after the appointed day, election shall be held to 
the House of the People to elect a representative from that constituency, as if the seat of the member 
elected to the House  of the People from that constituency has become vacant and the provisions of section 
149 of the Representation of the People  Act, 1951  (43 of 1951) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to 
such election.  
10. Parliamentary constituencies .—On and from the appointed day, — 
(a) the Panaji parliamentary constituency, excluding the Daman and Diu assembly constituencies, 
and the Mormugao parliamentary constituency in the existing Union territory  shall be deemed to be 
the parliamentary constituencies  of the State of Goa and accordingly, in Part A of Schedule XXVI to 
the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies  Order,  1976, for the figures and 
words “12-Cumbarjua,  13-Santo Andre,  29-Daman and  30-Diu”, the figures and words “12-
Cumbarjua and  13-Santo Andre ” shall be  substituted;  
(b) the Daman and Diu assembly constituencies in the existing Union territory  shall be deemed to 
comprise the parliamentary constituency of the Union territory of Daman and Diu.  
11. Provisions as to si tting members .—(1) The sitting  member of the House of the People 
representing the Panaji parliamentary constituency which, on the appointed day, by virtue of the 
provisions of clause ( a) of section  10 stands altered and becomes a parliamentary constituency  of the 
State of Goa  shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been duly elected to that House by that 
constituency as so altered.  
(2) The sitting  member of the House of the People representing the Mormugao parliamentary 
constituency which, on the appoint ed day, by virtue of the provisions of clause ( a) of section  10 becomes 
a parliamentary constituency of the State of Goa  shall, as from that day, be deemed to have been duly 
elected to that House by that constituency in that State.  
The Legislative Assembly  
12. Provisions as to Legislative Assembly .—On and from the appointed day, the total number of 
seats in the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa to be filled by persons, chosen by direct election  
from assembly constituencies  shall be forty and the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People 
Act 1950  (43 of 1950), shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.  
13. Provisional Legislative Assembly .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act 
(including provisions relating to the strength of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa), on and 
from the appointed day and until the L egislative Assembly of that Stat e has been duly constituted and 
summoned to  meet for the first session, there  shall be a provisional Legislative As sembly which  shall 
consist of, — 
(a) members elected by the territorial constituencies of the Legislative Assembly of the existing 
Union territory,  other  than those  members elected by the territorial constituencies of Daman and Diu; 
and 6 
 (b) members nominated to that Assembly.  
(2) The period of five years referred to in clause ( 1) of Article  172 shall, in the case of provisional 
Legislative Assembly referred to in  sub-section ( 1), be deemed to have commenced on the date on which 
the duration of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory commenced under section  5 of the 
Government of Union Territories Act,  1963  (20 of 1963) . 
(3) For so long as the provisional Legislative Assembly constituted under this sectio n is in 
existence ,— 
(a) it shall be deemed to be the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa duly constituted under 
the Constitution and  shall be competent to discharge all the functions of a Legislative Assembly of a 
State under the Constitution; and  
(b) the  members thereof, referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1), shall be deemed to be 
the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa duly elected under the Constitution.  
14. [Amendment of Delimitation Orders ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 2001   
(30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
15. Speaker of the provisional Legislative Assembly .—The person who immediately before the 
appointed day is the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory  shall, on and 
from that day, be the Speaker of the provisional Legislative Assembly.  
16. Rules of procedure .—The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
Assembly of the existing Union territory, as in force immediately befor e the appointed day  shall, until 
rules are made under clause ( 1) of article  208, be the rules of  procedure and conduct of business of the 
provisional Legislative Asse mbly referred to in section  13; subject to such modifications and adaptations 
as may be ma de therein by the Speaker thereof.  
Delimitation of constituencies  
17. Delimitation of constituencies .—(1) The Election Commission  shall, in the manner herein 
provided, distribute, whether before or after the appointed day, the seats assigned to the Legislative 
Assembly of the State of Goa under section  12 to single -member territorial constituencies and delimit 
them having regard to the provisions of the Constitution and to the  following provisions, namely: — 
(a) all constituencies  shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas, and in 
delimiting them regard  shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communication and convenience to the public; and  
(b) constituencies in which seats are  reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes  shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their population to the 
total population is the largest.  
(2) For the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its fun ctions under  sub-section ( 1), the 
Election Commission  shall associate wit h itself as associate  members, — 
(a) the sitting  members of the House of the People referred to in section  11; and  
(b) such six of the  members of the Legislative Assembly of the existi ng Union territory or, as the 
case may be, the provisional Legislative Assembly referred to in section  13 as the Speaker thereof 
may nominate:  
Provided that none of the associate  members  shall have a right to vote or to sign any decision of the 
Election Co mmission.  
(3) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate  member falls vacant, it  shall be filled if 
practicable, in accordance with the provisions of  sub-section ( 2). 
  7 
 (4) The Election Commission  shall— 
(a) publish its proposals for the  delimitation of constituencies together with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate  member who desires publication thereof, in the Official Gazette 
and in such  other  manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting 
objections and suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the 
proposals will be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified;  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the 
date so specified, determine by one or more  orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause 
such order or  orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such publication, the  order 
or orders  shall have the full force of law and  shall not be called in question in any Court.  
(5) As soon as may be after such publication, every such  order relating to assembly 
constituencies  shall be laid before the Legisl ative Assembly of the existing Union territory or, as the case 
may be, the provisional Legislative Assembly referred to in section  13. 
18. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up -to-date.—(1) The Election 
Commission may, from time to time, by notific ation in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any  order made under section  17 or any error arising therein 
from inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where the bounda ries or name of any territorial division  mentioned i n any such  order are or is 
altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such  order 
up-to-date.  
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency  shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is issued, before the Legislative Assembly of the existing Union territory, the provisional 
Legislative Assembly referred to in section  13 or the Legislative Assembly of the State of Goa, as the 
case may be.  
19. [Amendment of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Orders ].—Rep. by the Repealing and 
Amending Act, 2001 (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
PART  IV 
HIGH COURT  
20. Common High Court for Maharashtra, Goa, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and 
Diu.—(1) On and from the appointed day, — 
(a) there shall be a common High Court for the State s of Maharashtra and Goa, and for the Union 
territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli, and Daman and Diu, to be called the High Court of Bombay 
(hereinafter referred to as the co mmon High Court);  
(b) the Judges of the High Court of Bombay (hereinafter referred to as the existing High Court), 
holding office immediately before that day shall, unless they have elected otherwise, become, on that 
day, the Judges of the common High Cour t. 
(2) The expenditure in respect of the salaries and allowances of the Judges of the common High Court 
shall be allocated amongst the States of Maharashtra and Goa and the Union in such proportion as the 
President may, by order, determine.  
(3) On and from  the appointed day, the common High Court shall have, in respect of the territories 
comprised in the States of Maharashtra and Goa and the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar Haveli and 
Daman and Diu, all such jurisdiction, powers and authority as, under the law in force immediately before 
the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of those territories by the High Court of Bombay.  
  8 
 21. Provision as to advocates .—(1) On and from the appointed day, — 
(a) in the Advocates Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , in section  3, in sub -section ( 1), for Clause ( ccc), the 
following clause  shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(ccc) for the States of Maharashtra and Goa and the Union territories of Dadra and Nagar 
Haveli and Daman and Diu, to be known as the Bar Council of Maharashtra and Goa;”; 
(b) the Bar Council of Maharashtra shall be deemed to be the Bar Council of Maharashtra and 
Goa with the Advocate -General of the State of Goa also as an ex officio  member.  
(2) Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practice in the 
existing High Court shall be entitled to practice as an advocate in the common High Court.  
(3) All persons who, immediately before the appointed day, are advocates on the roll of the Bar 
Council of Maharashtra, shall, as from th at day, become advocates on the roll of the Bar Council of 
Maharashtra and Goa.  
(4) The right of audience in the common High Court shall be regulated in accordance with the like 
principles as, immediately before the appointed day, are in force with respect  to the right of audience in 
existing High Court;  
Provided that as between the Advocates -General of the States of Maharashtra and Goa, the right of 
audience shall be determined with reference to their dates of enrolment as advocates.  
22. Practice and procedure in the common High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the 
law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the existing 
High Court shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation t o the common High Court.  
23. Custody of seal of the common High Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day with respect to the custody of the seal of the existing High Court shall, with the necessary 
modifications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the common High Court.  
24. Form of writs and other  processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awarded by the existing High Court 
shall, w ith necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, 
issued or awarded by the common High Court.  
25. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to the 
powers of the Chief J ustice, single Judges and division Courts of the existing High Court and with respect 
to all matters, ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, wi th the necessary modification apply in 
relation to the common High Court.  
26. Principal seat and other places of sitting of the common High Court .—(1) The principal seat 
of the common High Court shall be at the same place at which the principal seat of the existing High 
Court is located immediately before the appointed day.  
(2) The president may, by notifie d order, provide for the establishment of a permanent bench or 
benches of the common High Court at one or more places within the territories to which the jurisdiction 
of the High Court extends, other than the principal seat of the High Court, and for any m atters connected 
therewith : 
Provided that before issuing any order under this sub -section, the President shall consult the Chief 
Justice of the common High Court, and the Governor of the State in which the bench or benches is or are 
proposed to be establis hed. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division 
Courts of the common High Court may also sit at such other place or places within the territories to which 
the jurisdiction of that High Court extends as the Chief Justice of that High Court may, with the approval 
of the Governor of the State or the Administrator of the Union territory concerned, appoint.  
27. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
appoin ted day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the existing High Court and the Judges and 9 
 division Courts thereof shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the common High 
Court.  
28. Transfer of proceedings to the common High Cou rt.—(1) All proceedings pending in the 
existing High Court immediately before the appointed day shall, from such day, stand transferred to the 
common High Court.  
(2) Every proceeding transferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be disposed of by the common High  
Court as if such proceeding was entertained by that High Court.  
29. Interpretation, etc .—(1) For the purposes of section 28, — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a Court until that court has disposed of all 
issues between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the 
proceedings and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, 
applications for review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs; and  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
Court thereof and references to an order made by a Court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that Court or Judge.  
(2) Any person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practice in the 
existing High Court and was authorised  to appear or to act in any proceedings transferred from that High 
Court to the common High Court under section 28  shall have the right to appear or to act, as the case may 
be, in the common High Court in relation to those proceedings.  
30. Saving .—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the common High Court of any 
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made 
on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legisla ture or other authority having 
power to make such provision.  
PART  V 
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION AND REVENUES  
31. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by the Legislature .—(1) The  President 
may, at any time before the appointed day, authorise by  order such expenditure from the Consolidated 
Fund of the State of Goa as he deems necessary for a period of not more than six months beginning with 
the appointed day, pending the sanct ion of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Goa:  
Provided that the Governor of Goa may, after the appointed day, authorise by  order such further 
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Goa for an y period not 
extending beyond the said period of six months.  
(2) The President or, as the case may be, the Governor of Goa  shall make separate  orders  under   
sub-section ( 1) in respect of periods falling in different financial years.  
(3) The President may, at any time, before or after the appointed day, authorise by  order such 
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of India as he deems necessary for a period of  not more than six 
months beginning with the appointed day for the administration of the affairs of  the Union territory of 
Daman and Diu pending the sanction of such expenditure by Parliament.  
32. Reports relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory .—(1) The reports  of the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India referred to in section  49 of the Government of Union 
Terri tories Act,  1963  (20 of 1963), relating to the accounts of the existing Union territory in respect of 
any period prior to the appointed day,  shall be  submitted to the Governor of the State of Goa and the 
President who  shall ca use them to be laid before the Legislative Assembly of that State or the House of 
the People, as the case may be.  
  10 
 (2) The Governor may, by  order,— 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of the existing Union territory 
on any service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial year  1987 -88 or 
in respect of any earlier financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and for that 
year as disclosed in the report referred to in  sub-section (1) to have been duly authorised; and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said reports.  
33. Distribution of revenues .—The President  shall, by  order, determine the grants -in-aid of the 
revenues of the State of Goa and the share of that State in the Union duties of excise, estate duty and taxes 
on income and for that purpose amend thereby the relevant provisions of the Additional Duties of Excise 
(Goods of Special Importance) Act,  1957  (58 of 1957) , the Union Duties of E xcise (Distribution) 
Act, 1979  (24 of 1979) , the Estate Duty (Distribution) Act,  1962  (9 of 1962) and the Construction 
(Distribution of Revenues)  Order,1985  in such manner as he thinks fit.  
PART  VI 
ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
34. Definition .—In this Part “Union  purposes” means the purposes of Government relatable to any of 
the matters mentioned in List I in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution.  
35. Land and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles 
and other g oods held immediately before the appointed day, by the Union for the purposes of the 
governance of the existing Union territory, shall , on and from that day, pass to the State of Goa, unless 
any such land, stores, articles or goods are situate in the districts of Daman and Diu of the existing Union 
territory or are held for Union purposes:  
Provided that where the Central Government is of the opinion that any goods or class of goods should 
be distributed otherwise than according to the situation of the goods, the Central Government may issue 
such directions as it thinks fit for a just and equitable distribution of the goods.  
(2) The stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in particular institutions, 
workshops or undertakings or on p articular works under construction, shall be retained by the Union if 
such institution, workshop, undertaking or work is situated in the districts of Daman and Diu of the 
existing Union territory.  
(3) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovab le property of every kind and any rights in 
or over such property.  
36. Cash balance s.—The total of the cash balances in all treasuries, the Reserve Bank of India, the 
State Bank of India and any nationalised  bank, of the existing Union territory immediately before the 
appointed day shall be divided between the State of Goa and the Union according to the population ratio:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash balan ces from any 
treasury to any other treasury and the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the balances in the 
books of the Reserve Bank of India.  
Explanation .—In this section, “balance” includes a debit balance.  
37. Arrears of taxes .—(1) The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty (including arrears of land 
revenue) on any property situated in the district of Goa of the existing Union territory shall belong to the 
State of Goa.  
(2) The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty, other than a ta x or duty specified in sub -section ( 1), 
shall belong to the State of Goa if the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included in the district of 
Goa of the existing Union territory.  
38. Right to recover loans and advances .—The right to recover any loans or advances made by the 
Union before the appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist or other person in the district of 
Goa of the existing Union territory shall belong to the State of Goa:  11 
 Provided that right to recover loans or advances  of pay and travelling allowance to a Government 
servant made before the appointed day by the Administrator shall pass to the State of Goa if such 
Government servant is allotted to that State.  
39. Investments in and loans, etc. , to certain corporate bodies .—Where any  body corporate 
constituted under a Central Act or a State Act for the existing Union territory, or any part thereof, has, by 
virtue of the provisions of Part II, become an inter -State body corporate, the investmen ts in, or loans or 
advances to any such body by the Union made before the appointed day shall be divided between the 
State of Goa and the Union in such manner as may be agreed between them before the expiration of one 
year from the appointed day, or in default of such agreement in such manner as the Central Government 
may, by order, direct.  
40. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings .—The assets and liabilities relating to any 
commercial undertaking of the e xisting Union territory shall, — 
(a) if the undertaking is located in the district of Goa of the existing Union territory, pass to the 
State of Goa;  
(b) if the undertaking is located in the district of Goa , as well as the districts of Daman and Diu, 
of the existing Union territory, be divided i n such manner as may be agreed upon between the State of 
Goa and the Union before the expiration of one year from the appointed day, or in default of such 
agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.  
41. Refund of taxes collected in excess .—The liability of the Unio n to refund — 
(a) any tax or duty on property, including land revenue collected in excess shall go to the State of 
Goa if the property is situated in the district of Goa of the existing Union territory;  
(b) any  other tax or duty collected in excess shall go to the State of Goa if the place of assessment 
of that tax or duty is included in the district of Goa of the existing Union territory.  
42. Certain deposits .—The liability of the Union in respect of any civil deposit or local fund shall, 
on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the State of Goa, if the deposit has been made in the 
district of Goa of the existing Union territory.  
43. Provident fund .—(1) The liability of the Union in respect of the provident fund account of a 
Government servant employed in connection with the administration of the existing Union territory and in 
service on the appointed day shall, on and from th at day, be the liability of the State of Goa if that 
Government servant i s permanently allotted to that State.  
(2) The liability of the Union in respect of the provident fund account of a Government servant 
employed in connection with the administration of the existing Union territory who has retired from 
service before the app ointed day shall be the liability of the State of Goa in the first instance and shall be 
adjusted between the State of Goa and the Union according to the population ratio.  
44. Pensions granted by the Administrator, etc .—(1) Subject to the adjustments mentioned in  
sub-section ( 4), the State of Goa shall, in respect of pensions granted before the appointed day by the 
Administrator, pay the pensions drawn in the treasuries in the Goa district of the existing Union territory.  
(2) Subject to the adjustments mentioned in sub-section ( 4), the liability in respect of pensions of 
Government servants employed in connection with the affairs of the existing Union territory who retire or 
proceed on leave preparatory to retirement before  the appointed day but whose claims for pensions are 
outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the liability of the State of Goa.  
(3) The liability of the Union in respect of pensions granted before the appointed day by the 
Administrator and drawn in any treasury outside the existing Union territory shall be the liability of the 
State of Goa subject to adjustments to be made in accordance with sub -section ( 4), as if such pensions had 
been drawn in the treasuries referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(4) In respect of the period commencing on the app ointed day and ending on the 31 st day of March, 
1988, and in respect of each subsequent financial year, the total payments made by the State of Goa in 12 
 respect of pensions referred to in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) shall be apportioned between the 
State of Goa and the Union in the population ratio.  
(5) The liability in respect of the pension of any Government servant employed immediately before 
the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing Union territory and retiring on or after that 
day, shall be that of the State of Goa or the Union, as the case may be, but the portion of the pension in 
respect of the period of service of any such Government servant before the appointed day shall  be 
apportioned between the State of Goa and the Union in the population ratio.  
(6) Any reference in this section to a pension shall be construed as including a reference to the 
commuted value of the pension.  
45. Contracts .—(1) Where before the appointed day, the Union has made any contract in the exercise 
of its executive power for any purposes of the existing Union territory that contract shall be deemed to 
have been made in the exercise of the execut ive power of the State of Goa, — 
(a) if the purposes of  the contract are, on and from the appointed day, exclusively purposes of that 
State; and  
(b) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from that day, not exclusively purposes of any area 
in the district s of Daman and Diu of the existing Union territory,  
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue, under any such contract shall, to the 
extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the Union, be rights or liabilities of the State 
of Goa:  
Provided that in any such case a s is referred to in clause ( b), the initial allocation of rights  and 
liabilities made by this sub -section shall be subject to such financial adjustments as may be agreed upon 
between the State of Goa and the Union or in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, 
by order, direct.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which have 
accrued or  may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or  other tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in, or in connection with, any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations.  
46. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the 
Union in connection with the governance of the existing Union territory is subject to any liability in 
respect of an actionable wrong, oth er than breach of contract, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the district of Goa of the existing Union territory, be 
a liability of the State of Goa; and  
(b) in any other case , be initially a liability of the State of Goa but subject to such financial 
adjustments as may be ag reed upon between the State of Goa and the Union, or in default of such 
agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.  
47. Liability as guarantor of co -operative societies .—Where, immediately before the appointed 
day, the Union in connection w ith the governance of the existing Union territory is liable as guarantor in 
respect of any liability of a registered co -operative society or other person, that liability of the Union shall 
be a liability of the State of Goa — 
(a) if the area of the operations of such society or person is limited to the territories in the district 
of Goa of the existing Union territory; and  
(b) if the area of the operations of such society or person extends to the whole of the existing 
Union territory : 13 
 Provided that in any s uch case as is referred to in c lause ( b), the initial allocation of liabilities under 
this section shall be subject to such financial adjustments as may be agreed upon between the State of Goa 
and the Union or in default of such agr eement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.  
48. Items in suspense .—If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  
49. Residuary provision .—The benefit or burden of  any assets or liabilities of the Union in 
connection with the governance of the existing Union territory not dealt with in the foregoing provisions 
of this Part shall be retained by the Union for the purposes of the governance of the Union territory of 
Daman and Diu.  
50. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement .—Where the State of Goa and the Union 
agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be apportioned between them in 
a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this Part, then, notwithstanding 
anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be apportioned in the 
manner agreed upon.  
51. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, the Union becomes entitled to any property or obtains any 
benefits or the State of Goa becomes subject to any liability, and the Central Government is of opinion on 
a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed day by the State of Goa that it is just 
and equitable that th at property or those benefits should be transferred to, or shared with, the State of Goa 
or that a contribution towards that liability should be made by the Union the said property or benefits 
shall be allocated in such  manner, or the Union shall make to the State of Goa such contribution in respect 
thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Government of the State of Goa by 
order, determine.  
PART  VII 
PROVISIONS AS TO ARRANGEMENT S, CORPORATIONS A ND INTER -STATE AGREEMENT S 
52. Continuance of certain arrangements .—Where any arrangement in regard to the supply of 
electric power or the supply of water for any area in the districts of Daman and Diu of the existing Union 
territory or in regard to the execution of any project for such supply from an area included in the State of 
Goa by the provisions of  Part II  exists, such arrangement will be continued, unless terminated by 
agreement, between the State of Goa and the Union in accordance with such terms and conditions as  
may be mutually agreed upon by the State Governmen t of Goa and the Union within a period of one year 
from the appointed day, and, where no such agreement is arrived at within such period, the Central 
Government may give such directions as it deems fit to that State Government or the authority concerned 
for the continuance, so far as is practicable, of the previous arrangement.  
53. Provision as to co -operative banks .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section  22 of 
the Banking Regulation Act,  1949  (10 of 1949) , where  by virtue of the provisions of Part II, a co -
operative bank is newly formed on the appointed day or within three months thereof in the State of Goa or 
the Union territory of  Daman  and Diu, it may commence and conduct banking business without obtaining 
a licence under that section from the Reserve  Bank  of India, until it is granted such a licence or until it is 
informed by the  Reserve  Bank  of India that such a licence cannot be granted to it:  
Provided that such bank applies to the Reserve  Bank  of India for s uch a licence within a period of 
three months from the date of formation of the  Bank.  
54. General provisions as to statutory corporations .—(1) Where any  body  corporate constituted 
under any Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the existing Union territory or any part thereof has, 
by virtue of the provisions of Part II, become an inter -State body  corporate, then, the body  corporate  shall, 
on and from the appointed day, continue to function and operate in those areas in respect of which it was 
funct ioning and operating immediately before that day,  subject to such directions as may from time to 
time be issued by the Central Government until  other  provision is made by law in respect of the said 
body  corporate.  14 
 (2) Any direction issued by the Central Go vernment under  sub-section ( 1) in respect of any such 
body  corporate may include a direction that any law by which the said body  corporate is governed  shall, 
in its application to that body  corporate, have effect,  subject to such exceptions and modificatio ns as may 
be specified in the direction.  
55. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section  63 of the Motor Vehicles Act,  1939  (4 of 1939) , a permit 
granted in the existing Union territory  shall, if such permit was immediately before the appointed day, 
valid an d effective in any area therein , be deemed to continue t o be valid and effective in that area up to 
the 31st day of March,1988,  subject to the provisions of th at Act as for the time being in force in that area 
and it  shall not be necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by any State or Regional Transport 
Authority for the purpose of val idating it for use in such area : 
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Govern ment of Goa add 
to, amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the authority by which the permit was granted.  
(2) No toll, entrance fees or other  charges of a like nature  shall be levied for a period up to and 
inclusive of the  31st day of March,  1988, in respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in either the 
State of Goa or the Union territory of Daman and Diu under any such permit, if such vehicle was 
immediately before that da y exempt from the payment of any such toll, entrance fees or  other  charges for 
its operations within the existing Union territory:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Govern ment of Goa 
authorise the levy of any such  toll, entrance fees or  other  charges, as the case may be.  
56. Special provision relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases .—Where, by virtue 
of the provisions of Part II, any  body  corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial 
Act, any co -operative society registered under any law relating to co operative societies or any commercial 
or industrial undertaking is reconstituted or reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated 
with any  other  body  corporate, co -operative society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in consequence of 
such reconstitution, reorganisa tion, amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such 
body  corporate or any such co -operative society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re -employed by any  
other  body  corporate, or in any  other  co-operative society or undertaking, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in section  25F, section  25FF or section  25FFF, of the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947   
(14 of 1947) , such transfer or re -emplo yment  shall not entitle  him to any compensation under that section : 
Provided that — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer or  
re-employment are not less favourable to the workman than those applicable to  him i mmediately 
before the transfer or re -employment; and  
(b) the employer in relation to the body  corporate, the co -operative society or the undertaking 
where the workman transferred or re -employed, is by agreement or  otherwise, legally liable to pay to 
the wo rkman, in the event of  his retrenchment, compensation under section  25F, section  25FF or 
section  25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947  (14 of 1947) , on the basis that  his service has been 
continuous and has not been interrupted by the transfer or re -employment.  
57. Special provision as to income -tax.—Where the assets, rights and liabilities of  
any body  corporate carrying on business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to 
any other  bodies  corporate which after the transfer carry on the same business, the losses of profits or 
gains sustained by the body  corporate first  mentioned which, but  for such transfer, would have been 
allowed to be carried forward and set off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the  
Income -tax Act,  1961  (43 of 1961)  shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies  corporate in 
accordance with the rule s to be made by the Central Government in this behalf and, upon such 
apportionment, the  share of loss allotted to each transferee body  corporate  shall be dealt with in 
accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the said Act as if the transferee body  corporate had itself 
sustained such loss in a business carried on by it in the years in which these losses were sustained.  15 
 58. Continuance of existing facilities in certain institutions .—On and from the appointed day, the 
Government of Goa  shall, in respect of the technical institutions located in the State of Goa continue to 
provide facilities to the persons resident in the territories comprising the Union territory of Daman and 
Diu which  shall not in any respect be less favourable than those which were being provided to them 
immediately before that day upon such terms and conditions (including those relating to any contribution 
or payment to be made for the provisions of such facilities) as may be agreed upon between the State of 
Goa and the Un ion before the  1st day of April, 1988, or if no such agreement is reached by the said date, 
as may be fixed by the  order of the Central Government.  
PART  VIII 
PROVISION S AS TO SERVICES  
59. Provisions relating to All India Services .—(1) In this section, the expression “State Cadre ”,— 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian 
Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;  
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Police 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954, and  
(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Forest 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966.  
(2) The strength and composition of the State Cadre of Goa shall, on and from the appointed day, be 
such as is determined by the Central Government in consultation with the State Government.  
(3) The members of each of the said Services borne on the Union terri tories cadre immediately before 
the appointed day shall continue to be in the cadre of the same service of the Union territory in which they 
stand allocated before the appointed day.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on o r after the appointed day, of 
the All India Services Act , 1951  (61 of 1951) , or the rules made there under, in relation to the State cadres 
of the said services and in relation to the members of those services borne on the said cadres.  
60. Provisions relating to other services .—(1) Every person employed in connection with the affairs 
of the Union territory or the State of Goa and serving, immediately before the appointed day, in the 
district of Goa of the existing Union territor y shall, on a nd from that day, — 
(a) continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Goa; and  
(b) be deemed to be provisionally allotted to serve in connection with the affairs of the said State:  
Provided that nothing in clause ( b) shall apply to a person to whom the provisions of section 59 apply 
or to a person on deputation from any State.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall by general or special 
order, determine whether every person referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be finally allotted 
for service in the State of Goa or under the Union in connection with the affairs of the Union territory of 
Daman and Diu and the date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to hav e 
taken effect.  
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) to the State of Goa or 
the Union shall, if he is not alr eady serving therein or there under be made available for serving in that 
State or under the Union from such date as may be agreed upon between the State of Goa and the Union 
or in default of such agreement, as may be determined by the Central Government.  
(4) As soon as may be after the Central Government passes orders finally allotting an employee in 
terms of sub -section ( 2), the State of Goa or the Union shall take steps to integrate him into the services 
under its control in accordance with such special or general orders or instructions as may be issued by the 
Central Government from time to time in this b ehalf.  
  16 
 (5) The Central Government may, by order establish one or more Advisory Committees for the 
purpos e of assisting it in regard to — 
(a) the division of the services between the State of Goa and the Union; and  
(b) the  ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
section and the proper consideration of any representations made by such persons:  
Provided that notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law or rul e for the time being 
in force, no representation shall be against any order passed by the competent authority on matters arising 
out of the division and integration of services under this Act, on the expiry of three months from the date 
of publication or s ervice, whichever is earlier, of such order:  
Provided further that, notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding proviso, the  Central 
Government may suo motu  or otherwise and for reasons to be recorded, reopen any matter and pass such 
orders thereon , as may appear to it to be appropriate if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, in order 
to prevent any miscarriage of justice to any affected employee.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect, on or after the appointed day, the ope ration of 
the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in relation to the determination of the 
conditions of service of persons serving in connection with the affairs of the State of Goa or the Union:  
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day to the case of 
any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not be varied to his disadvantage except 
with the previous approval of the Central Government.  
(7) All service prior to the appointed day rendered by a person allotted under sub -section ( 2) in 
connection with the affairs of the existing Union territory shall for purposes of the rules regarding his 
conditions of service, be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the aff airs of the State or the 
Union to which he is finally allotted.  
(8) The provisions of this section other than clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply in relation to 
any person to whom the provisions of section 59 apply.  
61. Provisions as to continuan ce of officers in the same posts .—Every person who immediately 
before the appointed day is holding or discharging th e duties of any post or office in connection with the 
affairs of the existing Union territory shall continue to hold the same post or office  and shall be deemed, 
on and from that day, to have been duly appointed on the same terms and conditions of appointment and 
on the same tenure to that post or office by the Government of, or the other appropriate authority, in the 
State of Goa or of the Un ion, as the case may be:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority, on or after the 
appointed day, from passing in relation to such person, any order affecting his continuance in such post or 
office.  
62. Powers of Central Government to give direction s.—The Central Government may give such 
directions to the State Government as may appear to it to be necessary for the purpose of giving effect to 
the foregoing provisions of this Part and the said Government shall co mply with such directions.  
PART  IX 
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISION  
63. [Amendment of certain Articles ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 2001   
(30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
64. [Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
65. [Amendment of Act 20 of 1963 ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid.  (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
66. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of Part II  shall not be deemed to have effected any 
change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day extends or 17 
 applies, and the territorial references in any such law to the existing Union territory  shall, until  otherwise 
provided by a competent Legislature or  other  competent authority, be construed as  meaning the territories 
within the existing Union territory before the appointed day.  
67. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of 
Goa or the Union territory of Daman and Diu of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate 
Government may, within two years from that day, by  order, make such adaptations and modifications of 
the law, whether by way of repeal or amendme nt, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every 
such law  shall have effect  subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or 
amended by a competent Legislature or  other  competent authority.  
Explanation .— In this sect ion, the expression “appropriate Government ” means, as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution, the Central 
Government, and as respects any  other  law, 
(i) in its application to the State of Goa, the State Government, and  
(ii) in its application to the Union territory of Daman and Diu, the Central Government.  
68. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insufficient provision has been 
made under section  67 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application in 
relation to the State of Goa, or the Union territ ory of Daman and Diu construe the law in such manner not 
affecting the  substance as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or 
authority, as the case may be.  
69. Provisions as to continuance of courts, etc .—All courts and tribunals and all authorities 
discharging lawful functions throughout the existing Union territory or any part thereof immediately 
before the appointed day  shall unless their continuance is inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or 
until other  provision is made by a competent Legislature or  other  competent authority, continue to 
exercise their respective functions.  
70. Effect of provisions of Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act  shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any  other  law. 
71. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may, by  order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears 
to him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such  order  shall be made after the expiry of three years from the appointed day.  
(2) Every  order made under this section  shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
72. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to give 
effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section  shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule  should not be made, the rule  shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica tion or 
annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  18 
 [THE FIRST SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by the  Repealing and Amending Act , 2001   
(30 of 2001 ), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
[THE SECOND SCHEDULE ].—Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule, ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Jute Packaging Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE JUTE PACKAGING MATERIALS (COMPULSORY USE IN PACKING 
COMMODITIES) ACT, 1987  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power to specify commodities which are required to be packed in jute  packaging material . 
4. Constitution of Standing Advisory Committe e. 
5. Prohibition o f packing in any material other than the jute packaging mate rial. 
6. Power to call for information and samples.  
7. Power to enter and inspect . 
8. Power to search and seize.  
9. Penalty for contravention of section 5 . 
10. Penalty for false statement, etc . 
11. Offences by companies . 
12. Offences to be cognizable.  
13. Power to delegate.  
14. Central Government to give directions.  
15. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
16. Power to exempt . 
17. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE JUTE PACKAGING MATERIALS (COMPULSORY USE IN PACKING 
COMMODITIES) ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 10 OF 1987  
 [9th May, 1987 .]  
An Act to provide for the compulsory use of jute packaging material in the supply and 
distribution of certain commodities in the interests of production of raw jute and jute 
packaging material, and of persons engaged in the production thereof, and for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by P arliament in the Thirty -eighth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent  and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Jute Packaging 
Materials (Compulsory Use in Packing Commodities) Act, 1987.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force of such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “commodity ” means— 
(i) any essential commodity;  
(ii) any  article manufactured or produced by any scheduled industry;  
(b) “essential commodity ” shall have the same meaning as in the Essential Commodities Act, 
1955 (10 of 1955);  
(c) “jute packaging material ” means jute, jute yarn, jute twine, jute sacking cloth, hessian cloth, 
jute bags or any other packaging material containing not less than seventy -five per cent ., by weight , 
of jute;  
(d) “scheduled industry ” shall have the same meaning as in the Industries (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1951 (65 of 1951);  
(e) “Standing Advisory Committee ” means the Standing Advisory Committee constituted under 
section 4.  
3. Power to specify commodities which are required to be packed in jute packaging          
material .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the 
Central Government may, if it is satisfied, after considering the recommendations made to it by the 
Standing Advisory Committee, that it is necessary so to do in the interests of production of raw jute and 
jute packaging ma terial, and of persons engaged in the production thereof, by order publis hed in the 
Official Gazette, direct, from time to time, that such commodity or class of commodities or such 
percentage thereof, as may be specified in the order, shall, on and from su ch date, as may be specified in 
the order, be packed for the purpose s of its supply or distribution in such jute packaging material as may 
be specified in the order: 
Provided that until such time as the Standing Advisory Committee is constituted under s ection 4, the 
Central Government shall, before making any order under this sub -section, consider the matters specified 
in sub -section ( 2) of s ection 4, and any order so made shall cease to operate at the expiration of three 
months from the date on which th e Standing Advisory Committee makes its recommendations.  
                                                           
1. 14th May , 1987 , vide notification No. S.O . 467(E), dated 14th May, 1987 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3(ii). 3 
 (2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of  thirty days which may be c ompri sed 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the o rder or both Houses agree t hat the o rder should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyth ing previous ly done under that o rder. 
4. Constitution of Standing Advisory Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall, with a view 
to determining the commodity or class of commodities or percentage s thereof in respect of which jute 
packaging material shall be used in their packing, constitute a Standing Advisory Committee consisting of 
such persons as have, in the opinion of that Government, the necessary expertise to give advice in the 
matter.  
(2) The Standing Advisory Committee shall, after considering the following matters, indicate i ts 
recommendations to the Central Government, namel y:— 
(a) the existing level of usage of jute material;  
(b) the quantity of raw jute available;  
(c) the quantity of jute material available;  
(d) the protection of interests of persons engaged in the jute industry and in the production of raw 
jute; 
(e) the need for continued maintenance of jute industry;  
(f) the quantity of commodities which, in its opinion,  is likely to be required for packing in jute 
material;  
(g) such other matter s as the Standing Advisory Committee may think fit.  
5. Prohibition o f packing in any material other than the jute packaging material .—Wher e an 
order has been made under s ection 3 requiring any commodity, class of commodities or any percentage 
thereof to be packed in jute packaging material for their supply or distribution, such commodity, class of 
commodities or percentage thereof shall not, on and from the date specified in such o rder, be supplied or 
distributed unless the same is packe d in accordance with that order:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the supply or distribution of any commodity, class 
of commodities or percentage thereof for a period of three mon ths from the aforesaid date if immediately 
before that date such commodity, class of commodities or percentage thereof , were being packed in any 
material other than jute packing material.  
6. Power to call for information and samples .—The Central Government  may, by order, require 
any person, who is required to use jute packag ing material for packing under s ection 5, to furnish , for the 
purpose s of this Act, — 
(a) such information in his possession, with respect to any commodity or class of commodities or 
percentage thereof which requires such packing, to any officer specified by it, in such form and 
within such period as may be specified by t hat Government in the order;  
(b) such samples of jute packaging material for inspection by such officer at such places a nd 
within such period as may be specified by it in the order.  
7. Power to enter and inspect .—Any officer authorised by the Central Government (hereinafter 
referred to  as the authorised officer) may  enter, at all reasonable times, any place, premises or veh icle 
where any commodity packed in jute packaging material is stored or kept for supply or distribution, and 
may require its production for inspection and ask for any information relating thereto.  
8. Power to search and seize .—(1) The authorised  officer may, if he has reason to believe that any 
commodity has b een packed in contravention of s ection 5 and is secreted in any place, premises or 
vehicle, enter into and search such place, premises or vehicle for such commodity.  4 
 (2) Where, as a result o f any search made under sub -section ( 1), any commod ity packed in 
contravention of s ection 5 has been found, the authorised officer may seize such commodity and any 
other thing which , in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any proceeding under this Act:  
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such commodity or thing, the authorised officer  
may serve on the person an order that he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with, the 
commodity or thing except with the previous p ermission o f the authorised officer . 
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this section.  
9. Penalty for contravention of s ection 5 .—Whoever packs any commodity, class of commodities 
or any percentage thereof in an y material in contravention of s ection 5 shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to an amount equal to double the cost of the j ute packaging material which should have 
been used in accordance with t he order made under s ection 3.  
10. Penalty for false statement, etc. —If any person, when re quired by any order made under s ection 
6 to furnish any information or sample, fails to furnis h such information or sample, or makes any 
statement or furnishes any information which is false in any material particular and which he knows, or 
has reasonable cause to believe, to be false or does not believe it to be true, he shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees.  
11. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge, of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in thi s sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or  other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose s of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
12. Offences to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every offence punishable under this Act shall be cognizable.  
13. Power to delegate .—The Central Government may, by order published in the O fficial Gazette, 
direct that the powers exer cisable by it under any provision  of this Act, other tha n the power to make  
orders under section 3 or under s ection 16 or to make rules under s ection 17, shall, in relation to such 
matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercisable also by — 
(a) such officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government; or  
(b) such State Government or such officer or authority su bordinate to a State Government,  
as may be specified in the order.  
14. Central Government to giv e directions .—The Central Government may give such directions as 
it may consider necessary to a State Government as to the carrying into execution of the provisions of this 
Act. 5 
 15. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, State Government or any officer or employee of the Central 
Government or of any State Government or any authorised officer for anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
16. Power to exempt .—(1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, by order published in the O fficial Gaze tte, exempt any 
person or class of persons, supplying or distributing any commodity or class of commodities, from the 
operation of an order made under s ection 3.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised  
in one session or in two or more successive sessio ns, and if, before the expiry o f the session immediately 
following the session or the succes sive session s aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order  or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however , that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order.  
17. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Governme nt may, by notification in the O fficial Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out  the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under t hat rule.  
 
--------------------------The Legal Services Authorities Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES ACT, 1987  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  LEGAL  SERVICES  AUTHORITY  
3. Constitution of the National Legal Services Authority.  
3A. Supreme Court Legal Services Committee.  
4. Functions of the Central Authority . 
5. Central Authority to work in coordination with other agencies . 
 
CHAPTER III  
STATE  LEGAL  SERVICES AUTHORITY  
6. Constitution of State Legal Services Authority . 
7. Functions of the State Authority.  
8. State Authority to act in co ordination with other agencies , etc., and be subject to directions given  
by the Central Authority.  
8A. High Court Legal Services Committee . 
9. District Legal Services Authority . 
10. Functions of  the District Authority  
11. District Authority to act in coordination with other agencies and be subject to directions given by 
the Central Authority, etc.   
11A. Taluk Legal Services Committee.  
11B. Functions of Taluk Legal Services Committee . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
ENTITLEMENT TO LEGAL SERVICES  
12. Criteria for giving legal services . 
13. Entitlement of legal services . 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
14. Grants by the Central Government . 
  2 
 SECTIONS  
15. National Legal Aid Fund . 
16. State Legal Aid Fund . 
17. District Legal Aid Fund . 
18. Accounts and audit . 
CHAPTER VI  
LOK ADALATS  
19. Organisation of  Lok Adalats . 
20. Cognizance of cases by Lok Adalats . 
21. Award of Lok Adalat.  
22. Powers of Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat.  
 
CHAPTER VIA  
PRE-LITIGATION CONCILIATION AND SETTLEMENT  
22A. Definitions.  
22B. Establishment of   Permanent Lok Adalats.  
22C. Cognizance of cases by Permanent Lok Adalat . 
22D. Procedure of Permanent Lok Adalat.  
22E.  Award of Permanent Lok Adalat to be final.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEIOUS  
23. Members and staff of Authorities, Committees  and Lok Adalats to be public  servants.  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
25. Act to have overriding effect.  
26. Power to remove difficulties.  
27. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
28. Power of State Government to make rules.  
29. Power of Central Authority to make regulations.  
29A. Power of State Authority to make regulations . 
30. Laying of rules and regulations  
 
 
 
  3 
 THE LEGAL SERVICES AUTHORITIES ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1987  
[11th October , 1987 .] 
An Act to constitute legal services authorities to provide free and competent legal services to the 
weaker sections of the society to ensure that opportunities for securing  justice are not denied 
to any citizen by reason of economic or other disabilities, and to organise Lok Adalats to 
secure that the operation of the legal system promotes justice on a basis of equal opportunity.  
BE it enacted b y the Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—This Act may be called the Legal Services Authorities 
Act, 1987.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India, except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint; 
and different dates  may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for different States, and any 
reference to commencement in any provision of th is Act in relation to any State shall be construed as a 
reference to the commencement of that provision in that State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “case” includes a suit or any proceeding before a court;  
(aa) “Central Authority ” means the National Legal Services Authority constituted under          
section  3; 
(aaa) “court” means a civil, criminal or revenue court and includes any tribunal or any other 
authority constituted under any law for the time being in force, to exercise judicial or quasi -judicial 
functions;]  
(b) “District Authority ” means a District Legal Services Authority  constituted under section  9; 
3[(bb) “High Court Legal Services Committee ” means a High Court Legal Services Committee 
constituted under section  8A;] 
(c) “legal service ” includes the rendering of any service in the conduct of any case or other legal 
proceeding before any court or other authority or tribunal and the giving of adv ice on any legal 
matter;  
(d) “Lok Adalat ” means a Lok Adalat organised under Chapter VI;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
3[(ff) “regulations ” means regulations made under this Act; ] 
(g) “scheme ” means any scheme framed by the Central Authority, a State Authority or a District 
Authority for the purpose of giving effect to any of the provisions of this Act;  
(h) “State Authority ” means a State Leg al Services Authority constituted under section  6; 
(i) “State Government ” include s the administrator of a Union t erritory appointed by the Pr esident 
under article  239 of the Constitution;  
                                                           
1. 9th November, 1995, vide notification No. S.O. 893(E), date d 9th November, 1995, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,              
Part II, sec. 3( ii).  
2. Subs. by Act 59 of 1994, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  4 
 1[(j) “Supreme Court Legal Services Committee ” means the Supreme Court Legal Services 
Committee constituted under section  3A; 
(k) “Taluk Legal Services Committee ” means a Taluk  Legal Services Committee constituted 
under section  11A.] 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any other enactment or any provision thereof shall, in relation to an 
area in which such enactment or provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the c orresponding 
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  LEGAL  SERVICES  AUTHORI TY 
2[3. Constitution of the National Legal Services Authority .—(1) The Central Government shall 
constitute a body to be called the National Legal Services Authority to exercise the powers and perform 
the functions conferred on, or assigned to, the Central Authority under this Act.  
(2) The Cent ral Authority shall consist of — 
(a) the Chief Justice of India who shal l be the Patron -in-Chief;  
(b) a serving or retired Judge of the Supreme Court to be nominated by the President, in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India, who shall be the Executive Chairman; and  
(c) such number of other members, possessing such expe rience and qualifications, as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, to be nominated by that Government in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India.  
(3) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, appoint a pers on to 
be the Member -Secretary of the Central Authority, possessing such experience and qualifications as may 
be prescribed by that Government, to exercise such powers and perform such duties under the Executive 
Chairman of the Central Authority as may be p rescribed by that Government or as may be assigned to 
him by the Executive Chairman of that Authority.  
(4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of members and the  Member -Secretary 
of the Central Authority shall be such as may be presc ribed by the Central Government in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India.  
(5) The Central Authority may appoint such number of officers and other  employees as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, for the efficient 
discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(6) The officers and other employees of the Central Authority shall be entitled to such salary and 
allowances and shall be subject to such other conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.  
(7) The administrative expenses of the Central Authority, including the salaries, allowances and 
pensions payable to the Member -Secretary, officers and other employees of the Centra l Authority, shall 
be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  
(8) All orders and decisions of the Central Authority shall be authenticated by the Member -Secretary 
or any other officer of the Central Authority duly authorised by the Executive Chairm an of that Authority.  
(9) No act or proceeding of the Central Authority shall be invalid merely on the ground of the 
existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Central Authority.  
3A. Supreme Court Legal Services Committee .—(1) The Central Authority shall constitute a 
committee to be called the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee for the purpose of exercising such 
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 59 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for section 3 (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  5 
 powers and performing such functions as may be determined by regulations made by the Central 
Authority.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of — 
(a) a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court who shall be the Chairman; and  
(b) such number of other members possessing such experience and qualifications as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government,  
to be nominated by the Chief  Justice of India.  
(3) The Chief Justice of India shall appoint a person to be the Secretary to the Committee, possessing 
such experience and qualifications as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of the members and Secretary of the 
Committee shall be such as may be determined by regulations made by the Central Authority.  
(5) The Committee may appoint such number of officers and other employees as may be prescribed 
by the Central G overnment, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, for the efficient discharge of 
its functions.  
(6) The officers and other employees of the Committee shall be entitled to such salary and allowances 
and shall be subject to such other conditions of  service as may be prescribed by the Central Government 
in consultation with the Chief Justice of India. ] 
4. Functions of the Central Authority .—The Central Authority shall  1*** perform all or any of th e 
following functions, namely: — 
(a) lay down policies and principles for making legal services available under the provisions of 
this Act;  
(b) frame the most effective and economical schemes for the purpose of making legal services 
available under the provisions of this Act;  
(c) utilise the funds at its dispo sal and make appropriate allocations of funds to the State 
Authorities and District Authorities;  
(d) take necessary steps by way of social justice litigation with regard to consumer protection, 
environmental protection or any other matter of special concer n to the weaker sections of the society 
and for this purpose, give training to social workers in legal skills;  
(e) organise legal aid camps, especially in rural areas, slums or labour  colonies with the dual 
purpose of educating the weaker sections of the society as to their rights as well as encouraging the 
settlement of disputes through Lok Adalats;  
(f) encourage the settlement of disputes by way of negotiations, arbitration and conci liation;  
(g) undertake and promote research in the field of legal services with special reference to the need 
for such services among the poor;  
(h) to do all things necessary for the purpose of ensuring commitment to the fundamental d uties 
of citizens unde r Part IV A of the Constitution;  
(i) monitor  and evaluate implementation of the legal aid programmes at periodic intervals and 
provide for independent evaluation of programmes and schemes implemented in whole or in part by 
funds provided under this Act;  
  
                                                           
1. The words “ , subject to the general directions of the Central Government ,” omitted by Act of 59 of 1994, s. 4                                 
(w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  6 
 1[(j) provide grants -in-aid for specific schemes to various voluntary social service institutions and 
the State and District Authorities, from out of the amounts placed at its disposal for the 
implementation of the legal services schemes under the provision s of this Act;]  
(k) develop, in consultation with the Bar Council of India, programmes for clinical legal 
education and promote guidance and supervise the establishment and working of legal services clinics 
in universities, law colleges and other instituti ons; 
(l) take appropriate measures for spreading legal literacy and legal awareness amongst the people 
and, in particular, to educate weaker sections of the society about the rights, benefits and 
privileges  guaranteed by social welfare legislations and oth er enactments as well as administrative 
programmes and measures;  
(m) make special efforts to enlist the support of voluntary social welfare institutions  working at 
the grass -root level, particularly among the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, women and 
rural and urban labour; and  
(n) coordinate and monitor the functioning of 2[State Authorities, District Authorities, Supreme 
Court Legal Services Co mmittee, High Court Legal Services Committees, Taluk Legal Services 
Committees and voluntary social service institutions] and other legal services organisations and give 
general directions for the proper implementation of the legal services programmes.  
5. Central Authority to work in coordination with other agencies .—In the discharge of its 
functions under this Act, the Central Authority shall, w herever appropriate, act in co ordination with other 
governmental and non -governmental agencies, universities and others engaged in the work of promoting 
the cause of legal services to the poor.  
CHAPTER III  
STATE  LEGAL  SERVICE S AUTHORITY  
3[6. Constitution of State Legal Services Authority .—(1) Every State Government shall constitute a 
body to be called the Legal Services Authority for the State to exercise the powers and perform the 
functions conferred on, or assigned to, a State Authority under this Act.  
(2) A St ate Authority shall consist of — 
(a) the Chief Justice of the Hig h Court who shall be the Patron -in-Chief; 
(b) a serving or retired Judge of the High Court, to be nominated by the Governor, in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of the High Court, who shall be the Executive Chairman; and  
(c) such number of other members, possessing such experience and quali fications as may be 
prescribed by the State Government, to be nominated by that Government in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(3) The State Government shall, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, appoint a 
person belonging to the State Higher Judicial Service, not lower in rank than that of a District Judge, as 
the Member -Secretary of the State Authority, to  exercise such powers and perform such duties under the 
Executive Chairman of the State Authority as may be p rescribed by that Government or as may be 
assigned to him by the Executive Chairman of that Authority.  
Provided that a person functioning as Secretary of a State Legal Aid and Advice  Board immediately 
before the date of constitution of the State Authority may be appointed as Member -Secretary of that 
Authority, even if he is not qualified to be appointed as such under this sub -section, for a period not 
exceeding five years.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1994, s. 4, for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “State and  District Authorities and other volunta ry social welfare institutions”  (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 5,  ibid.,  for section 6 (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  7 
 (4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of members and the Mem ber-Secretary 
of the State Authority shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government in consult ation with 
the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(5) The State Authority may appoint such number of officers and other  employees as may be 
prescribed b y the State Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court, for the 
efficient discharge of its functions under this  Act. 
(6) The officers and other employees of the State Authority shall be entitled to such salary and 
allowances and s hall be subject to such other conditions of service as may be prescribed by the State 
Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(7) The administrative expenses of the State Authority, including the salaries, allowances and 
pensio ns payable to the Member -Secretary, officers and other employees of the State Authority  shall be 
defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of the State.  
(8) All orders and decisions of the State Authority shall be authenticated by the Member -Secretary or 
any o ther officer of the State Authority duly authorised by the Executive Chairman of the State Authority.  
(9) No act or proceeding of a State Authority shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence of 
any vacancy in, or any defect in the constit ution of, the State Authority.]  
7. Functions of the State Authority .—(1) It shall be the duty of the State Authority to give to effect 
to the policy and directions of the Central Authority.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the fu nctions referred to in sub-section (1), the State 
Authority shall perform all or any of th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) give legal service to persons who satisfy the criteria laid down under this Act;  
(b) conduct  1[Lok Adalats , including L ok Adalats for High Court cases ]; 
(c) undertake preventive and strategic legal aid programmes; and  
(d) perform such other functions as the State Authority may, in consultation  with the  2[Central 
Authority] , fix by regulations.  
3[8. State Authority to act in coordin ation with other agencies., etc ., and be subject to directions 
given by the Central Authority .—In the discharge of its functions the State Authority shall 
appropriately act in coordination with other governmental  agencies, non -governmental voluntary social 
service institutions, universities and other bodies engaged in the work of promoting the cause of legal 
services to the poor and shall also be guided by such directions as the Central Authority may give to it in 
writing.  
8A. High Court Legal Services Committee .—(1) The State Authority shall constitute a Committee 
to be called the High Court Legal Services Committee for every High Court, for the purpose of exercising 
such powers and performing such functions as may be determined by regulations made by the State 
Auth ority.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of — 
(a) a sitting Judge of the High Court who shall be the Chairman; and  
(b) such number of other members possessing such experience and qualifications as may be 
determined by regulations made by the State Authority,  
to be nominated by the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(3) The Chief Justice of the High Court shall appoint a Secretary to the Committee possessing such 
experience and qualifications as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1994, s. 6, for “Lok Adalats” (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “Central Government” (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for sections 8 and 9 (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  8 
 (4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of the members and Secretary of the 
Committee shall be such as may be determined by regulations made by the State Authority.  
(5) The Committee may appoint such number of officers and other employees as may be prescrib ed 
by the State Government  in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court for the efficient 
discharge of its functions.  
(6) The officers and other employees of the Committee shall be entitled to such salary and allowances 
and shall be subject to such other conditions of Service as ma y be prescribed by the State Government in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
9. District Legal Services Authority .—(1) The State Government shall, in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of the High  Court, constitute a body to be called the District Legal Services Authority for 
every District in the State to exercise the powers and perform the functions conferred on, or assigned to, 
the District Authority under this Act.  
(2) A Dist rict Authority shall consist of — 
(a) the District Judge who shall be its Chairman; and  
(b) such number of other members, possessing such experience and qualifications, as may be 
prescribed by the State Government, to be nominated by that Government in consultation with t he 
Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(3) The State Authority shall, in consultation with the Chairman of the District  Authority, appoint a 
person belonging to the State Judicial Service not lower in rank  than that of a Subordinate Judge or Civil 
Judge poste d at the seat of the District  Judiciary as Secretary of the District Authority to exercise such 
powers and perform  such duties under the Chairman of that Committee as may be assigned to him by 
such Chairman.  
(4) The terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of members and Secretary of the District 
Authority shall be such as may be determined by regulations made by the State Authority in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(5) The District Authority may appoint such number of officers and other employees as may be 
prescribed by the State Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court for the 
efficient discharge of its functions.  
(6) The officers and other employees of the District Authority shall be enti tled to such salary and 
allowances and shall be subject to such other conditions of service as may be prescribed by the State 
Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(7) The administrative expenses of every District Authority, including the salaries, allowances and 
pensions payable to the Secretary, officers and other employees of the District Authority, shall be 
defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of the State.  
(8) All orders and decisions of the District Authority shall be authenticated by the Secretary or by any 
other officer of the District Authority duly authorised by the Chairman of that Authority.  
(9) No act or proceeding of the District Authority shall be in valid merely on the ground of the 
existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the District Authority.]  
10. Functions of the District Authority .—(1) It shall be the duty of every District Authority to 
perform such of the functions of the State Authority in the District as may be delegated to it from time to 
time by the State Authority.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the fu nctions referred to in sub -section (1), the District 
Authority may perform all or any of th e following functions, namely: — 
1[(a) coordinate the activities of the Taluk Legal Services Committee and other legal services  in 
the District;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 19 94, s. 8, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  9 
 (b) organise Lok Adalats within the District; and  
(c) perform such other functio ns as the State Authority may  1*** fix by regulations.  
11. District Authority to act in coordination with other agencies and be subject to directions 
given by the Central Authority, etc .—In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the District 
Authority shall, wherever appropriate, act in coordination with other governmental and                               
non-governmental institutions, universities and others engaged in the work o f promoting the cause of 
legal services to the poor and shall also be guided by such directions as the Central Authority or the State 
Authority may give to it in writing.  
2[11A. Taluk Legal Services Committee .—(1) The State Authority may constitute a Commi ttee, to 
be called the Taluk Legal Services Committee, for each taluk or mandal or for group of taluks or mandals.  
(2) The Committee shall consist of — 
(a) The  3[senior -most Judicial Officer] operating within the jurisdiction of the Committee who 
shall be the ex officio  Chairman; and  
(b) such number of other members, possessing such experience and qualifications, as may be 
prescribed by the State Government, to be nominat ed by that Government in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(3) The Committee may appoint such number of officers and other employees as may be prescribed 
by the State Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court for the efficient 
discharge of its functions.  
(4) The officers and other employees of the Committee shall be entitled to such salary and allowances 
and shall be subject to such other conditions of service as may be prescribed by the State Government in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(5) The administrative expenses of the Committee shall be defrayed out of the District Legal Aid 
Fund by the District Authority.  
11B. Functions of Taluk Legal Services Committee .—The Taluk Legal Servic es Committee may 
perform all or any of th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) co-ordinate the activities of legal services in the taluk;  
(b) organise Lok Adalats within the taluk; and  
(c) perform  such other functions as the District Authority may assign to it.]  
CHAPTER IV  
ENTITLEMENT TO LEGAL SERVICES  
12. Criteria for giving legal services .—Every person who has to file or defend a case shall be 
entitled to legal services un der this Act if that person is— 
(a) a member of a Scheduled Caste or Scheduled Tribe;  
(b) a victim of tra fficking in human beings or begar as referred to in article  23 of the 
Constitution;  
(c) a woman or a child;  
4[(d) a person with disability as defined in clause (i) of section  2 of the Persons With Disabilities 
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996);]  
                                                           
1. The words “ , in consultation with the State Government, ” omitted by Act 59 of 19 94, s. 8 (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994) . 
3. Subs. by Act 37 of 2002, s. 2, for “senior Civil Judge” (w.e.f. 11 -6-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 1 of 1996, s. 74, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 7 -2-1996).  10 
 (e) a person under circumstances of underserved want such as being a victim of a mass disa ster, 
ethnic, violence, caste atr ocity, flood, drough t, earthquake or industrial disa ster; or  
(f) an industrial workman; or  
(g) in custody, including custody in a protective  home within the meaning of clause (g) of            
section  2 of the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956 (104 of 1956), or in a juvenile home within 
the meaning of clause ( j) of section  2 of the Juvenile Justice Act, 1986 (53 of 1986), or in a 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing  home within the meaning of clause (g) of section  2 of the 
Mental Health Act, 1987 (14 of 1987); or  
1[(h) in receipt of annual income less than rupees nine thousand or such other higher amount as 
may be prescribed by the State Government, if the  case is before a court other than the Supreme 
Court, and less than  rupees twelve th ousand or such other higher amount as may be  prescribed by the 
Central Government , if the case is before the Supreme  Court.]  
13. Entitlement of legal services .—(1) Persons who satisfy all or any of the criteria specified in 
section 12 shall be entitled to receive legal services provided that the concerned Authority is satisfied that 
such person has a prima facie  case to prosecute or to defend.  
(2) An affidavit made by a person as to his income may be regarded as sufficient for making  him 
eligible to the entitlement of legal services under this Act unless the concerned Authority has reason to 
disbelieve such affidavit.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
14. Grants by the Central Government .—The Central Government shall, after due ap propriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Central Authority, by way of grants, such sums of 
money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
15. National Legal Aid Fund .—(1) The Central Authority shall establish a fund to be called the 
National Legal Aid Fund and t here shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all sums of money given as grants by the Central Government under section 14; 
(b) any grants or donations that may be made to the Central Aut hority by any other person for the 
purposes of this Act;  
(c) any amount received by the Central Authority under the orders of any court or  from any other 
source.  
(2) The National Legal Aid Fund sh all be applied for meeting — 
(a) the cost of legal services provided under this Act including grants made to State Authorities;  
2[(b) the cost of legal services provided by the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee;  
 (c) any other expenses which are required to be met by the Central Authori ty.] 
16. State Legal Aid Fund .—(1) A State Authority shall establish a fund to be called the State Legal 
Aid Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all sums of money paid to it or any grants by the Central Authority for the purposes of this 
Act; 
(b) any grants or donations that may be made to the State Authority by the State Government or 
by any person for the purposes   of this Act;  
(c) any other amount received by the State Authority under the orders of any court or from any 
other source.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1994, s. 10, for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  11 
 (2) A State Legal Aid Fund shall be  applied for meeting — 
(a) the cost of functions referred to in section 7; 
1[(b) the cost of legal services provided by the High Court Legal Services Committee;  
(c) any other expenses which are required to be met by the State Au thority.]  
17. District Legal Aid Fund .—(1) Every District Authority shall establish a fund to be called the 
District Legal Aid Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all sums of money paid or any grants made by the State Authority to the District Au thority for 
the purposes of this Act;  
2[(b) any grants or donations that may be made to the District Authority by any person, with the 
prior approval of the State Authority, for the purposes of this Act;]  
(c) any other amount received by the District Authority under the orders of any court or from any 
other source.  
(2) A District Legal Aid Fu nd shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the cost of functions referred to in section 10 3[and 11 B]; 
(b) any  other expenses which are required to be met by the District Authority.  
18. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Central Authority, State Authority, or the District Authority 
(hereinafter referred to in this section as „the authority ‟), as the case may be, shall ma intain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the income and 
expenditure account and  the balance -sheet in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authorities shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority concerned to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the auditing of the accounts of an Authority under this Act shall have the same rights and 
privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
has in connection with the auditing of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of the Authorities under this Act.  
(4) The accounts of the Authorities, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any o ther person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually by the Authorities to the Central Government or the State Governments, as the case may be.  
4[(5) The Central Government shall cause the accounts and the audit report received by it under                                        
sub-section (4) to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before each House of Parliament.  
(6) The State Governm ent shall cause the accounts and the audit report received by it under                   
sub-section (4) to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before the State Legislature.]  
CHAPTER VI  
LOK ADALATS  
5[19. Organisation of Lok Adalats .—(1) Every State Authority or District Authority or the Supreme 
Court Legal Services Committee or every High Court Legal Services Committee or, as the case may be, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1994, s. 12, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  
5. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for sections 19 and 20 (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  12 
 Taluk Legal Services Committee may organise Lok Adalats at such intervals and places and for 
exercising such jurisdiction and for such areas as it thinks fit.  
(2) Every Lok Adalat organised for an area shall consist of such number of — 
(a) serving or retired judicial officers; and  
(b) other persons,  
of the area as may be specified by the State Autho rity or the District Authority or the Supreme Court 
Legal Services Committee or the High Court Legal Services Committee, or as the case may be, the Taluk 
Legal Services Committee, organising such Lok Adalat.  
(3) The experience and qualifications of other persons referred to in clause  (b) of sub-section (2) for 
Lok Adalat s organised by the Supreme Court Legal Services  Committee shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.  
(4) The experience an d qualifications of other persons referred to in clause  (b) of sub -section (2) for 
Lok Adalat s other than referred to in sub -section  (3) shall be such as may be prescribed by the State 
Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(5) A Lok Adalat shall have jurisdiction to determine and to arrive at a compromise or settlement 
between the parties to a dispute in respect of — 
(i) any case pending before; or  
(ii) any  matter which is falling within the jurisdiction of, and is not brought before,  
any Court for which the Lok Adalat is organised:  
Provided that the Lok Adalat  shall have no jurisdiction in respect of any case or matter relating to an 
offence not compoundable under any law.  
20. Cognizance of cases by Lok Adalats .—(1) Wher e in any case referred to in clause  (i) of               
sub-section  (5) of section 19 ,— 
(i) (a) the parties thereof agree; or  
(b) one of the parties thereof makes an application to the Court,   
for referring the case to the Lok Adalat for settlement and if such court is  prima facie  satisfied that there 
are chances of such settlement; or  
(ii) the court is satisfied that the matter is an appropriate one to be taken cognizance of by the Lok 
Adalat,  
the Court shall refer the case to the Lok Adalat:  
Provided that no case shall be referred  to the Lok Adalat under sub -clause  (b) of clause ( i) or              
clause (ii) by such court except after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard to the parties.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any cither law for the time being in  force, the Authority or 
Committee organisi ng the Lok Adalat un der sub -section  (1) of section  19 may, on receipt of an 
application from any one of the parties  to any matter referred to in clause  (ii) of sub -section  (5) of           
section  19 that such matter needs to be determined by a Lok Adalat, refer such matter t o the Lok Adalat, 
for determination:  
Provided that no matter shall be referred to the Lok Adalat except after giving a reasonable  
opportunity of being heard to the other party.  
(3) Where any case is referre d to a Lok Adalat under sub -section  (1) or where a  reference ha s been 
made to it under sub -section  (2), the Lok Adalat shall proceed to dispose of the case or matter and arrive 
at a compromise or settlement between the parties.  13 
 (4) Every Lok Adalat shall, while determining any reference before it under th is Act, act with utmost 
expedition to arrive at a compromise or settlement between the parties and shall be guided by the 
principles of justice, equity, fair play and other legal principles.  
(5) Where no award is made by the Lok Adalat on the ground that n o compromise or settlement  could 
be arrived at between the parties, the record of the case shall be returned by it to the court, from which the 
reference has been received under sub -section (1) for disposal in accordance with law.  
(6) Where no award is mad e by the Lok Adalat on the ground that no compromise or settlement could 
be arrived at between the parties, in a matter referred to in sub -section (2), that Lok Adalat shall advice 
the parties to seek remedy in a court. 
(7) Where the record of the case if returned under sub -section (5) to the court, such  court shall 
proceed to deal with such case from the stage which was reached before  such reference under                     
sub-section (1).] 
21. Award of Lok Adalat .—1[(1) Every award of the Lok Adalat  shall be deemed to be a decree of a 
civil court or, as the case may be, an order of any other court and where a compromise or settlement has 
been arrived at, by a Lok Adalat in a case referred to it under s ub-section  (1) of section  20, the court-fee 
paid in such case s hall be refunded in the manner provided under the Court -fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870).]  
(2) Every award made by a Lok Adalat shall be final and binding on all the parties to the dispute, and 
no appeal shall lie to any court against the award.  
22. Powers of  2[Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat .]—(1) The   2[Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok 
Adalat] shall, for the purposes of holding any determination  under this Act, have the same powers as are 
vested in a Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit in respect 
of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any witness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) the reception of evidence on  affidavits;  
(d) the requisitioning of any public record or document or copy of such record or document from 
any court or office; and  
(e) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers contained in sub -sectio n (1), every  2[Lok Adalat 
or Permanent Lok Adalat] shall have the requisite powers to specify its own procedure for the 
determination of any dispute coming before it.  
(3) All proceedings before a  2[Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat ] shall be deemed to be judicial 
proceedings within the meaning of sections  193, 219 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and 
every  2[Lok Adalat or Permanent Lok Adalat] shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purpose of 
section 195 and Chapter  XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
3[CHAPTER VIA  
PRE-LITIGATION CONCILIATION AND SETTLEMENT  
22A. Definitions .—In this Chapter and for the purposes of sections  22 and 23, unless t he context 
otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Permanent Lok Adalat ” means a Permanent Lok Adalat established under sub -section  (1) of 
section  22B; 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1994, s. 16, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994),  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 2002, s. 3, for “Lok Adalat” (w.e.f. 11 -6-2002).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -6-2002).  14 
 (b) “public utility service ” means any — 
(i) transport service for the carriage of passengers or goods by air, road or water; or  
(ii) postal, telegraph or telephone service; or  
(iii) supply of power, light or water to the public by any establishment; or  
(iv) system of public conservancy or sanitation; or  
(v) service in hospital or dispensary;  or 
(vi) insurance service,  
and includes any service which the Central Gover nment or the State Government, as the case may be, 
in the public interest, by notification, declare to be a public utility service for the purposes of this 
Chapter.  
22B. Establishment of Permanent Lok Adalats .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section  19, the Central Authority or, as the case may be, every State Authority shall, by notification, 
establish Permanent Lok Adalats at such places and for exercising such jurisdiction in respect of one or 
more public utility services and for such areas as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Every Permanent Lok Adalat established for an area notified under sub -section  (1) shall consist 
of— 
(a) a person who is, or has been, a district judge or additional district judge or has held judicial 
office higher in rank than that of a district judge, shall be the Chairman of the Permanent Lok Adalat; 
and 
(b) two other persons having adequate experience in public utility service to be nominated by the 
Central Government or, a s the case may be, the State Government on th e recommendation of the 
Central  Authority or, as the case may be, the State Authority,   
appointed by the Central Authority or, as the case may be, the State Authority, establishing such 
Permanent Lok Adalat and the other terms and conditions of the appointment of the Chairman and other 
persons referred to in clause  (b) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
22C. Cognizance of cases by Permanent Lok Adalat .—(1) Any party to a dispute may, before the 
dispute is brought before any court, make an application to the Permanent Lok Adalat for the settlement 
of dispute:  
Provided that the Permanent Lok Adalat shall not have jurisdiction in respect of any matter relatin g to 
an offence not compoundable under any law:  
Provided further that the Permanent Lok Adalat shall also not have jurisdiction in the matter where 
the value of the property in dispute exceeds ten lakh rupees:  
Provided also t hat the Central Government, may  by notification, increase the limit of  ten lakh rupees 
specified in the second proviso in consultation with the Central Authority.  
(2) After an application is made under sub -section  (1) to the Permanent Lok Adalat , no party to that 
application shall invoke jurisdiction of any court in the same dispute.  
(3) Where an application is made to a Permanent Lok Adalat under sub -section  (1), it— 
(a) shall direct each party to the application to file before it a written stat ement, stating therein 
the facts and nature of dispute under the application, points or issues in such dispute and grounds 
relied in support of, or in opposition to, such points or issues, as the case may be, and such party 
may supplement such statement wi th any document and other evidence which such party deems 
appropriate in proof of such facts and grounds and shall send a copy of such statement together with 
a copy of such document and other evidence, if any, to each of the parties to the application;  
(b) may require any party to the application to file additional statement before it at any stage of 
the conciliation proceedings;  15 
 (c) shall communicate any document or statement received by it from any party to the 
application to the other  party, to enable s uch other party to present reply thereto.  
(4) When statement, additional statement and reply, if any, have been filed under sub -section  (3), to 
the satisfaction of the Permanent Lok Adalat, it shall conduct conciliation proceedings between the parties 
to the application in such manner as it thinks appropriate taking into account the circumstances of the 
dispute.  
(5) The Permanent Lok Adalat shall, during conduct of  conciliation proceedings under                           
sub-section  (4), assist the parties  in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of the dispute in an 
independent and impartial manner.  
(6) It shall be the duty of the every party to the application to cooperate in good faith with the 
Permanent Lok Adalat in conciliation of the dispute relating to the application and to comply with the 
direction of the Permanent Lok Adalat to produce evidence and other related documents before it.  
(7) When  a Permanent Lok Adalat, in the aforesaid conciliation proceedings, is of opinion that there 
exist e lements of settlement in such proceedings which may be acceptable to the parties, it may formulate 
the terms of a possible settlement of the dispute and give to the parties concerned for their observations 
and in case the parties reach at an agreement on t he settlement of the dispute, they shall sign the 
settlement  agreement and the Permanent Lok Adalat shall pass an award in terms thereof and furnish a 
copy of the same to each of the parties concerned.  
(8) Where the parties fail to r each at an agreement un der sub -section  (7), the Permanent Lok Adalat 
shall, if the dispute does not relate to any offence, decide the dispute.  
22D. Procedure of Permanent Lok Adala t.—The Permanent Lok Adalat  shall, while conducting 
conciliation proceedings or deciding a dispute on merit under this Act, be guided by the principles  of 
natural justice, objectivity , fair play, equity and other principles of justice, and shall not be bound by the 
Code of Civil Pro cedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
22E.  Award of Permanent Lok Adalat to be final .—(1) Every award of the Permanent Lok Adalat  
under this Act made either on merit or in terms of a settlement agreement shall be final and binding on all 
the parties thereto and on persons claiming under them.  
(2) Every award of the Permanent Lok Adalat under this Act shall be deemed to be a decree o f a civil 
court.  
(3) The award made by the Permanent Lok Adalat under this Act shall be by a majority of the persons 
constituting the Permanent Lok Adalat.  
(4) Every award made by the Permanent Lok Adalat under this Act shall be final and shall not be 
called in question in any original suit, application or execution proceeding.  
(5) The Permanent Lok Adalat may transmit any award made by it to a civil court having local 
jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if it were a decree made by that court.]  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
1[23. Members and staff of Authorities, Committees and Lok Adalats to be public              
servants .—The members including Member -Secretary or, as the case may be, Secretary of the Central 
Authority, the State Authority, the District Authorities, the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee, 
High Court Legal Services Committees, Taluk Legal Services Committees and officers and other 
employees of such Authorities, Committees and the  2[members of the Lok Adalats or the person s 
constituting Permanent Lok Adalats ] shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of             
section  21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1994, s. 17, for sections 23 and 24 (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994),  
2. Subs. by Act 37 of 2002, s. 5, for “members of the Lok Adalats” (w.e.f. 11 -6-2002).  16 
 24. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other leg al proceeding shall 
lie against — 
(a) the Central Government or State Government;  
(b) the Patron -in-Chief, Executive Chairman, members of, Member -Secretary or officers or other 
emplo yees of the Central Authority;  
(c) Patron -in-Chief, Executive Chairman, member, Member -Secretary or officers or other 
employees of the State Authority;  
(d) Chairman, Secretary, members or officers or other employees of the Supreme Court Legal 
Services Comm ittee, High Court Legal Services Committees, Taluk Legal Services Committees or 
the District Authority; or  
(e) any other person authorised by a ny of the Patron -in-Chief, Executive Chairman, Chairman, 
Member, Member -Secretary referred to in sub -clause s (b) to (d),  
for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under the provisions of this Act or any 
rule or regulation made thereunder.]  
25. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything i nconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of law other than this Act.  
26. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect  to the  provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that n o such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parli ament.  
1[27. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government in consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number, experience and qualifications of other members of the  Central Authority under 
clause  (c) of sub -section  (2) of section 3; 
(b) the experience an d qualifications of the Member -Secretary of the Central Authority and his 
powers and functions under sub -section  (3) of section  3; 
(c) the terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of members and Member -Secretary of 
the Central Authority under sub -section  (4) of section 3; 
(d) the number of officers and other employees of the Central Authority under sub -section  (5) of 
section  3; 
(e) the conditions of service and the salary and allowances of officers and other employees of the 
Central Authority under sub -section  (6) of section  3; 
(f) the number, experience and qualifications of members of the Supreme Court Legal Services 
Committee under clause ( b) of sub -section  (2) of section  3A; 
(g) the experience and qualifications of Secretary of the Supreme Court Legal Services 
Committee under sub -section  (3) of section  3A; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 1994, s. 18, for sections 27, 28 and 29 (w.e.f. 29 -10-1994).  17 
 (h) the number of officers and other employees of the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee 
under sub -section  (5) of section  3A and the conditions of service and the salary and allowances 
payable to them under sub -section  (6) of that section;  
(i) the upper limit of annual income of a person entitling him to legal services under clause  (h) of 
section  12, if the case is before the Supreme Court;  
(j) the manner in which the accounts of the Central Authority, the State Authority or the District 
Authority shall be maintained under section  18; 
(k) the experience and qualifications of other persons of the Lok Adalats organised by the 
Supreme Court Legal Servi ces Committee specified in sub -section  (3) of section  19; 
(l) other matters under clause  (e) of sub -section  (1) of section  22; 
1[(la) the other terms and conditions of appointment of the Chairman and other persons under             
sub-section ( 2) of section  22B;] 
(m) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
28. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government in consultation with the 
Chief Justice of  the High Court may, by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  number, experience and qualifications of other members of the State Authority under              
clause  (c) of sub -section  (2) of section  6; 
(b) the powers and functions of the Member -Secretary of the State Authority under                         
sub-section (3) of section  6; 
(c) the terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of members and Member -Secretary of 
the State Authority under sub -section  (4) of section  6; 
(d) the number of officers and other employees of the State Authority under sub-section  (5) of    
section  6; 
(e) the conditions of service and the salary and allowances of officers and other employees o f the 
State Authority under sub -section  (6) of section  6; 
(f) the  experience and qualifications of Secretary of the High Court Legal Services Committee 
under sub -section  (3) of section  8A; 
(g) the number of officers and other employees of the High Court Legal Services Committee 
under sub -section  (5) of section  8A and the conditions of service and the salary and allowances 
payable to them under sub -section  (6) of that section;  
(h) the number, experience and qualifications of members of the District Authority under             
clause  (b) of sub -section  (2) of section  9; 
(i) the number of officers and other employees of the District Authority under sub -section  (5) of 
section  9; 
(j) the conditions of service and the salary and allowances of the officers and other employees of 
the District Authority under sub -section  (6) of section  9; 
(k) the number, experience and qualifications of members of the Taluk Legal Services Committee 
under clause  (b) of sub -section  (2) of section  11A; 
(l) the number of officers and other employees of the Taluk Legal Services Committee under                
sub-section  (3) of section  11A; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 37 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 11 -6-2002).  18 
 (m) the conditions of service and the salary and allowances of officers and other employees of the 
Taluk Legal Services Committee under sub -section  (4) of section  11A; 
(n) the upper limit of annual income of a person entitling him to legal services under clause  (h) 
of section  12, if the case is before a court, other than the Supreme Court;  
(o) the experience and qualifications of other persons of the Lok Adalats other tha n referred to in                
sub-section  (4) of section  19; 
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
29. Power of Central Authority to make regulations .—(1) The Central Authority may, by 
notification, make regulations not inconsistent  with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provisions is necessary or expedient for the purposes of 
giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular , and without prejudice to the gener ality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the powers and functions of the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee under                        
sub-section  (1) of section  3A; 
(b) the terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of the members and Secretary of the 
Supreme Court Legal Services Committee under sub -section  (4) of section  3A. 
 29A. Power of State Authority to make regulations .—(1) The State Authority may, by 
notification, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of  this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, to provide for all matters for which provision in necessary or expedient for the purposes of 
giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the other functions to be performed by the State Authority under clause  (d) of sub -section  (2) 
of section  7; 
(b) the powers and functions of the High Court Legal Services Committee under sub -section  (1) 
of section  8A; 
(c) the number, experience and qualifications of members of the High Court Legal Services 
Committee under clause  (b) of sub -section  (2) of section  8A; 
(d) the terms of office and other conditions relating thereto, of the members and Secretary of the 
High Court Legal Services Committee under sub -section  (4) of section  8A; 
(e) the term of office and other conditions relating thereto, of the members and Secretary of the 
District Authority under sub -section  (4) of section  9; 
(f) the number, experience and qualifications of members of the High Court Legal Services 
Committee under clause  (b) of sub -section  (2) of section  8A; 
(g) other functions to be performed by the District Authority under clause  (c) of sub -section  (2) 
of section  10; 
(h) the term of office and other conditions relating thereto, of members and Secretary of the Taluk  
Legal Services Committee under sub -section  (3) of section  11A.] 
 30. Laying of rules and regulations .—(1) Every rule made under this Act by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by the Central Authority thereunder shall be laid, as soon as may 
be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirt y days 
which may be comprised in one session, or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry 
of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule o r regulation, or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation 
should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of 19 
 no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment s hall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by a State Government and every regulation made by a State 
Authority thereunder shall be laid, as soon as may be after i t is made, before the State Legislature.  
 
--------------------------The Mental Health Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE MENTAL HEALTH  ACT, 1987  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
MENTAL  HEALTH  AUTHORITIES  
3. Central Authority for Mental Health Services . 
4. State Authority for Mental Health Services . 
 
CHAPTER III  
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS AND PSYCHIATRIC NURSING HOMES  
5. Establishment or maintenance of psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes . 
6. Establishment or maintenance of psychiatric hospitals or psychiatric  nursing homes only with 
licence . 
7. Application for licence . 
8. Grant or refusal of licence . 
9. Duration and renewal of licence . 
10. Psychiatric hospital and psychiatric nursing home to be maintained in accordance with prescribed 
conditions . 
11. Revocation of licence . 
12. Appeal.  
13. Inspection of psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes and visiting of patients . 
14. Treatment of out patients . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
ADMISSION AND DETENTION IN PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL OR PSYCHIATRIC NURSING HOME  
PART I 
Admission on voluntary basis  
15. Request by major for admission as voluntary patient . 
16. Request by guardian for admission of a ward.  
17. Admission of, and regulation with respect to, voluntary patients . 
18. Discharge of voluntary patients . 
  2 
 PART II 
Admission under special circumstances  
SECTIONS  
19. Admission of mentally ill persons under certain special circumstances . 
PART III 
Reception orders  
A.—Reception orders on applications  
20. Application for reception order . 
21. Form and contents of medical certificates . 
22. Procedure upon application for reception order . 
B.—Reception orders on production of mentally ill persons before Magistrate  
23. Powers and duties of police officers in respect of certain mentally ill persons . 
24. Procedure on production of mentally ill person . 
25. Order in case of mentally ill person cruelly treated or not under proper care and control . 
C.—Further provisions regarding admission and detention of certain mentally ill persons  
26. Admission as inpatient after inquisition . 
27. Admission and detention of mentally ill prisoner . 
28. Detention of alleged mentally ill person pending report by medical officer . 
29. Detention of mentally ill person pending his removal to psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home . 
D.—Miscellaneous provisions in relation to order under this Chapter  
30. Time and manner of medical examination of mentally ill person . 
31. Authority for reception order . 
32. Copy of reception order to be sent to medical officer in -charge . 
33. Restricti on as to psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes into which reception order 
may direct admission . 
34. Amend ment of order or document . 
35. Power to appoint substitute for person upon whose application reception order has been made . 
36. Officers competent to exercise powers and discharge functions of Magistrate under certain 
sections . 
 
CHAPTER V  
INSPECTION, DISCHARGE, LEAVE OF ABSENCE AND REMOVAL OF MENTALLY  ILL PERSONS  
PART I 
Inspection  
37. Appointment of Visitors . 
38. Monthly inspection by Visitors . 
39. Inspection of mentally ill prisoners .  3 
 PART II 
Discharge  
SECTIONS  
40. Order of discharge by medical officer in charge . 
41. Discharge of mentally ill persons on application . 
42. Order of discharge on the undertaking of relatives or friends, etc., for due care of mentally ill 
person . 
43. Discharge of person on his request . 
44. Discharge of person subsequently found on inquisition to be of sound mind . 
PART III 
Leave of absence  
45. Leave of absence . 
46. Grant of leave of absence by Magistrate . 
PART IV 
Removal  
47. Removal of mentally ill person from one psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home to any 
other psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home . 
48. Admi ssion, detention and retaking in certain cases . 
49. Appeal from orders of Magistrate . 
CHAPTER VI  
JUDICIAL INQUISITION REGARDING ALLEGED MENTALLY ILL PERSON POSSESSING  
PROPERTY, CUSTODY OF HIS PERSON AND MANAGEMENT OF HIS PROPERTY  
50. Application for judicial inquisition . 
51. Issues on which finding should be given by District Court after inquisition.  
52. Provision for appointing guardian of mentally ill person and for manager of property . 
53. Appointment of guardian of mentally ill person . 
54. Appointment of manager for management of property of mentally ill person . 
55. Appointment of manager by Collector . 
56. Manager of property to execute bond . 
57. Appointment and remuneration of guardians and managers . 
58. Duties of guardian and manager . 
59. Powers of manager . 
60. Manager to furnish inventory  and annual accounts . 
61. Manager ’s power to execute conveyances under orders of District Court . 
62. Manager to perform contracts directed by District Court . 
63. Disposal of business premises . 
64. Manager may dispose of leases . 
65. Power to make order concerning any matter co nnected with mentally ill person . 
66. Proceeding if accuracy of inventory or accounts is impugned . 
67. Payment into public treasury and investment of proceeds of estate . 
68. Relative may sue for account . 
69. Removal of managers and guardians . 
70. Dissolution and disposal of p roperty of partnership on a member becoming mentally ill . 4 
 SECTIONS  
71. Power to apply property for maintenance of mentally ill person without appointing manager in 
certain cases . 
72. Power to order transfer of stock, securities or shares belonging to mentally ill person in certain 
cases . 
73. Power to order transfer of stock, securities or shares of mentally ill persons residing out of India.  
74. Power to apply property for mentally ill person ’s maintenance in case of temporary mental 
illness.  
75. Action taken in respect of men tally ill person to be set aside if District Court finds that his mental 
illness has ceased . 
76. Appeals . 
77. Power of District Court to make regulations . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
LIABI LITY TO MEET COST OF MAINTENANCE OF MENTALLY ILL PERSONS DETAINED IN PSYCHIATRIC 
HOSPITAL OR PSYCHIATRIC NURSING HOME  
78. Cost of maintenance to be borne by Government in certain cases . 
79. Application to District Court for payment of cost of maintenance out of estate of mentally ill 
person or from a person legally bound to maintain him . 
80. Persons legally bound to maintain mentally ill person not absolved from such liability . 
 
CHAPTER VIII 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS OF MENTALLY ILL PERSONS  
81. Mentally ill persons to be treated without violation of human rights . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
82. Penalty for establishment or maintenance of psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in 
contravention of Chapter III.  
83. Penalty for improper reception of mentally ill person . 
84. Penalty for contravention of sections 60 and 69 . 
85. General provision for puni shment of other offences . 
86. Offences by companies . 
87. Sanction for prosecution s. 
 
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
88. Provision as to bonds . 
89. Report by medical officer . 
90. Pension, etc., of mentally ill person payable by Government . 
91. Legal aid to mentally ill person at State expense in certain cases.  5 
 SECTIONS  
92. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
93. Construction of references to certain laws, etc . 
94. Power of Central Government and State Government to make rules . 
95. Rules made by Central Government or the State Government to be laid before the Legislature . 
96. Effect of Act on other law s. 
97. Power to remove difficulty . 
98. Repeal and saving . 
 
  6 
 THE MENTAL HEALTH ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 14 OF 1987  
[22nd May , 1987 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the treatment and care of mentally ill 
persons, to make better provision with respect to their property and affairs and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Mental Health Act, 
1987.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different States and for different provisions of this Act, and any 
reference in any provision to the commencement of this A ct in a State shall be constru ed as  a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision in that State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “cost of maintenance ”, in relation to a mentally ill person admitted in a psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric  nursing home, shall mean the cost of such items as the State Government may, by general 
or special order, specify in this behalf;  
(b) “District Court ” means, in any area for which there is a city civil court, that court, and in any 
other area t he principal civil court of original jurisdiction, and include s any other civil court which the 
State Government may, by notification, specify as the court competent to deal with all or any of the 
matters specified in this Act;  
(c) “Inspecting Officer ” means a person authorised by the State Government or by the licensing 
authority to inspect any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home;   
(d) “licence ” means a licence  granted under section 8;  
(e) “licen see” means the holder of a licence ; 
(f) “licen sed psychiatric hospital ” or “licens ed psychiatric nursing home ” means a psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home, as the case may be, licens ed, or deemed to be licens ed, under 
this Act;  
(g) “licensing authority ” means such officer or authority as ma y be specified by the State 
Government to be the licensing authority for the purposes of this Act;  
(h) “Magistrate ” means, — 
(1) in relation to a metropolitan are a within the meaning of clause ( k) of section 2 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a Metropolitan Magistrate;  
(2) in relation to any other area, the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sub -Divisional Judicial 
Magistrate or such other Judicial Magistrate o f the first class as the State Government may, by 
notification , empower to perform the  functions of a Magistrate under this Act;  
(i) “medical officer ” means a gazetted medical officer in the service of Government and includes 
a medical practitioner declared, by a general or special order of the State Government, to be a medical 
officer for the purpose s of this Act;   
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1993, vide notification No. S.O. 43(E), dated 11th January, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii). 7 
 (j) “medical officer in charge ”, in relation to any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, 
means the medical officer who , for the time being, is in charge of that hospital or nursing home;  
(k) “medical practitioner ” means a person who possesses a recognised me dical qualification as 
defined — 
(i) in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), and 
whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register, as defined in clause ( k) of that  section;  
(ii) in clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 
1970 (48 of 1970), and whose name has been entered in a State Register of Indian Medicine, as 
defined in clause  (j) of sub -section ( 1) of that section;  and 
(iii) in clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Hom oeopathy Central Council Act, 
1973 (59 of   1973), and whose name has been entered in a State Register of Homoeopathy, as 
defined in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of that section;  
(l) “mentally ill person ” means a person who is in need of treatment by reason of any mental 
disorder other than mental retardation;  
(m) “mentally ill prisoner ” means a mentally ill person for whose detention in, or removal to, a 
psychiatric hospital, psychiatr ic nursing home, jail or other place of safe custody, an order referred to 
in section 27 has been made;  
(n) “minor ” means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years;  
(o) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(p) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(q) “psychiatric hospital ” or “psychiatric nursing home ” means a hospital or, as the case may be, 
a nursing   home established or maintained by the Government or any other person for the treatme nt 
and care of mentally ill persons and includes a convalescent home established or maintained by the 
Government or any other person for such mentally ill persons; but does not include any general 
hospital or general nursing home established or maintained by the Government and which provides 
also for psychiatric services;  
(r) “psychiatrist ” means a medical practitioner possessing a post -graduate degree or diploma in 
psychiatry, recognised by the Medical Council of India, constituted under the Indian Medical  Council 
Act, 1956 (102 of 1956), and includes, in relation to any State, any medical officer who, having 
regard to his knowledge and experience in psychiatry, has been declared by the Government of that 
State to be a psychiatrist for the purposes of this Act; 
(s) “reception order ” means an order made under the provisions of this Act for the admission and 
detention of a mentally ill person in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home;  
(t) “relative ” includes any person related to the mentally ill p erson by blood, marriage or 
adoption;  
(u) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator thereof.  
CHAPTER  II 
MENTAL  HEALTH  AUTHORITIES  
3. Central Authority for Mental Health Services .—(1) The Central Government shall establish an 
Authority for mental health with such designation as it may deem fit.  
(2) The Authority established under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the superintendence, direction 
and control of the Central Government.  
  8 
 (3) The Authority establish ed under sub -section ( 1) shall — 
(a) be in charge of regulation , development, direction and co ordination with respect to Mental 
Health Services under the Central Government and all other matters which, under this Act, are the 
concern of the Central Government  or any officer or authority subordinate to the Central 
Government;  
(b) supervise the psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes and other Mental Health 
Service  Agencies (including places in which mentally ill persons may be kept or detained) unde r the 
control of the Central Government;  
(c) advise the Central Government on all matters relating to mental health; and  
(d) discharge such other functions with respect to matters relating to mental health as the Central 
Government may require.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and section 4, “Mental Health Services ” include, in 
addition to psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes, observation wards, day -care centers,  
inpatient treatment in general hospitals, ambulatory treatment fac ilities and other facilities, convalescent 
homes and half -way-homes for mentally ill persons.  
4. State Authority for Mental Health Services .—(1) The State Government shall establish an 
Authority for mental health with such designation as it may deem fit.  
(2) The Authority established under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the superintendence, direction 
and control of the State Government.  
(3) The Authority establish ed under sub -section ( 1) shall — 
(a) be in charge of regulation, development and co-ordination with respect to Mental Health 
Services under the State Government and all other matters which, under this Act, are the concern of 
the State Government or  any officer or authority subordinate to the State Government;  
(b) supervise the psychiat ric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes and other Mental Health 
Service Agencies (including places in which mentally ill persons may be kept or detained) under the 
control of the State Government;  
(c) advise the State Government on all matters relating  to mental health; and  
(d) discharge such other functions with respect to matters relating to mental health as the State 
Government  may require.  
CHAPTER  III 
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITALS AND PSYCHIATRIC NURSING HOMES  
5. Establishment or maintenance of psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes .—(1) 
The Central Government may, in any part of India, or the State Government may, within the limits of its 
jurisdiction, establish or maintain psychiatric hospitals or psychiatric nursing homes for the admission, 
treatment and care of mentally ill persons at such places as it thin ks fit; and separate psychiatric hospitals 
and psychiatric nursing homes may be established or maintained for, — 
(a) those who are under the age of sixteen years;  
(b) those who are addicted  to alcohol or other drugs which lead to behavio ural changes in a 
person;  
(c) those who have been convicted of any offence; and  
(d) those belonging to such other class or category of persons as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where a psychiatric hospital or psychia tric nursing home is established or maintained by the 
Central Government, any reference in this Act to the State Government shall, in relation to such hospital 
or nursing home, be constructed as a reference to the Central Government.   9 
 6. Establishment or maintenance of psychiatric hospitals or psychiatric nursing homes only 
with licence .—(1) On and after the commencement of this Act, no person shall establish or maintain a 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home unless he holds a valid licence  granted to him under  
this Act:  
Provided that a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home (whether called asylum or by any 
other name) licence d by the Central Government or any State Government and maintained as such 
immediately before the commencement of this Act may continue to be maintained, and shall be deemed 
to be a licence d psychiatric hospital or licence d psychiatric nursing home, as th e case may be, under  
this Act, — 
(a) for a period of three months from such commencement, or  
(b) if an application made in accordance with section 7 for a licence  is pending on the expiry of 
the period specified in clause ( a), till the disposal of such application.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home established or maintained by the Central Government or a State Government.  
7. Application for licence .—(1) Every person, who holds, at the commencement of this Act, a valid 
licence  authorising that person to establish or maintain any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home, shall, if the said person intends to establish or continue the maintenance of  such hospital or nursing 
home after the expiry of the period referred to in clause ( a) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 6, 
make, at least one month before the expiry of such period, an application to the licensing authority for the 
grant of a fresh licence  for the establishment or maintenance of such hospital or nursing home, as the case 
may be.  
(2) A person, who intends to establish or maintain, after the commencement of this Act, a psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home, shall, unle ss the said person already holds a valid licence , make an 
application to the licensing authority for the grant of a licence . 
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be in such form and be 
accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed.  
8. Grant or refusal of licence .—On receipt of an application under section 7, the licensing authority 
shall make such inquiries as it may deem fit and where it is satisfied that — 
(a) the  establishment or maintenance of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home or 
the continuance of the maintenance of any such hospital or nursing home established before 
the  commencement of this Act is necessary;  
(b) the applicant is in a positi on to provide the minimum facilities prescribed for the admission, 
treatment and care of mentally ill persons; and  
(c) the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, will be under the charge of a medical 
officer who is a psychiatrist, it shall grant  a licence  to the applicant in the prescribed form, and where 
it is not so satisfied, the licensing authority shall, b y order, refuse to grant the licence  applied for:  
Provided that, before making any order refusing to grant a licence , the licensing author ity shall 
give to the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard and every order of refusal to grant a 
licence  shall set out therein the reasons for such refusal and such reasons shall be communicated to 
the applicant in such manner as may be prescr ibed.  
9. Duration and renewal of licence .—(1) A licence  shall not be transferable or heritable.  
(2) Where a licen see is unable to function as such for any reason or where a licens ee dies, the licen see 
or, as the case may be, the legal representative of such licen see shall forthwith report the matter in the 
prescribed manner to the licensing authority and notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), 
the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home concerned may continue to be maintained and shall 
be deemed to be a licen sed psychiatric hospital or licen sed psychiatric nursing home, as the case may 
be,— 
(a) for a period of three months from the date of such report or in the case of the death of the 
licen see from the date of his death, or   10 
 (b) if an application made in accordance with sub -section ( 3) for a licence  is pending on the 
expiry of the period specified in clause ( a), till the disposal of such application.  
(3) The legal representative of the licen see referred to in sub -section ( 2), shall, if he intends to 
continue the maintenance of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home after the expiry of the 
period referred to in sub -section ( 2), make, at least one month before the expiry of such period, an 
application to the licensing authority for the grant of a fresh licence  for the maintenance of such hospital 
or nursing home, as the case may be, and t he provisions of section 8 shall apply in relation to such 
application as they apply in relation to an application made under section 7.  
(4) Every licence  shall, unless revoked earlier under section 11, be valid for a period of five years 
from the date on which it is granted.  
(5) A licence  may be renewed, from time to time, on an application made in that behalf to the 
licensing authority, in such form and accompanied by such fee, as may be prescribed, and every such 
application shall be made not less than o ne year before the date on which the period of validity of the 
licence  is due to expire:  
Provided that the renewal of a licence  shall not be refused unless the licensing authority is satisfied 
that— 
(i) the licen see is not in a position to provide in a psy chiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home, the minimum facilities prescribed for the admission, treatment and care therein of mentally ill 
persons; or  
(ii) the licen see is not in a position to provide a medical officer who is a psychiatrist to take 
charge of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home; or  
(iii) the licen see has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made thereunder.  
10. Psychiatric hospital and psychiatric nursing home to be maintained in accordance with 
prescribed conditions .—Every psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home shall be maintained in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
11. Revocation of licence .—(1) The licensing authority may, without prejudice to any other penalty 
that may be imposed on the licen see, by order in writing, revoke the licence  if it is satisfied that — 
(a) the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home is not being maintained by the licen see in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder; or  
(b) the maintenance of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home is being carried on in 
a manner detrimental to the moral, mental or physical well -being of the inpatients thereof:  
Provided that no such order shall be made except after giving the licen see a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard, and every such order shall set out therein the grounds for the revocation of the licence  and 
such grounds shall b e communicated to the licen see in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall contain a direction that the inpatients of the 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home shall be transferred to such other psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home as may be specified in that order and it shall also contain such provisions 
(including provisions by way of directions) as to the care and custody of such inpatients pending such 
transfer.  
(3) Every order ma de under sub -section ( 1) shall take effect, — 
(a) where no appeal has been preferred against such order under section 12, immediately on the 
expiry of the period prescribed for such appeal; and  
(b) where such appeal has been preferred and the same has been dismissed, from the date of the 
order of such dismissal.  
12. Appeal .—(1) Any person, aggrieved by an order of the licensing authority refusing to grant or 
renew a licence , or revoking a licence , may, in such manner and within such period as may be prescribed, 
prefer an appeal to the State Government:  11 
 Provided that the State Government may entertain an appeal preferred after the expiry of the 
prescribed period if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the  
appeal in time.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and be, accompanied by such fee 
as may be prescribed.  
13. Inspection of psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes and visiting of patients .—
(1) An Inspecting Officer may, at any time, enter and inspect any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home and require the production of any records, which are required to be kept in accordance with 
the rules made in this behalf, for inspection:  
Provided that any pe rsonal records of a patient so inspected shall be kept confidential except for the 
purposes of sub -section ( 3). 
(2) The Inspecting Officer may interview in private any patient receiv ing treatment and care therein — 
(a) for the purpose of inquiring into any complaint made by or on behalf of such patient as to the 
treatment  and care, or  
(b) in any case, where the Inspecting Officer has reason to believe that any inpatient is not 
receiving proper treatment and care.  
(3) Where the Inspecting Officer is satisfied  that any inpatient in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home is not receiving proper treatment and care, he may report the matter to the licensing 
authority and thereupon the licensing authority may issue such direction as it may deem fit to t he medical 
officer in charge or the licen see of the psychiatric hospital, or, as the case may be, the psychiatric nursing 
home and every such med ical officer in charge or licens ee shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
14. Treatment of out patients .—Provision shall be made in every psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home for such facilities as may be prescribed for the treatment of every mentally ill person, 
whose condition does not warrant his admission as an inpatient or who, for the time being, is not 
undergoing treatment as inpatient.  
CHAPTER  IV 
ADMISSION AND DET ENTION IN PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL, OR PSYCHIATRIC NURSING HOME  
PART I 
Admission on voluntary basis  
15. Request by major for admission as voluntary patient .—Any person (not being a minor), who 
considers himself to be a mentally ill person and desires to be admitted to any psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home for treatment, may  request the medical officer in charge for being admitted as a 
voluntary patient.  
16. Request by guardian for admission of a ward .—Where the guardian of a minor considers such 
minor to be a mentally ill person and desires to admit such minor in any psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home for treatment, he m ay request the medical officer in charge for admitting such 
minor as a voluntary patient.  
17. Admission of, and regulation with respect to, voluntary patients .—(1) On receipt of a request 
under section 15 or section 16, the medical officer in charge shall make such inquiry as he may deem fit  
within a period not exceeding twenty -four hours and if satisfied that the applicant or, as the case may be, 
the minor requires treatment as an inpatient in the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, he 
may admit therein such applicant or, as th e case may be, minor as a voluntary patient.  
(2) Every voluntary patient admitted to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home shall be 
bound to abide by such regulations as may  be made by the medical officer in charge or the licen see of the 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home.   12 
 18. Discharge of voluntary patients .—(1) The medical officer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home shall, on a  request made in that behalf, — 
(a) by any voluntary patient; and  
(b) by the guardian of the patient, if h e is a minor voluntary patient,  
discharge, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) and within twenty -four hours of the receipt of such 
request, the patient from the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home.  
(2) Where a minor voluntary patient who is admitted as an inpatient in any psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home attain s majority, the medical officer in charge of such hospital or nursing home 
shall, as soon as may be, intimate the patient that  he has attained majority and that unless a request for his 
continuance as an inpatient is made by him within a period of one month of such intimation, he shall be 
discharged, and if, before the expiry of the said period, not request is made to the medical   
officer in charge for his continuance as an inpatient, he shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), 
be discharged on the expiry of the said period.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), where the medical  
officer -in-charge of a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home is satisfied that the discharge of a 
voluntary patient under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) will not be in the interest of such voluntary 
patient, he shall, within seventy -two hou rs of the receipt of a request under sub -section ( 1), or, if no 
request under sub -section ( 2) has been made by the voluntary patient before the expiry of the period 
mentioned in that sub -section, within seventy -two hours of such expiry constitute a Board c onsisting of 
two medical officers and seek its opinion as to whether such voluntary patient needs further treatment and 
if the Board is of the opinion that such voluntary patient needs further treatment in the psychiatric hospital 
or psychiatric nursing ho me, the medical officer shall not discharge the voluntary patient, but continue his 
treatment for a period not exceeding ninety days at a time.  
PART II 
Admission under special circumstances  
19. Admission of mentally ill persons under certain special circumstances .—(1) Any mentally ill 
person who does not, or is unable to, express his willingness for admission as a voluntary patient, may be 
admitted and kept as an inpatient in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home on an application 
made in  that behalf by a relative or a friend of the mentally il l person if the medical officer in charge is 
satisfied that in the interest s of the mentally ill person it is necessary so to do:  
Provided that no person so admitted as an inpatient shall be kept in the psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home as an inpatient for a period exceeding ninety days except in accordance with the 
other provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in the prescribed form and be accompani ed by 
two medical certificates, from two medical practitioners of whom one shall be a medical practitioner in 
the service of Government, to the effect that the condition of such mentally ill person is such that he 
should be kept under obs ervation and treat ment as an in patient in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home:  
Provided that the medical officer, in charge of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home 
concerned may, if satisfied that it is proper so to do, cause a mentally ill pe rson to be examined by two 
medical practitioners working in the hospital or in the nursing home instead of requiring such certificates.  
(3) Any mentally ill person admitted under sub -section ( 1) or his relative or friend may apply to the 
Magistrate for his  discharge and the Magistrate may, after giving notice to the person at whose instance 
he was admitted to the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home and after making such inquiry as 
he may deem fit either allow or dismiss the application.  
(4) The  provisions of the foregoing sub -section shall be without prejudice to the power s exercisable 
by a Magistrate before whom the case of a mentally ill person is brought, whether under this section or 
under any other provision of this Act, to pass a reception  order, if he is satisfied that it is necessary so to 
do in accordance with the relevant provisions of this Act.   13 
 PART III 
Reception orders  
A.—Reception orders on applications  
20. Application for reception order .—(1) An application for a reception order may be made by — 
(a) the medical officer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, or  
(b) by the husband, wife or any other relative of the mentally ill person.  
(2) Where a medical officer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in which a 
mentally ill person is undergoing treatment under a temporary tre atment order is satisfied that — 
(a) the mentally ill person is suffering from mental disorder of such a nature and degree that his 
treatment in the psychiatric hospital or, as the case may be, psychiatric nursing home is required to be 
continued for more than six months, or  
(b) it is necessary in the interests of the health and personal safety of the mentally ill person or 
for the protection of others  that such person shall be detained in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home,  
he may make an application to the Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the psychiatric 
hospital or, as the case may be, psychiatric nursing home is situated, for the detention of such mentally ill 
person under a reception order in such psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, as the case may 
be. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), the husband or wife of a person who is allege d to be 
mentally ill or, where there is no husband or wife, or where the husband or wife is prevented by reason of 
any illness or absence from India or otherwise from making the application, any other relative of such 
person may make an application to the Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the said 
person ordinarily resides, for the detention of the alleged mentally ill person under a reception order in a 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home.  
(4) Where the husband or wife o f the alleged mentally ill person is not the applicant, the application 
shall contain the reasons for the application not being made by the husband or wife and shall indicate the 
relationship of the applicant with the alleged mentally ill person and the ci rcumstances under which the 
application is being made.  
(5) No person, — 
(i) who is a minor, or  
(ii) who, within fourteen days before the date of the application, has not seen the alleged mentally 
ill person,  
shall make an application under this section.  
(6) Every application under sub -section ( 3) shall be made in the prescribed form and shall be signed 
and verified in the prescribed manner and shall state whether any previous application had been made for 
inquiry into the mental condition of the alleged ment ally ill person and shall be accompanied by two 
medical certificates from two medical practitioners of whom one shall be a medical practitioner in the 
service of Government.  
21. Form and contents of medical certificates .—Every  medical certificate referred to in  
sub-section ( 6) of section  20 shall contain a statement, — 
(a) that each of the medical practitioners referred to in that sub -section has independently 
examined the alleged mentally ill person and has formed his opinion on the basis of his own 
observations and from the particulars communicated to him; and  
(b) that in the opinion of each such medical practitioner the alleged mentally ill person is 
suffering from mental disorder of such a nature and degree as to warrant the  detention of such person 14 
 in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home and that such detention is necessary in the 
interests of the health and personal safety of that person or for the protection of others.  
22. Procedure upon application for recep tion order .—(1) On receipt of an application under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 20, the Magistrate may make a reception order, if he is satisfied that — 
(i) the mentally ill person is suffering from mental disorder of such a nature and degree that it is 
necessary to  detain him in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home for treatment; or  
(ii) it is necessary in the interests of the health and personal safety of the mentally ill person or for 
the protection of others that he should be so detained , and a temporary treatment order would not be 
adequate in the circumstances of the case and it is necessary to make a reception order.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 3) of section 20, the Magistrate shall consider the 
statements made in the application and the evidence of mental illness as disclosed by the medical 
certificates.  
(3) If the Magistrate considers that there are sufficient grounds for preceding further, he shall 
personally examine the alleged mentally ill person unless, for  reasons to be recorded in writing, he thinks 
that it is not necessary or expedient to do so.  
(4) If the Magistrate is satisfied that a reception order may properly be made forthwith, he may make 
such order, and if the Magistrate is not so satisfied, he shall fix a date for further consideration of the 
application and may make such inquiries concerning the alleged mentally ill person as he thinks fit.  
(5) The notice of the date fixed under sub -section ( 4) shall be given to the applicant and to any other 
person to whom, in the opinion of the Magistrate, such notice shall be given.  
(6) If the Magistrate fixes a date under sub -section ( 4) for further consideration of the application, he 
may make su ch order as he thinks fit, for he proper care and custody of t he alleged mentally ill person 
pending disposal of the application.  
(7) On the date fixed under sub -section ( 4), or on such further date as may be fixed by the Magistrate, 
he shall proceed to consider the application  in camera , in the presence of — 
(i) the applicant;  
(ii) the alleged mentally ill person (unless the Magistrate in his discretion otherwise directs);  
(iii) the person who may be appointed by the alleged mentally ill person to represent him; and  
(iv) such other person as the Magistrate thinks fit , 
and if the Magistrate is satisfied that the alleged mentally ill person, in relation to whom the application is 
made, is so mentally ill that in the interests of the health and personal safet y of that person or for the 
protection of others it is necessary to detain him in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home for 
treatment, he may pass a reception order for that purpose and if he is not so satisfied, he shall dismiss the 
applicati on and any such order may provide for the payment of the costs of the inquiry by the applicant 
personally or from out of the estate of the mentally  ill person, as the Magistrate may deem appropriate.  
(8) If any application is dismissed under sub -section ( 7), the Magistrate shall record the reasons for 
such dismissal and a copy of the order shall be furnished to the applicant.  
B.—Reception orders on production of mentally ill persons before Magistrate  
23. Powers and duties of police officers in respect of certain mentally ill persons .—(1) Every  
officer in charge of a police station, — 
(a) may take or cause to be taken into protection any person found wandering at large within the 
limits of his  station whom he has reason to believe to be so mentally ill as to be incapable of taking 
care of himself, and  
(b) shall take or cause to be taken into protection any person within the limits of his station whom 
he has  reason to believe to be dangerous by reason of mental illness.  15 
 (2) No person taken into protection under sub -section ( 1) shall be detained by the police without 
being informed, as soon as may be, of the grounds for taking him into such protection, or where, in the 
opinion of the officer taking the person into protection, such person is not capable of un derstanding those 
grounds, without his relatives or friends, if any , being informed of such grounds.  
(3) Every person who is taken into protection and detained under this section shall be produced before 
the nearest Magistrate within a period of twenty -four hours of taking him into such protection excluding 
the time necessary for the journey from the place where he was taken into such protection to the Court of 
the Magistrate and shall not be detained beyond the said period without the authority of the Magi strate.  
24. Procedure on production of mentally ill person .—(1) If a person is produced before a 
Magistrate under sub -section ( 3) of section 23, and if, in his opinion, there are sufficient grounds for 
proceeding furt her, the Magistrate shall — 
(a) examine  the person to assess his capacity to understand,  
(b) cause him to be examined by a medical officer, and  
(c) make such inquiries in relation to such person as he may deem necessary.  
(2) After the completion of the proceedings under sub -section ( 1), the Mag istrate may pass a 
reception order authorising the detention of the said person as an inpatient in a psychiatric hospita l or 
psychiatric nursing home, — 
(a) if the medical officer certifies such person to be a mentally ill person, and  
(b) if the Magistrate is satisfied that the said person is a mentally ill person and that in the 
interests of the   health and personal safety of that person o r for the protection of others, it is necessary 
to pass such order:  
Provided that if any relative or friend of the mentally ill person desires that the mentally ill person be 
sent to any particular licen sed psychiatric hospital or licen sed psychiat ric nursing home for treatment 
therein and undertakes in writing to the sati sfaction of the Magistrate to pay the cost of maintenance of 
the mentally ill person in such hospital or nursing home, the Magistrat e shall, if the medical officer  
in charge of such hospital or nursing home consents, make a reception order for the admissi on of the 
mentally  ill person into that hospital or nursing home and detention therein:  
Provided further that if any relative or friend of the mentally ill person enters into a bond, with or 
without sureties for such amount as the Magistrate may determine,  undertaking that such mentally ill 
person will be properly taken care of and shall be prevented from doing any injury to himself or to others, 
the Magistrate may, instead of making a reception order, hand him over to the care of such relative or 
friend.  
25. Order in case of mentally ill person cruelly treated or not under proper care and control .—
(1) Every officer in charge of a police station, who has reason to believe that any person within the limits 
of his station is mentally ill and is not under prope r care and control, or is ill -treated or neglected by any 
relative or other person having charge of such mentally ill person, shall forthwith report the fact to the 
Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the mentally ill person resides.  
(2) Any private person who has reason to believe that any person is mentally ill and is not under 
proper care and control, or is ill -treated or neglected by any relative or other person having charge of such 
mentally  ill person, may report the fact to the M agistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
mentally ill person resides.  
(3) If it appears to the Magistrate, on the report of a police officer or on the report or information 
derived from any other person, or otherwise that any mentally il l person within the local limits of his 
jurisdiction is not under proper care and control, or is ill -treated or neglected by any relative or other 
person having the charge of such mentally ill person, the Magistrate may cause the mentally ill person to 
be produced before him, and summon such relative or other person who is, or who ought to be in charge 
of, such mentally ill person.   16 
 (4) If such relative or any other person is legally bound to maintain the mentally ill person, the 
Magistrate may, by order, require the relative or the other person to  take proper care of such mentally ill 
person and where su ch relative or other person wil fully neglects to comply with the said order, he shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees . 
(5) If there is no person legally bound to maintain the mentally ill person, or if the person legally 
bound to maintain the mentally ill person refuses or neglects to maintain such person, or if, for any other 
reason, the Magistrate thinks fit so to do, he may  cause the mentally ill person to be produced before him 
and, without prejudice to any action that may be taken under sub -section ( 4), proceed in the manner 
provided in section 24 as if such person had been produced before him under sub -section ( 3) of  
section 23.  
C.—Further provisions regarding admission and detention of certain mentally ill persons  
26. Admission as inpatient after inquisition .—If any District Court holding an inquisition under 
Chapter VI regarding any person who is found to be mentally ill is of opinion that it is necessary so to do 
in the interests of such person, it may, by order, direct that such person shall be admitted and kept as an 
inpatient in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home and every such order may be varied f rom 
time to time or revoked by the District Court.  
27. Admission and detention of mentally ill prisoner .—An order under section 30 of the Prisoners 
Act, 1900 (3 of 1900) , or under section 144 of the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), or under section 145 
of the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or under section 143 or section 144 of the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 
1957), or under section 330 or section 335 of the Co de of Criminal Proce dure, 1973 (2 of 1974), directing 
the reception of a mentally ill prisoner into any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, shall be 
sufficient authority for the admission of such person in such hospital or, as the case may be, such nursing 
home or any other psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home to which such person may be lawfully 
transferred for detention therein.  
28. Detention of alleged mentally ill person pending report by medical officer .—(1) When any 
person alleged to be a mentally ill person appears or is brought before a Magistrate under section 23 or 
section 25, the Magistrate may, by order in writing, authorise the detention of the alleged mentally ill 
person under proper medical custody  in an observation ward of a general hospital or general nursing 
home or psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home or in any other suitable place for such period not 
exceeding ten days as the Magistrate may consider necessary for enabling any medica l officer to 
determine whether a medical certificate in respect of that alleged mentally ill person may properly be 
given under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 24.  
(2) The Magistrate may, from time to time, for the purpose mentioned in sub -section  (1), by order in 
writing, authorise such further detention of the alleged mentally ill person for periods not exceeding ten 
days at a time as he may deem necessary:  
Provided that no person shall be authorised to be detained under this sub -section for a co ntinuous 
period exceeding thirty days in the aggregate.  
29. Detention of mentally ill person pending his removal to psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home .—Whenever any reception order is made by a Magistrate under section 22, section 24 or 
section 25, he may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct that the mentally ill person in respect of 
whom the order is made may be detained for such period not exceeding thirty days in such place as he 
may deem appropriate, pending the removal of s uch person to a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home.  
D.—Miscellaneous provisions in relation to orders under this Chapter  
30. Time and manner of medical examination of mentally ill person .—Where any order under this 
Chapter is required to be made on the basis of a medical certificate, such order shall not be made unless 
the person who has signed the medical certificate, or where such order is required to be made on the basis 17 
 of two medical c ertificates, the signatory of the respective certificates, has certified that he has personally 
examined th e alleged mentally , ill person, — 
(i) in the case of an order made on an application, not earlier than ten clear days immediately 
before the date on which such application is made; and  
(ii) in any other case, not earlier than ten clear days immediately before the date of such order:  
Provided that where a reception order is required to be made on the basis of two medical certificates 
such order shall  not be made unless the certificates show that the signatory of each certificate examined 
the alleged mentally ill person independently of the signatory of the other certificate.  
31. Authority for reception order .—A reception order made under this Chapter  shall be sufficient 
authority — 
(i) for the applicant or any person authorised by him, or  
(ii) in the case of a reception order made otherwise than on an application, for the person 
authorised so to do  by the authority making the order,  
to take the mentally  ill person to the place mentioned in such order or for his admission and treatment as 
an inpatient in the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home specified in the order or, as the case 
may be, for his admission and detention therein, or in any ps ychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home to which he may be removed in accordance with the provisions of th is Act, an d the medical officer 
in charge shall be bound to comply with such order:  
Provided that in any  case where the medical officer in charge finds accommodation in the psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home inadequate, he shall, after according admission, intimate that fact to 
the Magistrate or the District Court w hich passed the order and there upon the Magistrate or the District 
Court, as the case may be, shall pass such order as he or it may deem fit:  
Provided further that every reception or der shall cease to have effect — 
(a) on the expiry of thirty days from the date on which it was made, unless within that period, the 
mentally ill  person has been admitted to the place mentioned therein, and  
(b) on the discharge, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, of the mentally ill  person.  
32. Copy of reception order t o be sent to medical officer in charge .—Every Magistrate or District 
Court making a reception order shall f orthwith send a certified copy t hereof together with copies of the 
requisite medical certificates and the statement of par ticulars to the medical officer in charge of the 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home to which the mentally ill person is to be admitted.  
33. Restriction as to  psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric  nursing homes into which reception 
order may direct admission .—No Magistrate or District Court shall pass a reception order for the 
admission as an inpatient to, or for the detention of any mentally ill person in, any psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home outside the St ate in which the Magistrate or the District Court exercises 
jurisdiction:  
Provided that an order for admission or detention into or in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home situated in any other State may by passed if the State Government has,  by general or special 
order and after obtaining the consent of the Government of such other State, authorised the Magistrate or 
the District Court in that behalf.  
34. Amendment of order or document .—If, after the admission of any mentally ill person to any 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home under a reception order, it appears that the order under 
which he was admitted or detained or any of the documents on the basis of which such order was made is 
defective or incorrect, the same may, at an y time thereafter, be amended with the permission of the 
Magistrate or the District Court, by the person or persons who signed the same and upon such amendment 
being made, the order shall have effect and shall be deemed always to have had effect as if it h ad been 
originally made as so amended, or, as the case  may be, the documents upon which it was made had been 
originally furnished as so amended.  18 
 35. Power to appoint substitute for person upon whose application reception order has been 
made .—(1) Subject to  the provisions of this section the Magistrate may, by order in writing (hereinafter 
referred to as the order of substitution), transfer the duties and responsibilities under this Act, of the 
person on whose application a reception order was made, to any o ther person who is willing to undertake 
the sa me and such other person shall t hereupon be deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the person on 
whose application the reception order was made and all references in this Act to the latter person shall be 
construed accordingly:  
Provided that no such order of substitution shall absolve the person upon whose application the 
reception order was made or, if he is dead, his legal representatives, from any liability incurred before the 
date of the order of substitu tion. 
(2) Before making any order of substitution, the Magistrate shall send a notice to the person on whose 
application the reception order was made, if he is alive, and to any relative of the mentally  ill person who, 
in the opinion of the Magistrate, sha ll have notice.  
(3) The notice under sub -section ( 2) shall specify the name of the person in whose favour it is 
proposed to make the order of substitution and the date (which shall be not less than twenty days from the 
date of issue of the notice) on which  objections, if any, to the making of such order shall be considered.  
(4) On the date specified under sub -section ( 3), or on any subsequent date to which the proceedings 
may be adjourned, the Magistrate shall consider any objection made by any person to wh om notice was 
sent, or by any other relative of the mentally ill person, and shall receive all such evidence as may be 
produced by or on behalf of any such person or relative and after making such inquiry as the Magistrate 
may deem fit, make or refrain fro m making the order of substitution:  
Provided that, if the person on whose application the reception order was made is dead and any other 
person is willing and is, in the opinion of the Magistrate, fit to undertake the duties and responsibilities 
under this  Act of the former person, the Magistrate shall, subject to the provisions contained in the 
proviso to sub -section ( 1), make an order to that effect.  
(5) In making any substitution order under this section, the Magistrate shall give preference to the 
perso n who is the nearest relative of the mentally ill person, unless, for reasons to be recorded in writing 
the Magistrate considers that giving such preference will not be in the interests of the mentally ill person.  
(6) The Magistrate may make such order for the payment of the costs of an inquiry under this section 
by any person or from out of the estate of the mentally ill person as he thinks fit.  
(7) Any notice under sub -section ( 2) may be sent by post to the last known address of the person for 
whom it is intended.  
36. Officers competent to exercise powers and discharge functions of Magistrate under certain 
sections .—In any area where a Commissioner of Police has been appointed , all the powers and functions 
of the Magistrate under sections 23, 24, 25 and 28 may be exercised or discharged by the Commissioner 
of Police and all the functions of an officer in charge of a police station under this Act may be discharged 
by any police officer not below the rank of an Inspe ctor. 
CHAPTER  V 
INSPECTION, DISCHARGE, LEAVE OF ABSENCE AND REMOVAL OF MENTALLY ILL PERSONS  
PART I 
Inspection  
37. Appointment of Visitors .—(1) The State Government or the Central Government, as the case 
may be, shall appoint for every psychiatric hospital and every psychiatric nursing home, not less than  
five Visitors, of whom at least one shall be a medical officer , preferably a psychiatrist and two social 
work ers. 
(2) The head of the Medical Services of the State or his nominee preferably a psychiatrist shall be  
an ex officio  Visitor of all the psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric nursing homes in the State.  19 
 (3) The qualifications of person s to be appointed as Visitors under sub -section ( 1) and the terms and 
conditions of their appointment shall be such as may be prescribed.  
38. Monthly inspection by Visitors .—Not less than three Visitors shall, at least once in every 
month, make a joint inspection of every part of the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in 
respect of which they have been appointed and examine every minor admitted as a voluntary patient 
under section 17 and, as far as circumstances will permit, every other men tally ill person admi tted therein 
and the order for t he admission of, and the medical certificates relating to, every mentally ill person 
admitted subsequent to the joint inspection immediately preceding, and shall enter in a book kept for that 
purpose suc h remarks as they deem appropriate in regard to the management and condition of such 
hospita l or nursing home and of the in patients thereof:  
Provided that the Visitors shall not be entitled to inspect any personal records of an inpatient which in 
the opini on of the medical officer in charge are confidential in nature:  
Provided further that if any of the Visitors does not participate in the joint inspection of the 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in respect of which he was appointed a Visitor  for three 
consecutive months, he shall cease to hold office as such Visitor.  
39. Inspection of mentally ill prisoners .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 38, 
where any person is detained under the provisions of section 144 of the Air Force Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), 
or section 145 of the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), or section 143 or section 144 of the Navy Act, 1957 
(62 of 1957), or section 330 or section 335 of the Code of Crimina l Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), — 
(i) the Inspector -General of Prisons, where such person is detained in a jail; and  
(ii) all or any three of the Visitors including at least one social worker appointed under  
sub-section ( 1) of   section 37, where such person is detained in a psychiatric hospital  or psychiatric 
nursing home,  
shall once in every three months, visit such person at the place where he is detained, in order to assess the 
state of mind of such person and make a report thereon to the authority under whose order such person is 
so detained . 
(2) The State Government may empower any of its officers to discharge all or any of the functions of 
the Inspector -General of Prisons under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The medical officer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home wherein a ny 
person referred to in sub -section ( 1) is detained , shall once in every six months, make a special report 
regarding the mental and physical condition of such person to the authority under whose or der such 
person is detained.  
(4) Every person who is detai ned in jail under the provisions of various Acts referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) shall be visited at least once in every three months by a psychiatrist, or, where a 
psychiatrist is not available, by a medical officer empowered by the State Government in this behalf and 
such psychiatrist or, as the case may be, such medical officer shall make a special report regarding the 
mental and physical condition of such person to the authority under whose order such person is detained.  
PART II 
Discharge  
40. Order of  discharge by medical officer in charge .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
Chapter IV, the medical officer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home may, on 
the recommendation of two medical practitioners  one of whom shall pre ferably by  a psychiatrist, by order 
in writing, direct the discharge of any person, other than a volu ntary patient detained or under going 
treatment therein as an in patient, and such person shall thereupon be discharged from the psychiatric 
hospital or psyc hiatric nursing home:  
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made in respect of a mentally ill prisoner 
otherwise than as provided in section 30 of the Prisoners Act, 1990 (3 of 1990) or in any other relevant 
law.  20 
 (2) Where any order of di scharge is made under sub -section ( 1) in respect of a person who has been 
detained o r is undergoing treatment as in patient in pursuance of an order of any authority, a copy of such 
order shall be immediately forwarded to that authority by the medical officer in charge.  
41. Discharge of mentally ill persons on application .—Any person detained in psychiatric hospital 
or psychiatric nursing home under an order made in pursuance of an application made under this Act, 
shall be discharged on an application made in tha t behalf to the medical officer in charge by the person on 
whose application the order was made:  
Provided that no person shall be discharged under this section if the medical  officer in charge certifies 
in writing that the person is dangerous an d unfit to be at large.  
42. Order of discharge on the undertaking of relatives or friends, etc., for due care of mentally 
ill person .—(1) Where any relative or friend of a mentally ill person detained in a psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home under section 22, section 24 or section 25 desires that such person shall be 
delivered over to his care and custody, he may make an app lication to the medical officer in charge who 
shall forward it together with his remarks thereon to the authority under t hose orders the mentally ill 
person is detained.  
(2) Where an application is received under sub -section ( 1), the authority shall, on such relative or 
friend furnishing a bond, with or without sureties, for such amount as such authority may specify in this 
behalf , undertaking to take proper care of such mentally ill person, and ensuring that the mentally ill 
person shall be prevented from causing injury to himself or to others, make an order of discharge and 
thereupon the mentally ill person shall be dischar ged. 
43. Discharge of person on his request .—(1) Any person (not being a mentally ill prisoner) detained 
in pursuance of an order made under this Act who feels that he has recovered from his mental illness, may 
make an application to the Magistrate, where necessary under the provisions of this Act, for his discharge 
from the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home.  
(2) An application made under sub -section ( 1) shall be supported by a certificate either from the 
medical officer in charge of the psyc hiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home where the applicant is 
undergoing treatment or from a psychiatrist.  
(3) The Magistrate may, after making such inquiry as he may deem fit, pas s an order discharging the 
person or dismissing the application.  
44. Discharge of person subsequently found on inquisition to be of sound mind .—If any person 
detained in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home in pursuance of a reception order made 
under this Act is subsequently found, on an inquisition held in a ccordance with the provisions of  
Chapter VI, to be of sound mind or capable of taking care of himself and ma naging his affairs, the 
medical officer in charge shall forthwith, on the production of a copy of such finding duly certified by the 
District Court , discharge such person from such hospital or nursing home.  
PART III 
Leave of absence  
45. Leave of absence .—(1) An application for leave of absence on behalf of any mentally ill person 
(not being a mentally ill prisoner) undergoing treatment as an inpatient in any psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home may be made to t he medical officer in charge, — 
(a) in the case of a person who was admitted on the application of the husband o r wife, by the 
husband or wife  of such mentally ill person, or where by reason of mental or physical illness, abs ence 
from India or  otherwise, the husband or wife is not in a position to make such application, by any 
other relative of the  mentally ill person duly authorised by the husband or wife, or  
(b) in the case o f any other person, by the person on whose application the mentally ill person 
was admitted:  
Provided that no application under this sub -section shall be made by a person who has not attained the 
age of majority.  21 
 (2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by a bond , with or without sureties 
for suc h amount as the medical officer in charge may specify, undertaking — 
(i) to take proper care of the mentally ill person,  
(ii) to prevent the mentally ill person from causing injury to himself or to others, and  
(iii) to bring back the mentally ill person to the psychiatric hospital or, as the case may be, 
psychiatric nursing home, on the expiry of the period of leave.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the medical officer in charge may grant leave 
of absence to the mentally ill person for suc h period as the medical officer in charge may deem necessary 
and subject to such conditions as may, in the interests of the health and personal safety of the ment ally ill 
person or for the protection of others, be specified in the order:  
Provided that the total number of days for which leave of absence may be granted to a patient under 
this sub -section shall not exceed sixty days.  
(4) Where the mentally ill person is not brought back to the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home on the expiry of the leave granted to him under th is section, the medical officer in charge shall 
forthwith report that fact to the Magistrate within the local limits of whose juri sdiction such hospital or 
nursing home is situate and the Magistrate may, after making such inquiry as he may deem fit, make an 
order directing him to be brought back to the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home, as the case 
may be.  
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to a voluntary patient referred to in section 15 or 
section 16 and the provisions of section 18 shall apply to him.  
46. Grant of leave of absence by magistrate .—(1) Where the medical officer in charge refuses to 
grant leave of absence to a mentally ill person under section 45, the applicant may apply to the Magistrate 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home wherein 
the mentally ill person is detained is situate,  for the grant of leave of absence to the mentally ill person 
and the Magistrate may, if he is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, and on the applicant entering into a 
bond in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2), by order, grant leave of  absence to the mentally 
ill person for such period and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Every bond referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be with or without sureties and for such amount as 
the Magistrate may decide and shall contain the undertaking referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 45.  
(3) The Magistrate shall forward a copy of h is order to the medical officer in charge and on receipt of  
such order the medical officer in charge shall entrust the mentally ill person to the person on whose 
application the leave of absence was granted under this section.  
PART IV 
Removal  
47. Removal of mentally ill person from one psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home to 
any other psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home .—(1) Any mentally ill person other than a 
voluntary patient referred to in section 15 or section 16 may, subject to any general or special order of the 
State Government, be removed from any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home to any other 
psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home within the State, or to any other psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home in any other State with the consent of the Government of that other State:  
Provided that no mentally ill person admitted to a ps ychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home 
under an order made in pursuance of an application made under this Act shall be so removed unless 
intimation thereof has been given to the applicant.  
(2) The State Government may make such general or special o rder as it thinks fit directing the 
removal of any mentally ill prisoner from the place where he is for the time being detained, to any 
psychiatric hospital, psychiatric nursing home, jail or other place of safe custody in the State or to any 
psychiatric h ospital, psychiatric nursing home, jail or other place of safe custody in any other State with 
the consent of the Government of that other State.  22 
 48. Admission, detention and retaking in certain cases .—Every person brought into a psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home under any order made under this Act, may be detained or , as the case 
may be, admitted as an inpatient therein until he is removed or is discharged under any law, and in case of 
his escape from such hospital or nursing home he may, by virtue of such order, be retaken by any police 
officer or by the medical officer in charge or any officer or servant of such hospital or nursing home, or 
by any other person authorised in that behalf by the medical officer in charge, and conveyed to, an d 
received and detained or, as the case may be, kept as an inpatient in such hospital or nursing home:  
Provided that in the case of a mentally ill person (not being a mentally ill prisoner) the power to 
retake as aforesaid under this section shall not be e xercisable after the expiry of a period of one month 
from the date of his escape.  
49. Appeal from orders of Magistrate .—Any person aggrieved by any order of a Magistrate, passed 
under any of the foregoing provisions may, within sixty days from the date of the order, appeal against 
that order to the District Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the M agistrate exercised the 
powers and the decision of the District Court on such appeal shall be final.  
CHAPTER  VI 
JUDICIAL INQUISITION REGARDING ALLEGED MENTALLY ILL PERSON POSSESSING PROPERTY,  CUSTODY OF 
HIS PERSON AND MANAGEMENT OF HIS PROPERTY  
50. Application for judicial inquisition .—(1) Where an alleged mentally ill person is possessed of 
property, an application for holding an inquisition into the mental condition of such person may be made 
either — 
(a) by any of his relatives, or  
(b) by a public curator appointed under the Indian Succe ssion Act, 1925 (39 of 1925), or  
(c) by the Advocate -General of the State in which the alleged mentally  ill person resides, or  
(d) where the property of the alleged mentally ill person comprises land or interest in land, or 
where the property or part thereof is of such a nature as can lawfully be entrusted for management to 
a Court of Wards established under any law for the time being in force in the State, by the Collector 
of the District in which such land is situate,  
to the District Court within the  local limits of whose jurisdiction the alleged mentally ill person resides.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the District Court shall, by personal service or 
by such other mode of service as it may deem fit, serve a notice on the al leged mentally ill person to 
attend at such place and at such time as may be specified in the notice or shall , in like manner, serve a 
notice on the person having the custody of the alleged mentally ill person to produce such person at the 
said place and a t the said time, for being examined by the District Court or by any other person from 
whom the District Court may call for a report concerning the mentally ill person:  
Provided that, if the alleged mentally ill person is a woman, who according to the custo m prevailing 
in the area where she resides or according to the religion to which she belongs, ought not to be compelled 
to appear in public, the District Court may cause her to be examined by issuing a commission as provided 
in the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908 (5 of 1908).  
(3) A copy of the notice under sub -section ( 2) shall also be served upon the applicant and upon any 
relative of the alleged mentally ill person or other person who, in the opinion of the District Court, shall 
have notice of judicial inquisition to be held by it.  
(4) For the purpose of holding the inquisition applied for, the District Court may appoint two or more 
persons to act as assessors.  
51. Issues on which finding should be given by District Court after inquisition .—On completion  
of the inquisition, the District Court  shall record its findings on, — 
(i) whether the alleged mentally ill person is in fact mentally ill or not, and  23 
 (ii) where  such person is mentally ill, whether he is incapable of taking care of himself and of 
managing his property, or incapable of managing his property only.  
52. Provision for appointing guardian of mentally ill person and for manager of property .—(1) 
Where the District Court records a finding that the alleged mentally ill person is in fact mentally ill and is 
incapable of taking care of himself and of managing his property, it shall make an order for the 
appointment of a guardian under section 53 to take car e of his person and of a manager under section 54 
for the management of his property.  
(2) Where the District Court records a finding that the alleged mentally ill person is in fact mentally 
ill and is incapable of managing his property but capable of takin g care of himself, it shall make an order 
under section 54 regarding the management of his property.  
(3) Where the District Court records a finding that the alleged mentally ill person is not mentally ill, it 
shall dismiss the application.  
(4) Where the Di strict Court deems fit, it may appoint under sub -section ( 1) the same person to be the 
guardian and manager.  
53. Appointment of guardian of mentally ill person .—(1) Where the mentally ill person is 
incapable of taking care of himself, the District Court or, wh ere a direction has been issued  
under sub-section ( 2) of section 54, the Collector of the District, may appoint any suitable person to be his 
guardian.  
(2) In the discharge of his functions under sub -section ( 1), the Collector shall be subject to the  
supervision and control of the State Government or of any authority appointed by it in that behalf.  
54. Appointment of manager for management of property of mentally ill person .—(1) Where the 
property of the mentally ill person who is incapable of managin g it is such as can be taken charge of by a 
Court of Wards under any law for the time being in force, the District Court shall authorise the Court of 
Wards to take charge of such property, and thereupon notwithstanding anything contained in such law, 
the C ourt of Wards shall assume the management of such property in accordance with that law.  
(2) Where the property of t he mentally ill person consists in whole or in part of land or of an y interest 
in land which cannot be taken charge of by the Court of Wards, the District Court may, after obtaining the 
consent of the Collector of the District in which the land is situated, direct the Collector to take charge of 
the person and such part of the property or interest therein of mentally ill person as cannot b e taken 
charge of by the Court of Wards. 
(3) where the management of the property of the mentally ill person cannot be entrusted to the Court 
of Wards or to the Collector under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be, the District 
Court shal l appoint any suitable person to be the manager of such property.  
55. Appointment of manager by Collector .—Where the property of a mentally ill person has been 
entrusted to the Collector by the District Court under sub -section ( 2) of section 54, he may, subject to the 
control of the State Government or of any authority appointed by it in that behalf, appoint any suitable 
person for the management of the property of the mentally ill person.  
56. Manager of property to execute bond .—Every person who is appoi nted as the manager of the 
property of a mentally ill person by the District Court or by the Collector shall, i f so required by the 
appointing authority, enter into a bond for such sum, in such form and with such sureties as that authority, 
may specify, to account for all receipts from the property of the mentally ill person.  
57. Appointment and remuneration of guar dians and managers .—(1) No person, who is the legal 
heir or a mentally ill person shall be appointed under section 53, 54 or 55 to be the guardian of such 
mentally ill person or, as the case ma y be, the manager of his propert y unless the District Court or,  as the 
case may be, the Collector, for reasons to be recorded in writing, considers that such appointment is for 
the benefit of the mentally ill person.  
(2) The guardian of a mentally ill person or the manager of his property or both appointed under  
this Act shall be paid, from out of the property of the mentally ill person, such allowance as the 
appointing authority may determine.  24 
 58. Duties of guardian and manager .—(1) Every person appointed as a guardian of a mentally ill 
person or manager of his property, or of both, under this Act shall have the care of the mentally ill person 
or his property, or of both and be responsible for the maintenance of the mentally  ill per son and of such 
members of his family as are dependent on him.  
(2) Where the person appointed as guardian of a mentally ill person is different from the person 
appointed as the manager of his property, the manager of his property shall pay to the guardian of the 
mentally ill person such allowance as may be fixed by the authority appointing the guardian for the 
maintenance of the mentally ill person and of such members of his family as are dependent on him.  
59. Powers of manager .—(1) Every manager appointed under this Act shall, subject to the 
provi sions of this Act, exercise the same powers in regard to the management of the property of the 
mentally ill person in respect of which he is appointed as manager, as the mentally ill person would have 
exercised as owner of the property had he not been mentally ill, and shall realise all claims due to the 
estate of the mentally ill person and pay all debts and discharge all liabilities legally due from that estate:  
Provided that the manager shall not mortgage, create  any charge on, or, transfer by sale, gift, 
exchange or otherwise, any immovable propert y of the mentally  ill pers on or lease out any such propert y 
for a period exceeding five years, unless he obtains the permission of the District Court in that behalf.  
(2) The District Court may, on an application made by the manager, grant him permission to 
mortgage, create a charge on, or, transfer by sale, gift, exchange or otherwise, any immovable property of 
the mentally ill person or to lease out any such property fo r a period exceeding five years, subject to such 
conditions or restrictions as that Court may think fit to impose.  
(3) The District Court shall cause notice of every application for permission to be served on any 
relative or friend of the mentally ill pers on and after considering objections, if any, received from the 
relative or friend and after makin g such inquiries as it may deem, necessary, grant or refuse permission 
having regard to the interests of the mentally ill person.  
60. Manager to furnish invent ory and annual accounts .—(1) Every manager appointed under this 
Act shall, within a period of six months from the date of his appointment, deliver to the authority, which 
appointed him, an inventory of the immovable property belonging to the mentally ill p erson and of all 
assets and other movable property received on behalf of the mentally  ill person, together with a statement 
of all claims due to and all debts and liabilities due by, such mentally ill person.  
(2) Every such manager shall also furnish to th e said appointing authority within a period of three 
months of the close of every financial year, an account of the property and assets in his charge, the sums 
received and disbursed on account of the mentally ill person and the balance remaining with him.  
61.Manager ’s power to execute conveyances under orders of District Court .—Every manager 
appointed under this Act, may in the name and on beha lf of the mentally ill person, — 
(a) execute  all such conveyances and instruments of transfers by way of sale, mortgage or 
otherwise of property of the mentally ill person as may be permitted by the District Court; and  
(b) subject to the orders of the District Court, exercise all powers vested in th at behalf in the 
mentally ill person, in his individual capacity or in his capacity as a trustee or as a guardian.  
62. Manager to perform contracts directed by District Court .—Where the mentally ill person had, 
before his mental illness contracted to sell or otherwise dispose of his propert y or any portion thereof, and 
if such contract is, in the opinion of the District Court, of such a nature as ought to be performed, the 
Distr ict Court may direct the manager appointed under this Act to perform such contract and to do such 
other acts in fulfil ment of the contract as the Court considers necessary and thereupon the manager shall 
be bound to act accordingly.  
63. Disposal of busines s premises .—Where a mentally ill person had been engaged in business 
before he became mentally  ill, the District Court may, if it appears to be for the benefit of the mentally ill 
person to dispose of his business premises, direct the manager appointed under this Act in relation to the 
property of such person , to sell and dispose of such premises and to apply the sale proceeds thereof in 25 
 such manner as the District Court may direct and thereupon the manager shall be bound to act 
accordingly.  
64. Manager may dispose of leases .—Where a mentally ill person is entitled to a lease or  
under lease, and it appears to the manager appointed under this Act in relation to the property of such 
person that it would be for the benefit of the mentally ill person to dispose o f such lease or under lease, 
such manager may, after obtaining the orders of the District Court, surrender, assign or otherwise  dispose 
of such lease or under lease to such person for such consideration and upon such terms and conditions as 
the Cour t may direct.  
65. Power to make order concerning any matter connected with mentally ill person .—The 
District Court may, on an application made to it by any person concerning any matter whatsoever 
connected with the mentally ill person or his property, make  such order, subject to the provisions of this 
Chapter, in relation to that matter as in the circumstances it thinks fit.  
66. Proceeding if accuracy of inventory or accounts is impugned .—If any relative of the mentally 
ill person or the Collector impugns, by a petition to the District Court, the accuracy of the inventory or 
statement referred to in sub -section ( 1), or, as the case may be, any annual account referred to in  
sub-section ( 2), of section 60, the Court may summon the manager and summarily inquire into the matter 
and make such order thereon as it thinks fit:  
Provided that the District Court may, in its discretion, refer such petition to any Court subordinate to 
it, or to the Collector in any case where the manager was appointed by the Collec tor and the petition is not 
presented by the Collector.  
67. Payment into public treasury and investment of proceeds of estate .—All sums received by a 
manager on account of any estate in excess of what may be required for the current expenses of the 
mentall y ill person or for the management of his property, shall be paid into the public treasury on 
account of the estate, and shall be invested from time to time in any of the securities specified in section 
20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), unless  the authority which appointed him for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, directs that, in the interests of the mentally ill person such sums be otherwise invested 
or applied.  
68. Relative may sue for account .—Any relative of a mentally ill person may, with the leave of the 
District Court, sue for an account from any manager appointed under this Act, or from any such person 
after his removal from office or trust, or from his legal representative in the case of his death, in respect of 
any property then o r formerly under his management or of any sums of money or other property received 
by him on account of such property.  
69. Removal of managers and guardians .—(1) The manager of the property of a mentally ill person 
may, for sufficient cause and for reasons  to be recorded in writing, be removed by the authority which 
appointed him and such authority may appoint a new manager in his place.  
(2) Any manager removed under sub -section ( 1) shall be bound to deliver the charge of all property of 
the mentally ill person to the new manager, and to account for all moneys received or disbursed by him.  
(3) The District Court may, for sufficient cause, remove any guardian of a mentally ill person and 
appoint in his place a new guardian.  
70. Dissolution and disposal of p roperty of partnership on a member becoming mentally ill .—
(1) Where a person, being a member of a partnership firm, is found to be mentally ill, the District Court 
may, on the application of any other partner for the dissolution of partnership or on the ap plication of any 
person who appears to that Court to be en titled to seek such dissolution, dissolve the partnership.  
(2) Upon the dissolution under sub -section ( 1), or otherwise, in due course of law, of a partnership 
firm to which that sub -section applies, the manager appointed under this Act may, in the name and on 
behalf of the mentally ill person, join with the other partners in disposing of the partnership property upon 
such terms, and shall do all such acts for carrying into effect the dissolut ion of the partnership, as the 
District Court may direct.   26 
 71. Power to apply property for maintenance of mentally ill person without appointing manager 
in certain cases .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions, the District Cour t 
may, instead of appointing a manager of the estate, order that in the case of cash, the cash and in the case 
of any other property the produce thereof, shall be reali sed and paid or delivered to such person as may be 
appointed by the District Court in th is behalf, to be applied for the maintenance of the mentally ill person 
and of such members of his family as are dependent on him.  
(2) A receipt given by the person appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be valid discharge to any 
person who pays money or delivers any property of the mentally ill person to the person so appointed.  
72. Power to order transfer of stock, securities or shares belonging to mentally ill person in 
certain cases .—Where any stock or Government securities or any share in a company (t ransferable 
within India or the dividends of which are payable therein) is or are standing in the name of, or vested in, 
a mentally ill person beneficially entitled thereto, or in the manager appointed under this Act or in a 
trustee for him, and the manage r dies intestate, or  himself becomes mentally ill or is out of the jurisdiction 
of the District Court, or it is uncertain whether the manager is living or dead, or he neglects or refuses to 
transfer the stock, securities or shares, or to receive and pay over thereof the dividends to a new manager 
appointed in his place, within fourteen days after being required by the Court to do so, then the District 
Court may direct the company or Government concerned to make such transfer or to transfer , the same, 
and to receive and pay over the dividends in such manner as it may direct.  
73. Power to order transfer of stock, securities or shares of mentally ill persons residing out of 
India .—Where any stock or Government securities or share in a company is or are standi ng in the name 
of, or vested in, any person residing out of India, the District Court upon being satisfied that such person 
has been declared to be mentally ill and that his personal estate has been vested in a person appointed for 
the management thereof, according to the law of the place where he is residing, may direct the company 
or Government concerned to make such transfer of the stock, securities or shares or of any part thereof, to 
or into the name of the person so appointed or otherwise, and also to  receive and pay over the dividends 
and proceeds, as the District Court thinks fit.  
74. Power to apply property for mentally ill person ’s maintenance in case of temporary mental 
illness .—If it appears to the District Court that the mental illness of a mentally ill person is in its nature 
temporary, and that it is expedient to make provision for a temporary period, for his maintenance or for 
the maintenance of such member of his family as are dependent on him, the District Court may, in like 
manner as un der section 71, direct his property or a sufficient part thereof to be applied for the purpose 
specified therein.  
75. Action taken in respect of mentally ill person to be set aside if District Court finds that his 
mental illness has ceased .—(1) Where the District Court has reason to believe that any person who was 
found to be mentally ill after inquisition under this Chapter has ceased to be mentally ill, it may direct any 
court subordinate to it to inquire whether such person has ceased to be mentally ill . 
(2) An inquiry under sub -section ( 1) shall, so far as may be , conducted in the same manner as an 
inquisition conducted under this Chapter.  
(3) If after an inquiry under this section, it is found that the mental illness of a person has ceased, the 
Distric t Court shall order all actions taken in respect of the mentally ill person under this Act to be set 
aside on such terms and conditions as that Court thinks fit to impose.  
76. Appeals .—An appeal shall lie to the High Court from every order made by a Distri ct Court under 
this Chapter.  
77. Power of District Court to make regulations .—The District Court may, from time to time, 
make regulations for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Chapter.  
  27 
 CHAPTER  VII 
LIABILITY TO MEET COST OF MAINTENANCE OF  MENTALLY ILL PERSONS DETAINED IN PSYCHIATRIC 
HOSPITAL OR PSYCHIATRIC NURSING HOME  
78. Cost of maintenance to be borne by Government in certain cases .—The cost of maintenance 
of a mentally ill person detained as an inpatient in any psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home 
shall, unless otherwise provided for by any law for the time being in force, be borne by the Government 
of the State wherein the authority which passed the order in relation to the mentally ill person is 
subordinate, if — 
(a) That authority which made the order has not taken an undertaking from any person (to bear 
the cost of maintenance of such mentally ill person, and  
(b) no provision for bearing the cost of maintenance of such a District Court under this Chapter.  
79. Appl ication to District Court for payment of cost of maintenance out of estate of mentally ill 
person or from a person legally bound to maintain him .—(1) Where any mentally ill person detained 
in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home has an estate  or where any person legally bound to 
maintain such person has the means to maintain such person, the Government liable to pay the cost of 
maintenance of such person under section 78 or any local authority liable to bear the cost of maintenance 
of such men tally ill person un der any law for the time being in force, may make an application to the 
District Court within whose jurisdiction the estate of the mentally ill person is situate or the person legally 
bound to maintain the mentally ill person and having the means therefore resides; for an order authorising 
it to apply the estate of the mentally ill person to the cost of maintenance or, as the case may be, directing 
the person legally bound to maintain the mentally  ill person and having the means therefore  to bear the 
cost of maintenance of such mentally ill person.  
(2) An order made by the District Court under sub -section ( 1) shall be enforced in the same manner, 
shall have the same force and effect and be subject to appeal, as a decree made by such Court in a suit in 
respect of the property or person mentioned therein.  
80. Persons legally bound to maintain mentally ill person not absolved from such liability .—
Nothing contained in the foregoing provisions shall be deemed to absolve a person legally bound to  
maintain a mentally ill person from maintaining such mentally ill person.  
CHAPTER  VIII 
PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS OF MENTALLY ILL PERSONS  
81. Mentally ill persons to be treated without violation of human rights .—(1) No mentally ill 
person shall be subjected during treatment to any indignity (whether physical or mental) or cruelty.  
(2) No mentally ill person under treatment shall be used fo r purposes of research, unless — 
(i) such  research is of direct benefit to him for purposes of diagnosis or treatment; or  
(ii) such person, being a voluntary patient has given his consent in writing or where such person 
(whether or not a voluntary patient) is incompetent , by reason of minority or  otherwise, to give valid 
consent, the guardian or other person competent to give consent on his behalf, has given his consent 
in writing for such research.  
(3) Subject to any rules made in this behalf under section 94 for the purpose of preventing vexatio us 
or defamatory communications or communications  prejudicial to the treatment of mentally ill persons, no 
letters or other communications sent by or to a mentally ill persons under treatment shall be intercepted, 
detained or destroyed.  
CHAPTER  IX 
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
82. Penalty for establishment or maintenance of psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing 
home in contravention of Chapter III .—(1) Any person who establishes or maintains a psychiatric 
hospital or psychiatric nursing home in contravention of the provisions of Chapter III shall, on conviction, 28 
 be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine w hich may 
extend to two hundred rupees, or with both, and in the case of a second or subsequent off ence, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever, after conv iction under sub -section ( 1) continues to maintain a psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home in contravention of the provisions of Chapter III shall, on conviction, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, for every day afte r the first day during 
which the contravention is continued.  
83. Penalty for improper reception of mentally ill person .—Any person who receives or detains or 
keeps a mentally ill person in a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric nursing home otherwise than i n 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years , or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
84. Penalty for contravention of sections 60 and 69 .—Any manager appointed under this Act to 
manage the property of a mentally ill person, who contravenes the provisions of section 60 or  
sub-section ( 2) of section 69, shall, on conviction, be punishable with fine which may extend to two 
thousand rup ees and may be detained in a civil prison till he complies with the said provisions.  
85. General provision for punishment of other offences .—Any person who contravenes any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule or regulation made thereunder, for the contravention of which no 
penalty is expressly provided, in this Act, shall, on conviction, be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both.  
86. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the co mpany, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offenc e was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
87. Sanction for prosecution s.—Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under section 82, 
except with the previous sanction of the licensing authority.  
CHAPTER  X 
MISCELLANEOUS  
88. Provision as to bonds .—The provisions of Chapter XXXIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974),  shall as far as may be, apply to bonds taken under this Act.  
89. Report by medical officer .—The medical officer in charge of a psychiatric hospital or 
psychiatric nursing home shall, as soon as may be, after any mentally ill person detained therein has been 29 
 discharged make a report in respect of his mental and physical condition to the authority under whose 
orders such person had been so detained.  
90. Pension, etc., of mentally ill person payable by Government .—(1) Where any sum is payable 
in respect of pay, pension, gratuity or any allowance to any person by any Government and the person to 
whom the sum is payable is certified by a Magistrate under this Act to be a mentally ill person, the officer 
under whose author ity such sum would be payable, may pay to the person having charge of the mentally 
ill person so much of the said sum, as he thinks fit, having regard to the cost of maintenance of such 
person and may pay to such members of the family of the mentally ill p erson as are dependent on him for 
maintenance, the surplus, if any , or such part thereof, as he thinks fit, having regard to the cost of 
maintenance of such members.  
(2) Where there is any further surplus amount available out of the funds specified in sub -section ( 1) 
after making payments as provided in that sub -section, the Government shall hold the same to be dealt 
with as follows, name ly:— 
(a) where the mentally ill person is certified to have ceased to be mentally ill by the District Court 
within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such person resides or is kept or detained, the whole of 
the surplus amount shall be paid to that person;  
(b) where the mentally ill person dies before payment, the whole of the surplus amount shall be 
paid over to those of his heirs who are legally entitled to receive the same;  
(c) where the mentally ill person dies during his mental illness without leaving any person legally 
entitled to succeed to his estate, t he whole of the surplus amount shall , with the prior permission of 
the District Court, be utilised for such charitable purpose as may be approved by the District Court.  
(3) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall be discharged of all 
liability in respect of an y amounts paid in accordance with this section.  
91. Legal aid to mentally ill person at State expense in certain cases .—(1) Where a mentally ill 
person is not represented by a legal practitioner in any proceeding under this Act before a District Court 
or a Magistrate and it appears to the District Court or Magistrate that such person has not sufficient means 
to engage a legal practitioner, the District Court or Magistrate shall assign a legal practitioner to represent 
him at the expense of the State.  
(2) Wh ere a mentally ill person having sufficient means to engage a legal practitioner is not 
represented by a legal practitioner in any proceeding under this Act before a District Court or a Magistrate 
and it appears to the District Court or Magistrate, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, that 
such person ought to be represented by a legal practitioner, the District Court or Magistrate may assign a 
legal practitioner to represent him and direct the State to bear the expenses with respect thereto and 
recover the same from out of the property of such person.  
(3) The High Court may, with the previous approval of the State Govern ment, make rules providing 
for— 
(a) the mode of selecting legal practitioners for the purpose of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2); 
(b) the facilities to be allowed to such legal practitioners;  
(c) the fees payable to such legal practitioners by the Government and generally for carrying out 
the purpose of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2). 
Explanation .—In this section “legal practitioner ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( i) of 
section 2 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961).  
92. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is i n good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder.  30 
 (2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government for any damage caused or likely 
to be caused for anything which is  in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or 
any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder.  
93. Construction of references to certain laws, etc .—(1) Any references in this Act to a law which 
is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that area, be constructed as a reference to the corresponding 
law, if any, in force in that area.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any officer or authority shall, in relation to any area in which there is 
no officer or authority with the sam e designation, be construed as a reference to such officer or authority 
as may be specified by the Cent ral Government by notification.  
94. Power of Central Government and State Government to make rules .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, make  rules providing for the qualifications of persons who may be 
appointed as Mental Health Authority under section 3 and the terms and conditions subject to which they 
may be appointed under that section and all other matters relating to such authority.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the State Government, with the previous approval of 
the Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the first rules shall be made by the Centra l Government by notification.  
(3) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules made under  
sub-section ( 2) may provide for all or any of  the following maters, namely: — 
(a) the qualifications of persons who may be appo inted as Mental Health Authority and the terms 
and conditions subject to which they may be appointed under section 4 and all other matters relating 
to such authority;  
(b) the  class or category of persons for whom separate psychiatric hospitals and psychiatric 
nursing homes may be established and maintained under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(c) the form in which, — 
(i) an application may be made for grant or, ren ewal of a licence  and the fee payable in 
respect thereof under section 7 or, as the case may be, section 9;  
(ii) a licence  may be granted for the establishment or maintenance of a psychiatric hospital or 
a psychiatric nursing home under section 8;  
(iii) an application may be made for a reception order under section 20;  
(d) the manner in which an order refusing  to grant, or revoking, a licence  shall be communicated 
under section 8 or, as the case may be , section 11;  
(e) the manner in which a report may be made to the licensing authority under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 9;  
(f) the minimum facil ities referred to in the provis o to sub -sectio n (5) of section 9, including, — 
(i) psychiatrist -patient ratio;  
(ii) other  medical or para-medical staff ; 
(iii) space requirement;  
(iv) treatment facilities; and  
(v) equipment;  
(g) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which a psychiatric hospital or psychiatric 
nursing home shall be maintained under section 10;  
(h) the form and  manner in which and the p eriod with in which an appeal against any order 
refusing to grant or renew a licence  or revoking a licence  shall be preferred the fee payable in respect 
thereof under section 12;  31 
 (i) the manner in which records shall be maintained under sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(j) the facilities to be provided under section 14 for the treatment of a mentally ill person as an 
outpatient;  
(k) the manner in which application for a reception order shall be signed and verified under  
sub-section ( 6) of section 20;  
(l) the qualifications of persons who may be appointed as Visitors and the terms and conditions 
on which they may be appointed , under section 37 and their functions;  
(m) prevention  of vexatious or defamatory communications and other matters referred to in  
sub-section ( 3) of section 81;  
(n) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
95. Rules made by  Central Government or the State Government to be laid before the 
Legislature .—(1) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule shou ld not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
(2) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before the State Legislature.  
96. Effect of Act on other law s.—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force and to the extent of 
such inconsistency that other law shall be deemed to have no effect.  
97. Power to remove difficulty .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisi ons of this Act 
in any State, the State Government may , by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions 
which appears to  it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty;  
Provided that no order shall be made under this  section in relation to any State after the expiry of two 
years from the date on which this Act comes into force in that State.  
98. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Indian Lunacy Act, 1912 (4 of 1912) and the Lunacy Act, 1977  
[Jammu and Kashmir Act 25 of 1977 (1920 AD)] , are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, an ything done or any action taken under either of the said Acts shall, 
in so far as such thing or action is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been 
done or t aken under the corresponding provisions of this Act and shall continue in force until superseded 
by anything done or any action taken under this Act.  
 
--------------------------The National Dairy Development Board Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of National Dairy Development Board as an institution of national   importance.  
3. Definitions.  
CHAPTER  II 
THE NATIONAL  DAIRY  DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
 
4. Incorporation of National Dairy Development Board . 
5. Vesting of undertakings of Indian Dairy Corporation in National Dairy Development Board and 
dissolution of Indian Dairy Corporation . 
6. Effect of incorporation of National Dairy Development Board . 
7. Saving of legal proceedings.  
CHAPTER  III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE NATIONAL  DAIRY DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
8. Management of National Dairy Development Board and composition of its Board of   Directors . 
9. Terms of office and conditions of service, etc., of Chairman and directors . 
10. Meetings of Board . 
11. Manner of transacting business of Board . 
12. Management committees . 
13. Allowances, etc., of members of management committees . 
14. Delegation of powers to management committees , etc. 
15. Delegation  of powers to whole -time directors, etc.  
CHAPTER  IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL  DAIRY  DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
16. Powers and functions of National Dairy Development Board . 
CHAPTER  V 
PROVISIONS  RELATING TO DIRECTORS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE  NATIONAL  DAIRY                   
DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
17. Provisions regarding members of board of society and directors of dissolved company.  
18. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of society and of dissolved company.  
19. Power of Board to restructure and streamline or ganisational and functional set -up of National 
Dairy Development Board to secure utmost efficiency in functioning . 
20. Schemes regarding compensation to redundant employees, etc . 
21. Compensation for transfer of employees not payable . 
22. Provident fund, gratuity, wel fare and other funds . 
 2 
 CHAPTER  VI 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
SECTIONS  
23. Borrowing powers of Board . 
24. Grants and loans by Central Government . 
25. Grants, donations, etc . 
26. National Dairy Development Board Fund . 
27. Preparation of accounts and balance -sheet . 
28. Audit . 
29. Reports to be laid before Parliament . 
30. Power to call for repayment before agreed period . 
31. Special provisions for enforcement of claims by National Dairy Development Board . 
CHAPTER  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc., of Board . 
33. Protection of acts done in good faith . 
34. Indemnity of directors . 
35. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy . 
36. Recruitment of additional officers and other employees . 
37. Liquidation only under orders of Central Government . 
38. Delegation of certain powers by Central Government . 
39. Transitional provisions for auditors . 
40. Transitional provisions with regard to Chairman and Board . 
41. Management or assistance to others to continue . 
42. Mother Dairy to be a subsidiary unit of National Dairy Development Board . 
43. Formation of comp anies with previous approval of Central Government . 
44. [Omitted ] 
45. Returns . 
46. Power to make schemes and regulations regarding service matters retrospectively . 
47. Act to have overriding effect . 
48. Power to make regulations . 
49. Power to remove difficulties . 
50. Schemes and regu lations to be laid before Parliament . 
THE SCHEDULE  
 
 
  3 
 THE NATIONAL DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 37 OF 1987  
[15th September , 1987 .] 
An Act to declare the institution known as the National Dairy Development Board in the State of 
Gujarat to be an institution of national importance and  to provide for its incorporation and  for 
the vesting in that body corporate of the undertakings of the Indian Dairy Corporation with a 
view to provide for the administration and the carrying on of the functions to be performed 
by the body corporate more effectively throughout the country and for matters connected 
therewith and incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the National Dairy Development Board, a society formed and registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860)  has been serving the country by the adoption of a              
co-operative strategy, being a strategy evolved at Anand (Gujarat), for the economic development of the 
rural masses and has been playing a vital role in improving the quality of l ife of the people through       
co-operative effort;  
AND WHEREAS  the objects of the National Dairy Development Board are such as to make it an 
institution of national importance and to co nstitute it as a body corporate;  
AND WHEREAS the functions of the Indian Dairy Corporation, a company formed and registered under 
the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) , and the functions of the National Dairy Development Board are 
complementary to each other and aimed at achieving common objectives;  
AND WHEREAS it is neces sary that the freedom and flexibility of operation hitherto available to the 
National Dairy Development Board should continue to be available to it so as to enable it to perform its 
functions more effectively and to play a wider and increasingly important role in serving the nation;  
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to vest the undertakings of the Indian Dairy Corporation in 
the National Dairy Development Board and to dissolve the said Corporation with a view to provide for 
the administration and the c arrying on of the functions to be performed by the body corporate more 
effectively.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Dairy Development 
Board Act, 1987.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may , by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of National Dairy Development Board as an institution of national   
importance .—Whereas the objects of the National Dairy Development Board at Anand in the State of 
Gujarat are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is hereby declared that the 
National Dairy Development Board is an institution of national importance.  
                                                           
1. 12th October , 1987 , vide notification No. S.O. 898(E), dated 12th  October , 1987 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,    
sec. 3(i). 4 
 3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context oth erwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date of commencement of this Act;  
(b) “Board ” means the Board of Directors of the National Dairy Development Board;  
(c) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the National Dairy Development Board;  
(d) “Companies Act ” means the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(e) “director ” means a director of the National Dairy Development Board, and includes the 
Chairman;  
(f) “foodstuffs ” means such of the foodstuffs as are included in the definition of                 
essential commodities as contained in clause ( a) of section 2 of the Es sential Commodities                    
Act, 1955  (10 of 1955) ; 
(g) “Indian Dairy Corporation ” means the Indian Dairy Corporation, a company formed and 
registered under the Companies Act, and having its registered office at Baroda in the State of Gujarat.  
(h) “milk product ” means— 
(i) sterili sed, standardised, recombined, toned, double -toned, skimmed, flavoured or acidified 
milk;  
(ii) ice-cream;  
(iii) cream;  
(iv) cheese;  
(v) butter;  
(vi) milk powders;  
(vii) weaning foods with milk and infant milk foods;  
(viii) malted milk foods with or without cocoa powder;  
(ix) ghee;  
(x) anhydrous milk fat and butter oil;  
(xi) casein;  
(xii) any other product containing milk or all or any of the milk products specified above 
which the Central Government may , by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf;  
(i) “National Dairy Development Board ” means the National Dairy Development Board 
incorporated under section 4;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
(k) “restructuring and streamlining ”, in relation to the organisational and functional set -up of the 
National Dairy Development Board, includes — 
(i) opening or closing of units or offices;  
(ii) revision of the organisational and functional set -up; 
(iii) declaratio n of staff required;  
(iv) integration of posts, fixation of seniority and pay scales;  
(v) integration of required personnel in the revised set -up and issuance of appointment orders 
in that behalf;  
(vi) declaration or demarcation of duties and responsibilit ies attendant to posts;  
(vii) declaration of posts equivalent to one another; and  5 
 (viii) any other matter that may be necessary of incidental to meet the organisational or 
functional needs of the National Dairy Development Board;  
(l) “society ” means the National Dairy Development Board, a society formed and registered 
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) and functioning as such immediately before 
the appointed day;  
(m) words and expressions used herein and not defined, but de fined in the Companies Act, have 
the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER  II 
THE NATIONAL  DAIRY  DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
4. Incorporation of National Dairy Development Board .—(1) The National Dairy Development 
Board is hereby constituted a body corporate by the same name, and as such body corporate, it shall have 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold 
and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by that name, sue and be sued.  
(2) The head office of the National Dairy Development Board shall be at Anand in the State of 
Gujarat.  
(3) The National Dairy Development Board may establish units, offices, branches or agencies at any 
such place in or outside India as it may cons ider necessary.  
5. Vesting of undertakings of Indian Dairy Corporation in National Dairy Development Board 
and dissolution of Indian Dairy Corporation .—(1) On and from the appointed day, subject to the other 
provisions of this Act, all the undertakings of the Indian Dairy Corporation shall stand transferred to and 
vest in the National Dairy Development Board.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Companies Act, the Indian Dairy Corporation shall, on 
and from the appointed day, stand dissolved by virtue of the provisions of this Act.  
6. Effect of incorporation of National Dairy Development Board .—On and from the appointed 
day,— 
(a) all properties and assets, movable and immovable , of, or belonging to, the society and the 
Indian Dairy Corporation (hereinafter referred to as the dissolved company) shall vest in the National 
Dairy Development Board;  
(b) all the rights, debts, liabilities, interests, privileges and obligations of the society and the 
Indian Dairy Corporation shall stand transferred to, and be the rights, liabilities, interests, privileges 
and obligations of , the National Dairy Development Board;  
(c) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( b), all debts , liabiliti es and obligations incurred, 
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for, the society or 
the dissolved company, immediately before the appointed day for or in connection with their 
purposes, shall be deemed to h ave been incurred, entered into, or engaged to be done by, with or for , 
the National Dairy Development Board;  
(d) all sums of money due to the society and the dissolved company, immediately before the 
appointed day, shall be deemed to be due to the Board;  
(e) every subsidiary or the society and the dissolved company shall become the subsidiary of the 
National Dairy Development Board;  
(f) every organisation, which was being managed immediately before the appointed day by the 
society or, as the case may be, b y the dissolved company, shall be managed by the National Dairy 
Development Board for such period to such extent and in such manner as the circumstances may 
require;   6 
 (g) every organisation which was getting financial, managerial or technical assistance fr om the 
society or the dissolved company, immediately before the appointed day, may continue to be given 
financial, managerial or technical assistance, as the case may be, by the National Dairy Development 
Board, for such period, to such extent and in such manner as the National Dairy Development Board 
may deem fit;  
(h) the amount representing the capital of the dissolved company shall form part of the funds of 
the National Dairy Development Board;  
(i) any reference to the society or, as the case may be, to the dissolved company, in any law other 
than this Act or in any contract or other instrument, shall be deemed to be reference to the National 
Dairy Development Board.  
7. Saving of legal proceedings .—If, on the appointed day, there is pending any suit, arbitration, 
appeal or other legal proceedings of whatever nature by or against the society or the dissolved company, 
the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be in any way prejudicially affected by reason of the 
incorporation of the National Dairy Dev elopment Board under section 4 or dissolution of the Indian Dairy 
Corpor ation under section 5, as the case may be, but the suit, arbitration, appeal or other proceedings may 
be continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the National Dairy Development  Board in the same 
manner and to the same extent as it would or may have been continued, prosecuted and enforced by or 
against the society or the dissolved company, as the case may be, if this Act had not been passed.  
CHAPTER  III      
   MANAGEMENT OF THE NATIONAL  DAIRY DEVELOPMENT  BOARD  
8. Management of National Dairy Development Boa rd and composition of its Board of   
Directors .—(1) The general superintendence, direction, control and management of the affairs and 
business of the National Dairy Development  Board shall vest in a Board of Directors, which shall 
exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the National Dairy 
Development Board.  
(2) The Board of Directors of the National Dairy Development Board shall c onsist of the following, 
namely :— 
(a) a Chairman;  
(b) one director from amongst the officials of the Central Government;  
(c) two directors from amongst the Chairmen of the State Co -operative Dairy Federations;  
(d) whole -time directors, not more than three in number, from amongst the executives of the 
highe st grade of the National Dairy Development Board;  
(e) one director, being an expert, from outside the National Dairy Development Board.  
(3) The Chairman and the director referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section (2) shall be nominated by 
the Central Government and the directors referred to in clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 2) shall be 
nominated by the Central Government after consultation with the Chairman:  
Provided that the Chairman and the director referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) shall be 
persons professionally qualified in one or more specialities, namely, dairying, animal husbandry, rural 
economics, rural development, business administration or banking.  
(4) The Board may associate with  itself, in such manner, on such terms and for such purposes as it 
may deem fit, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the 
provisions of this Act, and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the di scussions of the 
Board relevant to the purposes for which he has been associated but shall not have the right to vote.  
9. Terms of office and conditions of service, etc., of Chairman and d irectors .—(1) The Chairman 
shall be the Chief Executive of the National Dairy Development Board and shall hold office for such 
period as the Central Government may determine and any person so nominated shall be eligible for 
renomination.   7 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall have the 
right to terminate the services of the Chairman, at any time before the expiry of the period determined 
under that sub -section, by giving him notice of not less than three mo nths in writing or three months’  
salary and allowances i n lieu thereof, and the Chairman shall also have the right to relinquish his office, at 
any time before the expiry of the period specified under that sub -section, by giving to the Central 
Government notice of not less than three months in writing.  
(3) The Chairman shall receive such salary and allowances as may be determined by the Central 
Government.  
(4) Where an executive of the National Dairy Development Board has been nominated under section 
8 as a whole -time director thereof, such nomination shall be w ithout prejudice to his continuance as an 
executive of the National Dairy Development Board and he may be continued as such executive on his 
ceasing to be a director.  
(5) The directors nominated under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 shall hold o ffice for such 
period not exceeding one year at a time as the Central Government may determine , and the directors 
nominated under clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 shall hold office for such period as the 
Central Government may determine.  
(6) Every director, other than the Chairman, shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central 
Government.  
(7) The directors referred to in clauses ( b), (c) and ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 shall be paid 
such allowances as the Central Government  may determine.  
10. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at the head office of the National Dairy 
Development Board or any of its offices at such times as the Chairman may direct, and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its 
meetings) as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chairman or, if he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, any other director nominated by 
the Chairman in this behalf and, in the absence of s uch nomination or where there is no Chairman, any 
director chosen by the directors present from among themselves, shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall  be decided by a majority of 
votes of the d irectors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman or the 
person presiding shall have the right to exercise a second or casting vote.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), every director of the Board shall have  one vote.  
11. Manner of transacting business of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board 
shall, in the discha rge of its functions, act on s ound business principles with due regard to public interest.  
(2) Save as otherwise prescribed, the Chairman shall have the powers of general superintendence, 
direction, control and management of the affairs and business of the National Dairy Development Board, 
and he may exercise all other powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or done by the 
Board.  
(3) The Chairman may, when he is unable to discharge his functions by reason of his being away or  
otherwise, authorise any whole -time director to discharge al l or any of his functions for a temporary 
period.  
(4) In the absence of the Cha irman and of an authorised whole -time director as referred to in         
sub-section ( 3), for whatsoever reason, the powers of the Chairman may be exercised by the senior -most 
of the whole -time directors referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8.  
12. Management committees .—(1) The Board may from time to time constitute such number of 
management committees as it may deem fit for the purpose of assisting the Board in the efficient 
discharge of its functions.  8 
 (2) A management committee shall consist of such number of persons (whether directors or 
otherwise) as its members as the Board may determine, subject to the condition that in every such 
committee either the Chairman or a whole -time director shall be a member thereof.  
(3) Every mana gement committee shall function under the general control, direct ion and 
superintendence of the Board, and for such duration and in such manner as the Board may direct.  
(4) The minutes of every meeting of the management committees shall, as soon as may be,  be laid 
before the Board.  
13. Allowances, etc., of members of management committees .—(1) The members of any 
management committee, other than the Chairman and whole -time directors, may be paid such allowances, 
if any, as may be prescribed, for attending the meetings of the management committee or for attending to 
any other work of the National Dairy Development Board.  
(2) All other matters pertaining to the conduct of proceedings of the management committees shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
14. Delegat ion of pow ers to management committee s, etc.—(1) The Board may delegate to any 
management committee or to any member thereof or to any officer of the National Dairy Development 
Board, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified by the Board, such of its 
powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions.  
(2) The Board may, if it considers it necessary so to do in the public interest, delegate any of its 
powers and functions, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified by it, to a   
co-operative federation at the National or State level, or to any organisation owned, managed, controlled 
or assisted by the National Dairy Development Board.  
15. Delegation of powers to whole -time directors, etc .—The Board may, from time to time, by 
order, delegate, subject to such general and special conditions as it may deem fit to impose, the powers of 
appointment, termination, suspension and dismissal from serv ice of any employee of the Nat ional Dairy 
Development Board, — 
(a) who is drawing a salary in such higher grade as may be prescribed, to a whole -time director, 
and 
(b) who is drawing a salary in any grade, other than a h igher grade prescribed under clause  (a), to 
such officer of the National Dairy Development Board as it may deem fit:  
Provided that in relation to employees falling under clause ( b), the Chairman may, if he considers it 
necessary or expedient so to do, perform the functions of the Board under this section.  
CHAPTER  IV 
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL  DAIRY  DEVELOPMENT BOARD  
16. Powers and functions of National Dairy Development Board .—(1) Subject t o the provisions of 
this Act,—  
(a) it shall be the duty and function of the National Dairy Development Board to promote plan 
and organise programmes for the purposes of development of dairy and other agriculture based and 
allied industries and biologicals on an intensive and nation -wide basis and to render assistance in the 
implementation of suc h programmes;  
(b) it shall be the responsibility of the National Dairy De velopment Board to adopt the              
co-operative strategy in a more effective manner on an intensive and nation -wide basis and to take 
such steps as may be necessary for the pur poses aforesaid; and  
(c) the National Dairy Development Board may take such measures for carrying out the said 
purposes, and for the exercise of its powers and the performance of its functions and responsibilities 
under this Act, as it may consider necessa ry. 9 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the measures 
referred to therein may provide for — 
(a) facilitating research and promotional activities in the fields of dairying, immunology , animal 
husbandry, agriculture and horticulture;  
(b) imparting technological know -how to such organisations in the co -operative or public sector 
as are engaged in the production, procurement, preservation or marketing of milk and milk products;  
(c) facilit ating the training of personnel for absorbing and utilising the technical know -how that 
may be imparted;  
(d) designing, planning, promoting developing, constructing, sponsoring and setting up of dairy 
industries and undertaking any other related promotiona l activity including the financing of the same;  
(e) providing consultancy and managerial services and the execution of any project on a turn -key 
basis or otherwise, furnishing integral services such as storage, transportation, processing, distribution 
of milk and milk products and to serve as a lead institution with reference to milk and milk products;  
(f) adopting such measures as may be practicable — 
(i) for the conservation of milk and milk products by avoidance of w aste at all stages or 
otherwise;  
(ii) to assist primary producers of milk and milk products and persons in the co -operative and 
public sector to get incentive prices; and  
(iii) to build up a national milk grid;  
(g) recommending to Government, as and when necessary, the maximum and minimum prices to 
be fixed for the purchase or sale of milk and, if so required, assist in the enforcement of it;  
(h) functioning as a channelising agency in respect of import and export of milk and milk 
products and of milch animals or bulls;  
(i) providing financ ial, technical, administrative , managerial or other assistance or taking such 
measures as may be necessary — 
(A) for the development (if required by the import of quality semen) and preservation of high 
yielding cattle;  
(B) for adopting improved methods of cattle breeding;  
(C) for increasing production and supply of better and improved animal feed including 
fodder; and  
(D) generally for the enhancement of the cattle wealth of the country;  
(j) processing, promoting or  financing technological, industrial or economic research in milk and 
milk products in such manner as the Board may deem fit by the utilisation of available institutions or 
otherwise;  
(k) financing, in such manner as the Board may deem appropriate (includi ng contribution to 
capital), of co -operative federations, co -operative unions or co -operative enterprises or of any scheme 
in the co -operative or public sector intended to stimulate the production, preservation, distribution 
and consumption of milk and mil k products nation -wide;  
(l) regulating the dairy and allied industries and functioning as regulatory authority therefor, as 
may be required by the Central Government;  
(m) adopting measures for the development and co -ordination of organisations in the produ ction 
of milk and milk products so as to enable the primary producers thereof to become participants in, 
and beneficiaries of, the development and growth of dairy and allied industries;  10 
 (n) collecting and compiling relevant data and statistics necessary fo r the efficient management of 
the national milk grid and national milch herd and on any other matter relating to dairying and allied 
industries;  
(o) promoting publicity on the research and development of dairy and allied industries;  
(p) promoting and  developing production, grading  and marketing of milk and milk products in 
various parts of the country;  
(q) co-operating with international organisation s and foreign experts and for functioning as the 
agent of the Central Government for the reception, uti lisation and disbursement of any gift of milk 
and milk products and any other foodstuffs;  
(r) building up of a reserve of buffer stock of basic commodities;  
(s) promoting the export of milk and milk products where, in the opinion of the Board, it is so 
required to avoid waste or to otherwise serve the public interest and generally for exporting any 
article produced, processed or promoted by it;  
(t) acquiring, holding and disposing of any property for the purposes of its business;  
(u) transferring the whole or any part of its managerial, technical or other functions in relation to 
any organisations receiving assistance from the National Dairy Dev elopment Board to the recipient  
organisation;  
(v) advancing o r lending money upon security of  movable or immovable property or otherwise;  
(w) borrowing money in such manner and upon such security as the Board may deem fit;  
(x) carrying on, either by itself or through any other organisations, any other business or class of 
business, in a case where such business or class of business was being carried on by the society or the 
dissolved company immediately before the appointed day;  
(y) promoting and encouraging co -operative effort among those engaged in the production of 
milk and milk products and other foodstuffs;  
(z) levying fees o r other charges for any assistance given or services rendered by the National 
Dairy Development Board;  
(za) carrying on any other business or doing any other act or thing as may be necessary, 
incidental or conducive to further the objectives  of the National Dairy Development Board under this 
Act. 
(3) If, immediately before the appointed day, either the society or the dissolved company                
was engaged in the production, research and development, processing, marketing, import, export            
or other activities, or had been rendering any service or assistance, in relation to any article or         
product, other than milk and milk products or the dairy industry, then , notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or in any other law, the National Dairy Development Board may engage in the 
production, research and development, processing, marketing, import, export or other activities, or rend er 
such other services or assistance in relation to the said article or product as may be required, an d the 
provisions of sub -section s (1) and ( 2) shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to that article or product, as 
if any reference therein to milk an d milk products or to dairy and allied industries had been a reference to 
that article or product or service or activity.  
(4) Where the Central Government or the Government of any State considers that, having regard to 
the special expertise of the National  Dairy Development Board and the needs of the public, it is necessary 
or advisable to entrust the National Dairy Development Board with any activity, other than that to which 
the foregoing sub -sections apply, it may, entrust such activity to the National D airy Development Board, 
whereupon it shall be competent for the National Dairy Development Board to carry on such activity.  
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, it shall be competent for the National 
Dairy Development Board to p articipate, with the prior approval of the Central Government, in any other 
organisation, financially, managerially or in any other manner.   11 
 CHAPTER  V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO DIRECTORS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE  NATIONAL  DAIRY DEVELOPMENT BOARD   
17. Provisions regarding members of board of society and directors of dissolved         
company .—Every person holding office as a member of the board of the society, or as a director of the 
dissolved company, immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and  from that day, cease to hold 
office as such member or director.  
18. Provisions relating to officers and other employees of society and of dissolved       
company .—Subject to the provisions of section 19, every full -time officer or other employee, holding 
office immediately before the appointed day, in the society or the dissolved company, shall, on and from 
the appointed day, become an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the National Dairy 
Development Board and shall hold office or service in the National Dairy Development Board on the 
same terms and conditions of service as he would have had under the society or the dissolved company, 
as the case may be, and shall continue to do so unless and until his terms and conditions of service are 
duly altered by the Board.  
19. Power of Board to restructure and streamline organisational and functional set -up of 
National Dairy Development Board to secure utmost efficiency in functioning .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Chapter, the National Dairy Development Board may make such orders or take 
such action as may be necessary for restructuring and streamlining the organisational and functional     
set-up of the National Dairy De velopment Board to secure utmost efficiency in its functioning, and the 
Board shall, for achieving this object, be competent to declare any officer or other employee or any class 
of officers or other employees to be redundant if it finds them redundant by way of being surplus or 
otherwise due to duplication of posts of the same nature, or absence of the special expertise required for 
the post in the revised set -up, or the non -availability of posts in a particular office or unit of the National 
Dairy Develop ment Board and it is not practicable to accommodate him in the type of post in the 
particular grade.  
(2) Nothing in this  Chapter shall preclude the Board, if it is considered necessary for the purpose of 
rationalising the conditions of service of the offic ers and other employees so transferred to it, to change 
their designation, conditions of service or the scales of pay applicable to them or to reallocate their duties 
and functions.  
20. Schemes regarding compensa tion to redundant employees , etc.—(1) The officers or other 
employees declared as redundant in pursuance of section 19, shall be dealt with in accordance with such 
scheme or schemes as the Board may , with the previous approval of the Central Government, make in this 
behalf and different schemes ma y be made in relation to different classes or categories of officers and 
other employees.  
(2) The scheme or schemes referred to in sub -section ( 1) may provide for — 
(a) the quantum of compensation payable to any officer or other employee referred to in           
sub-section ( 1) and the mode of payment thereof:  
Provided that the compensation so payable shall in no case be less than that payable to him under 
the service conditions applicable to him if his services were dispensed with;  
(b) the quantum of ar rears of salary or other emoluments, provident fund, gratuity or any other 
amount that may be payable in accordance with the service conditions applicable to them;  
(c) the provision for appeal for the aggrieved redundant officers and other employees and for the 
appellate authority, being an officer not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of 
India in the Ministry dealing with Agriculture;  
(d) any other matter pertaining to the termination of service consequent on their being declared 
redundant.  12 
 21. Compensation for transfer of employees not payable .—The transfer of the services of any 
officer or other employee of the society or of the dissolved company to the National Dairy Development 
Board shall not entitle any such officer or other empl oyee to any compensation under the Industrial 
Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  or any other law for the time being in force, and no such claim shall be 
entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
22. Provident fund, gratuity, welfare and other funds .—(1) Where a provident fund has been 
established by the society or the dissolved company in respect of either of them for the benefit of the 
officers or other employees and the same stands vested in a trus t, the moneys and other assets standing to 
the credit of each provident fund shall continue to be held in trust with the same objects as were 
applicable before the appointed day and the trustees of such trusts immediately before the appointed day 
shall, su bject to the provisions of the trust deeds and the rules relating to the respective trusts, continue to 
function as trustees in respect of the respective provident fund until and unless otherwise directed by the 
National Dairy Development Board, and the ri ghts relating to the said trusts shall, as from the appointed 
day, vest in the National Dairy Development Board.  
(2) Where any gratuity, welfare or other fund had been established by the society or the dissolved 
company for the benefit of its officers or other employees and is in existence immediately before the 
appointed day, all moneys and other assets standing to the credit of or relatable to such gratuity, welfare 
or other fund shall vest in the National Dairy Development Board.  
(3) Notwithstanding any thing contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the Board may give such 
directions relating to the trusts or funds or take such other action as it may deem fit so as to bring about 
uniformity or to effect integration in part or in whole in such trusts or fund s. 
(4) The Board may, having regard to the welfare of the officers and other employees or their families, 
take such steps for the advancement of their health, education or other interests as may be prescribed and 
create such institutions as may be required  for the purpose.  
(5) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall derogate the power of the Board to make 
regulations for establishing or maintaining any provident fund, welfare fund, gratuity fund or other fund 
for any of its officers or oth er employees.  
CHAPTER  VI              
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
23. Borrowing powers of Board .—The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government or in accordance with the terms of any general or special authority given to it by the Central 
Government, borrow money from any source as it may deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions 
under this Act.  
24. Grants and loans by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the National Dairy Development Board by 
way of grants or loans such sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for 
the purposes of this Act.  
25. Grants, donations, etc .—The National Dairy Development Board may receive gifts, grants, 
donations or benefactions from Government or any other source in or outside India and the same shall be 
used by the Board for exercising its functions and discharging its responsibilities under this Act.  
(2) The National Dairy De velopment Board shall not receive any gifts, grants, donations or 
benefactions from a foreign government or any other source outside India except with the previous 
approval of the Central Government.  
26. National Dairy Development Board Fund .—(1) The National Dairy Development Board shall 
maintain a Fund to be called the National Dairy Development Board Fund to which shall be credited — 
(a) all sums of money vested in the National Dairy Development Board under Chapter II;  
(b) all sums of money that may be provided by Government;   13 
 (c) all fees and other charges received by the National Dairy Development Board;  
(d) all sums of money generated from gift commodities by the National Dairy Development 
Board or received by it by way of grants, donations, benefactions, bequests or transfers; and  
(e) all sums of money received by the National Dairy Development Board in any other manner or 
from any other source.  
(2) All sums of money credited to the said Fund shall, subject to the regulations, if any, made in  this 
behalf, be deposited with the State Bank of India or any other nationalised bank.  
Explanation .—In sub-section “nationalised bank ” means a corresponding new bank as defined in the 
Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) and the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (44 of  1980) . 
(3) The said Fund shall be applied towards meeting the administrative and other expenses of the 
National Dairy Development Board, including expenses i ncurred in the exercise of the powers and the 
discharge of its functions and responsibilities under section 16 or in relation to any of the activities 
referred to therein or for anything relatable thereto.  
27. Preparation of accounts and balance -sheet .—(1) The balance -sheet and accounts of the 
National Dairy Development Board shall be prepared in such form and in such manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the National Dairy Development Board to be 
closed and balanc ed as on the 31st day of March each year or such other date as the Board may, with the 
concurrence of the Central Government, decide.  
28. Audit .—(1) The accounts of the National Dairy Development Board shall be audited by auditors 
duly qualified to act as auditors of companies under the Companies Act, and the appointment o f auditors 
and remuneration pay able to them shall be subject to the approval of the Central Government.  
(2) Every auditor in the performance of his duties shall have at all reasonable time s access to books, 
accounts and other documents of the National Dairy Development Board.  
(3) The auditors shall submit their report to the Board which shall forward a copy of their report to 
the Central Government.  
29. Reports to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government shall cause the report of the 
auditors under section 28 to be laid before both the Houses of Parliament as soon as may be after such 
report is received by the Central Government.  
30. Power to call for repayment before agreed period .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any agreement to the contrary, the Board may, by notice in writing, require any person to which the 
National Dairy Development Board or the society or the dissolved company has granted any loan or 
advance, to discharg e forthwith in full, its liabilities to the Board, — 
(a) if it appears to the Board that any false or misleading information in any material particular 
was given in the application for the loan or advance; or  
(b) if the person has failed to comply with the terms of its contract in the matter of the loan or 
advance; or  
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the person is unable to pay his debts or that 
proceedings for liquidation may be commenced in respect thereof; or  
(d) if the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned as security for the loan or 
advance is not insured and kept insured by the person to the satisfaction of the Board (or depreciates 
in value to such an extent that, in the opinion of the Board, further security to the sat isfaction of the 
Board should be given and such security is not given after demand); or  
(e) if, without due permission, any machinery, plant or other equipment (whether forming par t of 
security or not) is removed from the concerned premises without being r eplaced; or  14 
 (f) if it appears to the Board that any condition in the loan agreement relating to the supply of 
goods or implementation of the project is being substantially violated; or  
(g) if, for any other reason, the Board considers it necessary so to do  for protecting the interests of 
the National Dairy Development Board.  
31. Special provisions for enforcement of claims by National Dairy Development             
Board .—(1) Where any person, in breach of any agreement, makes any default in the repayment of any 
loan or advance or any instalment thereof (or in meeting its obligations in relation to the guarantee given 
by the National Dairy Development Board) or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of agreement with 
the Board or where the Board requires any  person to make immediate repayment of any loan or advance 
under section 30 and the person fails to make such repayment, then, without prejudice to the provisions of 
section 69 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882  (4 of 1882) , any officer of the National Dairy 
Development Board, generally or specially authorised by the Board in  this behalf, may apply to the c ourt 
for one or more o f the following reliefs, namely :— 
(a) for an order for the sale of the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the 
National Dairy Development Board as security for the loan or advance; or  
(b) for transferring the management of any org anisation to the National Dairy Development    
Board; or  
(c) for an ad interim  injunction where there is apprehension that the machinery or other 
equipment is being removed from the premises of the organisation without due permission.  
(2) The procedure for making an application under sub -section ( 1) and for the disposal thereof shal l 
be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER  VII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
32. Defects in appointments not to invalidate acts, etc., of Board .—No act or proceeding of the 
Board or of any committee of the National Dairy Development Board shall be questioned on the ground 
merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board or the committee, as 
the case may be.  
33. Protection of acts done in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
National Dairy Development Board  or any director or any officer or other employee of the Board or any 
other person authorised by the Board to discharge any functions under this Act, for any loss or damage 
caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended t o be done in pursuance 
of this Act or of any other law or provision having the force of law.  
34. Indemnity of directors .—Every director shall be indemnified by the National Dairy 
Development Board against all losses and expenses incurred by him, in, or in relation to, the discharge of 
his duties, except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default.  
35. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy .—(1) The Board sh all not, except as otherwise required by 
this Act or any other law, divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs of, the National Dairy 
Development Board or of the society or of the dissolved comp any except in circumstances in w hich it is 
in accordance with the law or practice and usage customary among financial institutions, necessary or 
appropriate for the Board to divulge such information.  
(2) Every director, member of a committee, auditor or officer or other employee of the National Dairy 
Development Board shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of fidelity and sec recy in 
the form set out in the Schedule.  
36. Recruitment of additional officers and other employees .—Nothing contained in Chapter V 
shall be deemed to prejudice the right of the National Dairy Development Board to create such number of 
additional posts or  to appoint such number of additional officers or other employees as it may consider 
necessary or desirable for the efficient discharge of the functions of the National Dairy Development 
Board and where any such officer or other employee is appointed, the terms and conditions of service, 
including inter se  seniority, may also be determined by the Board.  15 
 37. Liquidation only under orders of Central Government .—No provision of any law relating to 
the winding up of companies or corporations shall apply to the National Dairy Development Board and it 
shall not be placed in liquidation save by an order of the Central Government and in such manner as it 
may direct.  
38. Delegation of certain powers by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, on 
the recommendation of the National Dairy Development Board, if satisfied that it is necessary so to do in 
the public interest, make any scheme for the purpose of enabling the National Dairy Development Board 
to undertake and perform any of the activities or fu nctions of the Central Government relatable to dairy, 
foodstuffs and connected industries, particularly with reference to matters related to the development of 
the national milk grid by the regulation of the production, procurement, marketing, export -impor t, 
maintenance of standards or such like activities (including the collection and compilation of statistics and 
relevant data).  
(2) Every scheme made under sub -section ( 1) shall be published in the Official Gazette and may 
contain such conditions, restrict ions or limitations as the Central Government may deem fit to impose.  
39. Transitional provisions for auditors .—Any auditor appointed in relation to the society or the 
dissolved company, functioning immediately before the appointed day, may, notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, be continued by the National Dairy Development Board for such period and on 
such terms as may be considered necessary.  
40. Transitional provisions with regard to Chairman and Board .—The Chairman of the societ y, 
holding office immediately before the appointed day, shall be the Chairman of the National Dairy 
Development Board until a Chairman is nominated in accordance with the provisions of this Act and he 
shall be competent to perform the functions of the Boar d until the constitution of the Board under this 
Act. 
41. Management or assistance to others to continue .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby 
declared that where, before the appointed day, either the society or the dissolved company was managing 
any ot her organisation or rendering any technical or other assistance to any organisation or person, the 
National Dairy Develop ment Board may continue to render  the same or similar service to such extent, for 
such period and with such modifications as the Board may deem fit.  
42. Mother Dairy to be a subsidiary unit of National Dairy Development Board .—The 
undertaking known as the Mother Dairy, Delhi, shall, on and from the appointed day, become a 
subsidiary unit of the National Dairy Development Board but shall r etain its separate character, unless 
otherwise decided by the Board.  
43. Formation of companies with previous approval of Central Government .—(1) Where the 
Board considers it necessary so to do, for the implementation of any of its o bjectives, it may, subject to 
the previous approval of the Central Government form one or more companies either by itself or in 
conjunction with any of its subsidiaries or with any other undertaking.  
(2) Where any company has been formed in  pursuance of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) in the case of a company formed by the Board by itself or along with its subsidiaries, it may 
contribute such capital, transfer such of its assets or render such assistance, as may be required, so as 
to enable the company so formed to function; and  
(b) in any other case, it may contribute capital, transfer assets or render assistance in such manner 
and to such extent as the Board may deem fit subject to specific previous approval of the Central 
Government in that regard.  
44. [ Exemption from tax on income ] Omitted by Act 20 of 2002  (20 of 2002 ) s.162  
(w.e.f.  1-4-2003).  
45. Returns .—The National Dairy Development Board shall furnish, from time to time, to the 
Central Government such returns as the Central Government may require.  16 
 46. Power to make schemes and regulations regarding service matters retrospectively .—Any 
scheme or regulation made under this Act in relation to conditions of service or like matters of officers or 
other employees of the National Dairy Development Board, may be made retrospectively from any date 
not earlier than the appointed day.  
47. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Companies Act, the Industrial Disputes                       
Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  or any other law for the time being in force or in any instrum ent having effect by 
virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority.  
48. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, by notification in the Gazette of India, make 
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act and the schemes made thereunder, to provide 
for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect to the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the genera lity of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure to be followed for the transaction of business at the meetings of the Board and 
the number of members which shall form quorum at a  meeting under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(b) the allowan ces to be paid to the members of any management committee, other than the 
Chairman and whole -time directors, for attending the meetings of the management committee or for 
attending to any other w ork of the National Dairy Development Board under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 13 and the other matters pertaining to the conduct of proceedings of the management 
committees under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(c) the higher grade for the purposes of clause ( a) of section 15;  
(d) the particulars of the steps for the advancement of the health, education or other interests of 
the officers and other employees or their families as referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 22;  
(e) the matters of detail rega rding establishment or maintenance of funds referred to in             
sub-section ( 5) of section 22;  
(f) the conditions subject to which sums of money are to be deposited under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 26;  
(g) the form and manner in which the balance -sheet and accounts of the National Dairy 
Development Board shall be prepared under sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(h) the procedure for making an application under sub -section ( 1) of section 31 and for the 
disposal thereof under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(i) conditions of service of officers and other employees;  
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
49. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central  Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necess ary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of fiv e years from the appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
50. Schemes and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every scheme and every regulation 
made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and, if, before the ex piry of the session immediately following the session or 
the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the scheme or 
regulation or both Houses agree that the scheme or regulation should not be made, the scheme or 
regula tion shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that scheme or regulation .  17 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 35  (2)] 
Declaration of fidelity and secrecy  
I, ................. do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly, and to the best of my skill and ability 
execute and perform the duties required of me as Chairman, director, member of committee, auditor, 
officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the National Dairy Development Board an d which 
properly relate to the o ffice or position held by me in or in relation to the National Dairy Development 
Board.  
I further declare  that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the National 
Dairy Development Board nor will I allow any such person to inspe ct or have access to any books or 
documents belonging to or in the possession of the National Dairy Development Board and relating to the 
business of the National Dairy Development Board or the business of any person having any dealing with 
the National Da iry Development Board.  
 
 
 
--------------------------The National Housing Bank Act, 1987--------------------------
1 THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK ACT, 1987 
___________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
___________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS 
1.Short title, extent and commencement.
2.Definitions.
CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL  HOUSING  BANK AND CAPITAL THEREOF
3.Establishment and incorporation of National Housing Bank.
4.Capital. 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE  NATIONAL  HOUSING  BANK
5.Management. 
6.Board of Directors. 
7.Term of office of Chairman, Managing Director and other directors, service conditions,             
etc. 
8.Disqualifications. 
9.Vacation and resignation of office by directors.
10.Casual vacancy in the office of Chairman or Managing Director.
11.Meetings of Board.
12.Executive Committee and other committees.
13.Director of Board or member of committee thereof not to participate in meetings in certain 
cases.
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINESS OF THE NATIONAL  HOUSING  BANK
14.Business of the National Housing Bank.
15.Borrowings and acceptance of deposits by National Housing Bank.
16. Loans in foreign currency.
16A. Assistance to borrower when to operate or a charge in the property offered as security . 
16B. Amount and security to be held in trust. 
17. Power to transfer rights.
18. Power to acquire rights. 
18A. Exemption from registration . 
18B. Recovery of dues as arrears of land revenue. 
19. Power to impose conditions for accommodation. 
20. Power to call for repayment before agreed period.
21. National Housing Bank to have access to records.
22. Validity of loan or advance not to be questioned.
23. National Housing Bank not to make loans or advances against its own bonds or debentures.
24. Power to inspect.2 SECTIONS
25. Power to collect credit information.
26. Power to publish information.
27. Advisory services. 
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO HOUSING FINANCE INSTITUTIONS RECEIVING DEPOSITS
28. Definition of deposit.
29. Chapter not to apply in certain cases.
29A. Requirement of registration and net owned fund.
29B. Maintenance of percentage of assets.
29C. Reserve fund.
30. National Housing Bank to regulate or prohibit issue of prospectus or advertisement soliciting 
deposits of money. 
30A. Power of National Housing Bank to determine policy and issue directions. 
31. Power of National Housing Bank to collect information from housing finance institutions as to 
deposits and to give directions.
32. Duty of housing finance institutions to furnish statements, etc., required by National Housing 
Bank.
33. Powers and duties of auditors. 
33A. Power of National Housing Bank to prohibit acceptance of deposit and alienation of assets. 
33B. Power of National Housing Bank to file winding up petition. 
34. Inspection. 
35. Deposits not to be solicited by unauthorised persons. 
35A. Disclosure of information. 
35B. Power of National Housing Bank to exempt any housing finance institution. 
36. Chapter V to override other laws.
36A. Power to order repayment of deposit.
36B. Nomination by depositors . 
CHAPTER VA 
OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO  HOUSING  FINANCE  INSTITUTIONS
36C. Definitions.
36D. Appointment of recovery officer.
36E. Application to the recovery officer.
36F. Procedure in respect of application under section 36E.
36G. Enforcement of order of recovery officer.
36H. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and District Magistrate to assist recovery officer in taking 
charge of property.
36-I. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.
36J. Composition of Appellate Tribunal.
36K. Qualifications for appointment as Presiding Officer of Appellate Tribunal.
36L. Term of office.
36M. Staff of Appellate Tribunal.
36N. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officers.
36-O. Filling up of vacancies. 
36P. Resignation and removal.
36Q. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its  proceedings.
36R. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of Appellate Tribunal.
36S. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.
36T. Deposit of amount due, on filing appeal.
36U. Procedure and powers of recovery officer and Appellate Tribunal.3 SECTIONS
36V. Limitation
36W. Presiding Officer, recovery officer, other officers and employees to be public servant.
36X. Protection of action taken in good faith.
36Y. Bar of jurisdiction.
36Z. Transitional provisions. 
CHAPTER VI 
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
37. General Fund and other funds.
38. Preparation of balance sheet, etc., of National Housing Bank.
39. Disposal of surplus.
40. Audit.
41. Returns.
42. Annual report on housing.
CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. Staff of National Housing Bank.
43A. Delegation of powers.
44. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy.
45. Defects in appointment not to invalidate acts, etc.
45A. Arrangement with National Housing Bank on appointment of directors to prevail .
46. Protection of action taken under the Act. 
47. Indemnity of directors.
47A. Nomination in respect of deposits, bonds, etc. 
48. [Omitted .] 
49. Penalties.
50. Offences by companies. 
51. Cognizance of offences. 
52. Application of fine.
52A. Power of National Housing Bank to impose fine.
53. Bankers’ Books Evidence Act 18 of 1891, to apply in relation to the National Housing Bank.
54. Liquidation of National Housing Bank.
54A. Power to make rules.
55. Power of the Board to make regulations.
56. [Repealed .]
57. Power to remove difficulties.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE. 
[REPEALED. ]
THE THIRD SCHEDULE. 4 THE NATIONAL HOUSING BANK ACT, 1987 
ACT NO. 53 OF 1987 
[23rd December , 1987.]  
An Act to establish a bank to be known as the National Housing Bank to operate as a 
principal agency to promote housing finance institutions both at local and regional levels 
and to provide financial and other support to such institutions and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Housing 
Bank Act, 1987. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in any provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision. 
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board” means the Board of Directors of the National Housing Bank referred to in     
section 6; 
(b) “Chairman” means the Chairman of the Board appointed under section 6;  
(c) “director” means a director appointed under section 6;  
(d) “housing finance institution” includes every institution, whether incorporated or not, 
which primarily transacts or has as 2[one of its principal objects], the transacting of the business of 
providing finance for housing, whether directly or indirectly;  
(e) “Managing Director” means the Managing Director appointed under section 6;  
(f) “National Housing Bank” means the National Housing Bank established under section 3;  
(g) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(h) “prescribed” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act; 
(i) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934). 
(j) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act;  
(k) words and expressions used herein and not defined either in this Act or in the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), but defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 
1949), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in the Banking Regulation Act, 
1949. 
1. 9th July, 1988, vide notification No. S.O. 684(E), dated 9th July, 1988, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii) [except Chapter V and sub-section ( 3) of section 49]. 
1st June, 1989, vide notification No. S.O. 394(E), dated 1st June, 1989, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii) [in respect of Chapter V and sub-section ( 3) of section 49]. 
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 2, for “its principal object” (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 5 CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL  HOUSING  BANK AND CAPITAL THEREOF
3. Establishment and incorporation of National Housing Bank .—(1) With effect from such 
date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be established for the 
purposes of this Act, a bank to be known as the National Housing Bank. 
(2) The National Housing Bank shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property and to contract, and may, by that name, sue and be sued. 
 (3) The head office of the National Housing Bank shall be at 1[New Delhi or at such other place 
as the Central Government] by notification, specify. 
(4) The National Housing Bank may establish offices, branches or agencies at any place in India, 
and with the previous approval of the 2[the Central Government], at any place outside India. 
3[4. Capital. —(1) The authorised and paid-up capital of the National Housing Bank shall be three 
hundred and fifty crores of rupees: 
4[Provided that the Central Government may, by notification, increase the authorised capital up to 
two thousand crore rupees or such other amount as may be determined by it from time to time];  
(2) The Board may, on such terms and conditions, as determined by it from time to time, issue the 
increased authorised capital to 5*** the Central Government, scheduled banks, public financial 
institutions, housing finance institutions or such other institutions, as may be approved by the Central 
Government: 
Provided that no increase in the issued capital shall be made in such manner that 5***, the Central 
Government, public sector banks, public financial institutions or other institutions owned or 
controlled by the Central Government, hold in aggregate at any time, less than fifty-one per cent. of 
the issued capital of the National Housing Bank.] 
6[(3) The subscribed capital of one thousand four hundred and fifty crore rupees of the National 
Housing Bank, which has been subscribed to by the Reserve Bank, shall stand transferred to, and 
vested in the Central Government upon payment of the face value of the subscribed capital, to the 
Reserve Bank from such date as may be notified by the Central Government.] 
CHAPTER III 
MANAGEMENT OF THE  NATIONAL  HOUSING  BANK
5. Management .—(1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and 
business of the National Housing Bank shall vest in the Board of Directors, which shall exercise all 
powers and do all acts and things, which may be exercised or done by the National Housing Bank.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board, in discharging its functions, shall act on 
business principles with due regard to public interest. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1) and save as otherwise provided in the regulations 
made under this Act, — 
7[(a) the Chairman, if he is a whole-time director or if he is holding offices both as the 
Chairman and the Managing Director, or 
(b) the Managing Director, if the Chairman is not if he is whole-time director, or if the 
Chairman being a whole-time director, is absent,] 
shall also have powers of general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and 
business of the National Housing Bank and may also exercise all powers and do all acts and things 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 163, for “Bombay or at such other place as the Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 1-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 163, ibid., for “the Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 1-6-2018). 
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 3, for section 4 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 164, for “Provided that the Central Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank,  
by notification, increase the authorised capital up to two thousand crores of rupees” (w.e.f. 1-6-2018). 
5. The words “the Reserve Bank” omitted by s. 164, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-2018). 
6. Ins. by s. 164, ibid. (w.e.f 1-6-2018). 
7. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 4, for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 6 which may be exercised or done by the National Housing Bank and shall act on business principles 
with due regard to public interest.  
(4) The Managing Director shall, in the discharge of his powers and functions, follow such 
directions as the Chairman may give.  
(5) In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the National Housing Bank shall be guided by 
such directions in matters of policy involving public interest as the Central Government, 1*** may 
give in writing. 
6. Board of Directors. —(1) The Board of Directors of the National Housing Bank shall consist 
of the following, namely: —
(a) a Chairman and a Managing Director: 
Provided that the same person may be appointed as Chairman and as Managing Director;  
(b) 2[two directors] from amongst the experts in the field of housing, architecture, 
engineering, sociology, finance, law, management and corporate planning or in any other field, 
special knowledge of which is considered useful to the National Housing Bank;  
3[(c) two directors, who shall be persons with experience in the working of institutions 
involved in providing funds for housing or engaged in housing development or have experience in 
the working of financial institutions or scheduled banks; 
(ca) two directors elected in such manner as may be prescribed by shareholders other than the 
4***, the Central Government and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central 
Government;] 
(d) 5[one director] from out of the directors of the Reserve Bank;  
(e) three directors from amongst the officials of the Central Government; 
(f) two directors from amongst the officials of the State Government. 
(2) The Chairman, the Managing Director and other directors 6[excluding the directors referred to 
in clauses ( ca) and ( d)], shall be appointed by the Central Government 7[the director] referred to in 
clause ( d) shall be nominated by the Reserve Bank. 
7. Term of office of Chairman, Managing Director and other directors, service conditions, 
etc.—(1) The Chairman and the Managing Director shall hold office for such term, not exceeding five 
years and shall receive such salary and allowances and be governed by such terms and conditions of 
service as the Central Government may 8*** specify and shall be eligible for re-appointment: 
Provided that the Chairman or, as the case may be, the Managing Director shall, notwithstanding 
the expiration of his term, continue to hold office until his successor enters upon his office. 
(2) The directors referred to in 9[clauses ( b), (c) and ( ca)] of sub-section ( 1) of section 6 shall hold 
hold office for a term of three years: 
10*  * * * * 
(3) The Central Government may 8*** remove the Chairman or the Managing Director, or any 
other director referred to in sub-section ( 2), at any time before the expiry of his term of office after 
giving him a reasonable opportunity of showing case against the proposed removal. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 3), the Central Government, 8*** 
shall have the right to terminate the term of office of the Chairman or, as the case may be, the 
1. The words “in consultation with the Reserve Bank, or the Reserve Bank” omitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 165                     
(w.e.f 1-6-2018). 
2. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 5, for “three directors” (w.e.f 12-6-2000). 
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
4. The words “the Reserve Bank,” omitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 166 (w.e.f. 1-6-2018).  
5. Subs. by s. 166, ibid, for “two directors” (w.e.f. 1-6-2018). 
6. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 5, for “excluding the directors referred to in clause ( d)” (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
7. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 166, for “in consultation with the Reserve Bank and directors” (w.e.f. 1-6-2018). 
8. The words “in consultation with the Reserve Bank” omitted by s. 167, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-6-2018). 
9. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “clauses ( b) and ( c)” (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
10. The proviso omitted by Act 45 of 2006, s. 19 (w.e.f. 16-10-2006). 7 Managing Director, at any time before the expiry of the term specified under sub-section ( 1), by 
giving him notice of not less than three months in writing or three months’ salary and allowances in 
lieu thereof and the Chairman or the Managing Director, as the case may be, shall also have  
the right to relinquish his office at any time before the expiry of the term specified under                
sub-section ( 1), by giving to the Central Government notice of not less than three months in writing or 
three months’ salary and allowances in lieu thereof. 
(5) The directors shall be paid such fees and allowances as may be prescribed for attending the 
meetings of the Board or of any of its committees and for attending to any other work of the National 
Housing Bank: 
Provided that no such fee shall be payable to any director, who is an official of the Government or 
a director of the Reserve Bank. 
8. Disqualifications. —No person shall be a director of the Board, if he— 
(a) is, or becomes of unsound mind and has been so declared by a competent court; or 
(b) is or has been convicted of any offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent or has suspended payment of his debts 
or has compounded with his creditors; or  
(d) has, for any reason, been removed or dismissed from the service of— 
(i) the Government, or  
(ii) the Reserve Bank, the State Bank or any other bank, or  
(iii) any public financial institution, or state financial corporation, or 
(iv) any other corporation owned or controlled by the Government.  
9. Vacation and resignation of office by directors .—(1) If a director— 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 8; or 
(b) is absent without leave of the Board for three or more consecutive meetings thereof,  
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
(2) Any director may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to the authority that 
appointed or, as the case may be, nominated him and on his resignation being accepted by such 
authority or if his resignation is not sooner accepted, on the expiry of three months from the receipt 
thereof by such appointing authority, he shall be deemed to have vacated his office. 
10. Casual vacancy in the office of Chairman or Managing Director .—If the Chairman, or as 
the case may be, the Managing Director, is by infirmity or otherwise rendered incapable of carrying 
out his duties or is absent on leave or otherwise, in circumstances not involving the vacation of his 
appointment, the Central Government may, appoint another person to act in his place during his 
absence. 
11. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall observe 
such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Chairman, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, the 
Managing Director, or, in the event of both the Chairman and the Managing Director being unable to 
attend a meeting, any other director nominated by the Chairman in this behalf and in the absence of 
such nomination, any director elected by the directors present from among themselves at the meeting, 
shall preside at the meeting. 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority 
of votes of the directors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or, 
in his absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote. 
12. Executive Committee and other committees .—(1) The Board may constitute an Executive 
Committee consisting of such number of directors as may be prescribed. 
(2) The Executive Committee shall discharge such functions as may be prescribed, or, as may be 
delegated to it, by the Board. 8 (3) The Board may constitute such other committees, whether consisting wholly of directors or 
wholly of other persons or partly of directors and partly of other persons as it thinks fit for such 
purposes, as it may decide and any committee so constituted shall discharge such functions as may be 
delegated to it by the Board. 
(4) The Executive Committee or any other committees constituted under this section shall meet at 
such times and places and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to transaction of business at 
its meetings, as may be prescribed. 
13. Director of Board or member of committee thereof not to participate in meetings in 
certain cases. —Any director of the Board or any member of a committee, who has any direct or 
indirect pecuniary interest in any matter coming up for consideration at a meeting of the Board or a 
committee thereof, shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have come to his 
knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and the disclosure shall be recorded in 
the minutes of the Board, or the committee, as the case may be, and the director or member shall not 
take any part in any deliberation or decision of the Board or the committee with respect to that matter.  
CHAPTER IV 
BUSINESS OF THE NATIONAL  HOUSING  BANK
14. Business of the National Housing Bank. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, the National 
Housing Bank may transact all or any of the following kinds of business, namely: —
(a) promoting, establishing, supporting or aiding in the promotion, establishment and support 
of housing finance institutions; 
1[(b) making of loans and advances or rendering any other form of financial assistance 
whatsoever for housing activities to housing finance institutions, scheduled banks, state co-
operative agricultural and rural development banks or any other institution or class of institutions 
as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(ba) making of loans and advances for housing or residential township-cum-housing 
development or slum clearance projects;] 
(c) subscribing to or purchasing stocks, shares, bonds, debentures and securities of every 
other description; 
(d) guaranteeing the financial obligations of housing finance institutions and underwriting the 
issue of stocks, shares, bonds, debentures and securities of every other description of housing 
finance institutions;  
(e) drawing, accepting, discounting or rediscounting, buying or selling and dealing in bills of 
exchange, promissory notes, bonds, debentures, hundies, coupons and other instruments by 
whatever name called; 
2[(ea) buying, selling or otherwise dealing in any loans or advances secured by mortgage or 
charge of the immovable property relating to scheduled banks or housing finance institutions; 
(eb) creating one or more trusts and transferring loans or advances together with or without 
securities therefor to such trusts for consideration; 
(ec) setting aside loans or advances held by the National Housing Bank and issuing and 
selling securities based upon such loans or advances so set aside in the form of debt obligations, 
trust certificates of beneficial interest or other instruments, by whatever name called, and to act as 
trustee for the holders of such securities; 
(ed) setting up of one or more mutual funds for undertaking housing finance activities; 
(ee) undertaking or participating in housing mortgage insurance;]
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 7, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f 12-6-2000). 9 1[(f) promoting, forming , conducting or associating in the promotion, formation or conduct of 
companies, mortgage banks, subsidiaries, societies, trusts or such other association of persons as 
it may deem fit for carrying out all or any of its functions under this Act;]
(g) undertaking research and surveys on construction techniques and other studies relating to 
or connected with shelter, housing and human settlement; 
(h) formulating one or more schemes, for the purpose of mobilisation of resources and 
extension of credit for housing; 
2[(hh) formulating a scheme for the purpose of accepting deposits referred to in clause ( a) of 
section 2 of the Voluntary Deposits (Immunities and Exemptions) Act, 1991 (47 of 1991) and 
crediting forty per cent. of the amount of such deposits to a special fund created under section 37;] 
(i) formulating one or more schemes; for the economically weaker sections of society which 
may be subsidised by the Central Government or any State Government or any other source; 
(j) organising training programmes, seminars and symposia on matters relating to housing; 
(k) providing guidelines to the housing finance institutions to ensure their growth on sound 
lines;  
(l) providing technical and administrative assistance to housing finance institutions; 
(m) co-ordinating with the Life Insurance Corporation of India the Unit Trust of India, the 
General Insurance Corporation of India and other financial institutions, in the discharge of its 
overall functions; 
(n) exercising all powers and functions in the performance of duties entrusted to the National 
Housing Bank under this Act or under any other law for the time being in force; 
(o) acting as agent of the Central Government, the State Government or the Reserve Bank or 
of any authority as may be authorised by the Reserve Bank; 
(p) any other kind of business which the Central Government may, on the recommendation of 
the Reserve Bank, authorise; 
(q) generally, doing of all such matters and things as may be incidental to or consequential 
upon the exercise of its powers or the discharge of its duties under this Act. 
15. Borrowings and acceptance of deposits by National Housing Bank .—(1) The National 
Housing Bank may, for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this Act— 
(a) issue and sell bonds and debentures with or without the guarantee of the Central 
Government, in such manner and on such terms as may be prescribed; 
(b) borrow money from3[the Central Government, scheduled banks, financial institutions, 
mutual funds] and from any other authority or organisation or institution approved by that 
Government on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon; 
(c) accept deposits repayable after the expiry of 4[such period and] on such terms as may 
generally or specially be approved by the Reserve Bank: 
5[Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to deposits accepted under the 
scheme formulated by the Bank in pursuance of clause ( hh) of section 14;] 
(d) borrow money from the Reserve Bank— 
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 7, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
2. Ins. by Act 47 of 1991, s. 5 (w.e.f. 20-9-1991). 
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 8, for “the Central Government” (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
4. Subs. by s. 8, ibid.,  for “a period which shall not be less than twelve months from the date of the making of the deposit”          
(w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
5. Added by Act 47 of 1991, s. 5 (w.e.f. 20-9-1991). 10 1[(i) by way of loans and advances and generally obtain financial assistance in such 
manner or on such terms and conditions as may be specified by the Reserve Bank;] 
(ii) out of the National Housing Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund established under 
section 46D of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) or any of the purposes 
specified in that section; 
(e) receive for services rendered, such remuneration, commission, commitment charges, 
consultancy charges, service charges, royalties, premia, licence fees and any other consideration 
of whatever description; 
(f) receive gifts, grants, donations or benefactions from Government or any other source. 
(2) The Central Government may, on a request being made to it by the National Housing Bank, 
guarantee the bonds and debentures issued by the National Housing Bank as to the repayment of 
principal and the payment of interest at such rate as may be fixed by that Government. 
16. Loans in foreign currency .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 2[the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999)] or in any other law for the time being in force relating 
to foreign exchange, the National Housing Bank may, for the purpose of making loans and advances 
under this Act, borrow in such manner and on such conditions as may be prescribed in consultation 
with the Reserve Bank and with the previous approval of the Central Government, foreign currency 
from any bank or financial institution in India or elsewhere. 
(2) The Central Government may, where necessary, guarantee any loan taken by the National 
Housing Bank under sub-section ( 1) or any part thereof as to the repayment of principal and the 
payment of interest and other incidental charges. 
3[16A. Assistance to borrower when to operate or a charge in the property offered as 
security .—(1) Where any person or institution seeks any financial assistance from the National 
Housing Bank on the security of any immovable property belonging to him or to that institution or on 
the security of the property of some other person whose property is offered as a collateral security for 
such assistance, such person or institution or, as the case may be, such other person may execute a 
written declaration in the form set out in the Third Schedule to this Act stating therein the particulars 
of the immovable property which is proposed to be offered as security, or as the case may be, 
collateral security, for such assistance and agreeing that the dues relating to the assistance, if granted, 
shall be a charge on such immovable property and, if on receipt of such declaration, the National 
Housing Bank grants any financial assistance to the person or institution aforesaid, the dues relating to 
such assistance shall, without prejudice to the rights of any other creditor holding any prior charge or 
mortgage in respect of the immovable property so specified, be, by virtue of the provisions of this 
section, a charge on the property specified in the declaration aforesaid. 
(2) Where any further immovable property is offered by a person or an institution as security for 
the financial assistance referred to in sub-section ( 1), such person or institution may execute a fresh 
declaration, as far as may be in the form set out in the Third Schedule to this Act, whereupon the dues 
relating to such assistance shall, by virtue of the provisions of this section, also be a charge on the 
property specified in such fresh declaration. 
(3) A declaration made under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) may be varied or revoked at any 
time by the person or institution as aforesaid, with the prior approval of the National Housing Bank. 
(4) Every declaration made under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a 
document registrable as an agreement under the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) 
and no such declaration shall have effect unless it is so registered. 
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 8, for sub-clause ( i) (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 168, for “the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973)” (w.e.f 1-6-2018).  
3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 9 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 11 16B. Amount and security to be held in trust .—(1) Any sums received by a borrowing 
institution in repayment or realisation of loans and advances financed or refinanced either wholly or 
partly by the National Housing Bank shall, to the extent of the accommodation granted by the 
National Housing Bank and remaining outstanding, be deemed to have been received by the 
borrowing institution in trust for the National Housing Bank, and shall accordingly be paid by such 
institution to the National Housing Bank. 
(2) Where any accommodation has been granted by the National Housing Bank to a borrowing 
institution, all securities held, or which may be held, by such borrowing institution on account of any 
transaction in respect of which such accommodation has been granted, shall be held by such 
institution in trust for the National Housing Bank.] 
17. Power to transfer rights .—The rights and interests of the National Housing Bank (including 
any other rights incidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advance made, or any amount 
recoverable, by it, may be transferred by the National Housing Bank, either in whole or in part, by the 
execution or issue of any instrument or by the transfer of any instrument by endorsement, or in any 
other manner in which the rights and interests in relation to such loan or advance may be lawfully 
transferred, and the National Housing Bank may, notwithstanding such transfer, act as the trustee 
within the meaning of section 3 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), for the transferee. 
18. Power to acquire rights .—The National Housing Bank shall have the right to acquire, by 
transfer or assignment, the rights and interests of any 1[institution] (including any other rights 
incidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advance made, or any amount recoverable by such 
institution, either in whole or in part, by the execution or issue of any instrument or by the transfer of 
any instrument or in any other manner in which the rights and interests in relation to such loan or 
advance may be lawfully transferred. 
2[18A. Exemption from registration .—Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) of 
section 17 of the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908),— 
(a) any instrument in the form of debt obligations or trust certificate of beneficial interest or 
other instruments, by whatever name called, issued by the National Housing Bank to securities the 
loans granted by the housing finance institutions and scheduled banks, and not creating, declaring, 
assigning, limiting or extinguishing any right, title or interest, to or in immovable property except 
in so far as it entitles the holder to an undivided interest afforded by a registered instrument, 
whereby the National Housing Bank has acquired the rights and interests in relation to such loans 
and in securities therefor; or 
(b) any transfer of such instruments referred to in clause ( a),  
shall not require compulsory registration. 
18B. Recovery of dues as arrears of land revenue. —Where any amount is due under an 
agreement to the National Housing Bank, whether acting as a trustee or otherwise, in respect of 
securitisation of loans of housing finance institutions and scheduled banks, the National Housing 
Bank may without prejudice to any other mode of recovery make an application to the State 
Government for the recovery of the amount due to it, and if the State Government or such authority, 
as that Government may specify in this behalf, is satisfied that any amount is due, it may issue a 
certificate for the amount to the Collector and the Collector shall proceed to recover that amount in 
the same manner as arrears of land revenue.]
19. Power to impose conditions for accommodation .—In entering into any transaction under 
this Chapter with any borrowing 3[institution], the National Housing Bank may impose such 
conditions as it may think necessary or expedient for protecting the interests of the National Housing 
Bank. 
20. Power to call for repayment before agreed period. —Notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any agreement, the National Housing Bank may, by notice in writing, require 
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 10, for “housing finance institution” (w.e.f. 12-6-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “housing finance institution” (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 12 any borrowing 1[institution] to discharge forthwith in full its liabilities to the National Housing 
Bank —
(a) if it appears to the Board that false or misleading information in any material particular 
was given in the application for the loan or advance; or 
(b) if the borrowing 1[institution] has failed to comply with any of the terms of the agreement 
with the National Housing Bank in the matter of the loan or advance; or 
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the borrowing 1[institution] is unable to pay its 
debts or that proceedings for liquidation may be commenced in respect thereof; or 
(d) if for any reason, it is necessary so to do to protect the interests of the National Housing 
Bank. 
21. National Housing Bank to have access to records .—(1) The National Housing Bank shall 
have free access to all such records of any 1[institution] which seeks to avail of any credit facilities 
from the National Housing Bank and to all such records of any person who seeks to avail of any credit 
facilities from such 1[institution], the perusal of which may appear to the national Housing Bank to be 
necessary in connection with the providing of finance or other assistance to such 1[institution] or the 
refinancing of any loan or advance made to such person by that 1[institution]. 
(2) The National Housing Bank may require any institution or person referred to in sub-section 
(1), to furnish to it copies of any of the records referred to in that sub-section and the institution or the 
person, as the case may be, shall be bound to comply with such requisition. 
22. Validity of loan or advance not to be questioned .—Notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in any other law for the time being in force, the validity of any loan or advance 
made by the National Housing Bank in pursuance of the provisions of this Act shall not be called in 
question merely on the ground of non-compliance with the requirements of such other law or of any 
resolution, contract, or any instrument regulating the constitution of the borrowing 1[institution]: 
Provided that nothing in this section shall enable any company or co-operative society to obtain 
any loan or advance where the instrument relating to the constitution of such company or co-operative 
society does not empower such company or co-operative society so to do. 
23. National Housing Bank not to make loans or advances against its own bonds or 
debentures .—The National Housing Bank shall not make any loan or advance on the security of its 
own bonds or debentures. 
24. Power to inspect .—(1) The National Housing Bank may at any time and shall, on being 
directed so to do by the Reserve Bank, cause an inspection to be made by one or more of its officers 
of any 1[institution] to which the National Housing Bank has made any loan or advance or granted any 
other financial assistance, and its books, accounts and other documents; and the National Housing 
Bank shall supply to the 1[institution] a copy of its report on such inspection. 
(2) It shall be the duty of every officer, employee or other person or persons incharge of the whole 
or part of the affairs of the 1[institution] to produce to any officer making an inspection under sub-
section ( 1), all such books, accounts and other documents in his custody or power and to furnish 
within such time as the said officer may specify, any statements, information relating to the affairs of 
the 1[institution] as the said officer may require of him. 
25. Power to collect credit information. —(1) The National Housing Bank may, for the purpose 
of the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act, at any time direct any 1[institution] to submit 
to it credit information in such form and within such time as may be specified by the National 
Housing Bank from time to time. 
(2) Every 1[institution] shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any law for 
the time being in force or in any instrument regulating the constitution thereof or in any agreement 
executed by it, relating to the secrecy of its dealings with its constituents, be bound to comply with 
any directions issued under sub-section ( 1). 
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 12, for “housing finance institution” (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 13 (3) The National Housing Bank may, for the purpose of the efficient discharge of its functions 
under this Act collect from the Central and State Governments, local authorities, the Reserve Bank, 
any bank or such financial or other institutions as the Reserve Bank may specify in this behalf, credit 
information or other information. 
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section and section 26, credit information means any 
information relating to —
(i) the amount of loans and advances and other credit facilities granted for the purpose of 
housing; 
(ii) the nature of security taken for such loans, advances or other credit facilities; 
(iii) the guarantees furnished; and 
(iv) any other information which has a bearing on the credit-worthiness of the borrower. 
26. Power to publish information. —The National Housing Bank, if it considers it in the public 
interest so to do, may publish any credit information or other information obtained by it under this 
Act, in such consolidated form or in any other form as it thinks fit. 
27. Advisory services. —The National Housing Bank may provide advisory services to the 
Central and State Governments, local authorities and other agencies connected with housing, in 
respect of — 
(a) formulation of overall policies aimed at promoting the growth of housing and housing 
finance institutions; 
(b) legislation relating to matters having a bearing on shelter, housing and human settlement.  
CHAPTER V 
PROVISIONS RELATING TO HOUSING FINANCE INSTITUTIONS RECEIVING DEPOSITS
28. Definition of deposit. —In this Chapter the term ‘deposit’ shall have the meaning assigned to 
it in section 45I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934). 
29. Chapter not to apply in certain cases. —(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to 
deposits accepted by a housing finance institution which is a firm or an unincorporated association of 
individuals. 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the firms and unincorporated associations 
of individuals referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall continue to be governed by the provisions of Chapter 
IIIC of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934). 
1[29A. Requirement of registration and net owned fund.— (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Chapter or in any other law for the time being in force, no housing finance institution 
which is a company shall commence or carry on the business of a housing finance institution 
without— 
(a) obtaining a certificate of registration issued under this Chapter; and 
(b) having the net owned fund of twenty-five lakh rupees or such other higher amount, as the 
National Housing Bank may, by notification, specify. 
(2) Every such housing finance institution shall make an application for registration to the 
National Housing Bank in such form as may be specified by the National Housing Bank: 
Provided that a housing finance institution which is a company in existence on the 
commencement of the National Housing Bank (Amendment) Act, 2000 (15 of 2000), shall make an 
application for registration to the National Housing Bank before the expiry of six months from such 
commencement and notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), may continue to carry on 
the business of housing finance institution until a certificate of registration is issued to it or rejection 
of application for registration is communicated to it. 
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 13 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 14 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), a housing finance institution which is a 
company in existence on the commencement of the National Housing Bank (Amendment) Act, 2000 
(15 of 2000), and having a net owned fund of less than twenty-five lakh rupees, may, for the purpose 
of enabling such institution to fulfil the requirement of the net owned fund, continue to carry on the 
business of a housing finance institution— 
(i) for a period of three years from such commencement; or 
(ii) for such further period as the National Housing Bank may, after recording the reasons in 
writing for so doing, extend, 
subject to the conditions that such institution shall, within three months of fulfilling the requirement 
of the net owned fund, inform the National Housing Bank about such fulfilment: 
Provided that the period allowed to continue business under this sub-section shall in no case 
exceed six years in the aggregate. 
(4) The National Housing Bank, for the purpose of considering the application for registration, 
may require to be satisfied by an inspection of the books of such housing finance institution or 
otherwise that the following conditions are fulfilled:— 
(a) that housing finance institution is or shall be in a position to pay its present or future 
depositors in full as and when their claims accrue; 
(b) that the affairs of the housing finance institution are not being or are not likely to be 
conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of its present or future depositors; 
(c) that the general character of the management or the proposed management of the housing 
finance institution shall not be prejudicial to the public interest or the interests of its depositors; 
(d) that the housing finance institution has adequate capital structure and earning prospects; 
(e) that the public interest shall be served by the grant of certificate of registration to the 
housing finance institution to commence or to carry on the business in India; 
(f) that the grant of certificate of registration shall not be prejudicial to the operation and 
growth of the housing finance sector of the country; and 
(g) any other condition, fulfilment of which in the opinion of the National Housing Bank, 
shall be necessary to ensure that the commencement of or carrying on the business in India by a 
housing finance institution shall not be prejudicial to the public interest or in the interests of the 
depositors. 
(5) The National Housing Bank may, after being satisfied that the conditions specified in                
sub-section ( 4) are fulfilled, grant a certificate of registration subject to such conditions which it may 
consider fit to impose. 
(6) The National Housing Bank may cancel a certificate of registration granted to a housing 
finance institution under this section if such institution— 
(i) ceases to carry on the business of a housing finance institution in India; or 
(ii) has failed to comply with any condition subject to which the certificate of registration had 
been issued to it; or 
(iii) at any time fails to fulfil any of the conditions referred to in clauses ( a) to ( g) of              
sub-section ( 4); or 
(iv) fails— 
(a) to comply with any direction issued by the National Housing Bank under the 
provisions of this Chapter; or 
(b) to maintain accounts in accordance with the requirement of any law or any direction 
or order issued by the National Housing Bank under the provisions of this Chapter; or 15 (c) to submit or offer for inspection its books of account and other relevant documents 
when so demanded by an inspecting authority of the National Housing Bank; or 
(v) has been prohibited from accepting deposit by an order made by the National Housing 
Bank under the provisions of this Chapter and such order has been in force for a period of not less 
than three months: 
Provided that before cancelling a certificate of registration on the ground that the housing 
finance institution has failed to comply with the provisions of clause ( ii) or has failed to fulfil any 
of the conditions referred to in clauses ( a) to ( g) of sub-section ( 4), the National Housing Bank, 
unless it is of the opinion that the delay in cancelling the certificate of registration shall be 
prejudicial to public interest or the interest of the depositors or the housing finance institution, 
shall give an opportunity to such institution on such terms as the National Housing Bank may 
specify for taking necessary steps to comply with such provision or fulfilment of such condition: 
Provided further that before making any order of cancellation of certificate of registration, 
such institution shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
(7) A housing finance institution aggrieved by the order or rejection of application for 
registration or cancellation of certificate of registration may prefer an appeal, within a period of 
thirty days from the date on which such order of rejection or cancellation is communicated to it, to 
the Central Government and the decision of the Central Government where an appeal has been 
preferred to it, or of the National Housing Bank where no appeal has been preferred, shall be 
final: 
Provided that before making any order of rejection of appeal, such institution shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(I) “net owned fund” means —
(a) the aggregate of the paid-up equity capital and free reserves as disclosed in the latest 
balance-sheet of the housing finance institution after deducting therefrom —
(i) accumulated balance of loss; 
(ii) deferred revenue expenditure; and 
(iii) other intangible assets; and 
(b) further reduced by the amounts representing —
(1) investments of such institution in shares of —
(i) its subsidiaries; 
(ii) companies in the same group; 
(iii) all other housing finance institutions which are companies; and 
(2) the book value of debentures, bonds, outstanding loans and advances (including 
hire-purchase and lease finance) made to, and deposits with, —
(i) subsidiaries of such company; and 
(ii) companies in the same group, to the extent such amount exceeds ten per cent. of 
(a) above; 
(II) “subsidiaries” and “companies in the same group” shall have the same meanings assigned 
to them in the 1[Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)]. 
 29B. Maintenance of percentage of assets.— (1) Every housing finance institution shall invest 
and continue to invest in India in unencumbered approved securities, valued at a price not exceeding 
the current market price of such securities, an amount which, at the close of business on any day, shall 
not be less than five per cent. or such higher percentage not exceeding twenty-five per cent. as the 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 169, for “the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)” (w.e.f. 1-6-2018).  16 National Housing Bank may, from time to time and by notification, specify, of the deposits 
outstanding at the close of business on the last working day of the second preceding quarter. 
(2) Every housing finance institution shall maintain in India in an account with a scheduled bank 
in term deposits or certificate of deposits (free of charge or lien) or in deposits with the National 
Housing Bank or by way of subscription to the bonds issued by the National Housing Bank, or partly 
in such account or in such deposit or partly by way of such subscription, a sum which, at the close of 
business on any day, together with the investment made under sub-section ( 1) shall not be less than 
ten per cent. or such higher percentage not exceeding twenty-five per cent., as the National Housing 
Bank may, from time to time and by notification specify, of the deposits outstanding in the books of 
the housing finance institution at the close of business on the last working day of the second preceding 
quarter. 
(3) For the purpose of ensuring compliance with the provisions of this section, the National 
Housing Bank may require every such housing finance institution to furnish a return to it in such 
form, in such a manner and for such period as may be specified by the National Housing Bank. 
(4) If the amount invested by a housing finance institution at the close of business on any day is 
less than the rate specified under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), such housing finance institution 
shall be liable to pay to the National Housing Bank, in respect of such shortfall, a penal interest at a 
rate of three per cent. per annum above the bank rate on such amount by which the amount actually 
maintained or invested falls short of the specified percentage, and where the shortfall continues in the 
subsequent quarters, the rate of penal interest shall be five per cent. per annum above the bank rate on 
such shortfall for each subsequent quarter. 
(5) (a) The penal interest payable under sub-section ( 4) shall be payable within a period of 
fourteen days from the date on which a notice issued by the National Housing Bank demanding 
payment of the same is served on the housing finance institution and, in the event of a failure of the 
housing finance institution to pay the same within such period, may be levied by a direction of the 
principal civil court having jurisdiction in the area where an office of the defaulting housing finance 
institution is situated and such direction shall be made only upon and application made in this behalf 
to the court by the National Housing Bank; and 
(b) When the court makes a direction under clause ( a), it shall issue a certificate specifying the 
sum payable by the housing finance institution and every such certificate shall be enforceable in the 
manner as if it were a decree made by the court in a suit. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, if the National Housing Bank is satisfied 
that the defaulting housing finance institution had sufficient cause for its failure to comply with the 
provisions of sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), it may not demand the payment of the penal interest. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,— 
(i) “approved securities” means securities of any State Government or of the Central 
Government and such bonds, both the principal whereof and the interest whereon shall have been 
fully and unconditionally guaranteed by any such Government; 
(ii) “unencumbered approved securities” includes the approved securities lodged by the 
housing finance institution with another institution for an advance or any other arrangement to the 
extent to which such securities have not been drawn against or availed of or encumbered in any 
manner; 
(iii) “quarter” means the period of three months ending on the last day of March, June, 
September or December. 
29C. Reserve fund. —(1) Every housing finance institution which is a company shall create a 
reserve fund and transfer therein a sum not less than twenty per cent. of its net profit every year as 
disclosed in the profit and loss account and before any dividend is declared. 
Explanation .—A housing finance institution creating and maintaining any special reserve in terms 
of clause ( viii) of sub-section ( 1) of section 36 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), may take 
into account any sum transferred by it for the year to such special reserve for the purposes of this         
sub-section.17 (2) No appropriation of any sum from the reserve fund including any sum in the special reserve 
which has been taken into account for the purposes of reserve fund in terms of sub-section ( 1), shall 
be made by such housing finance institution except for the purpose as may be specified by the 
National Housing Bank from time to time and every such appropriation shall be reported to the 
National Housing Bank within twenty-one days from the date of such withdrawal: 
Provided that the National Housing Bank may, in any particular case and for sufficient cause 
being shown, extend the period of twenty-one days by such further period as it thinks fit or condone 
any delay in making such report. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may, on the 
recommendation of the National Housing Bank and having regard to the adequacy of the paid-up 
capital and reserves of a housing finance institution which is a company in relation to its deposit 
liabilities, declare by order in writing that the provisions of sub-section ( 1) shall not be applicable to 
such housing finance institution for such period as may be specified in the order: 
Provided that no such order shall be made unless the amount in the reserve fund under sub-section 
(1), together with the amount in the share premium account, is not less than the paid-up capital of the 
housing finance institution.] 
30. National Housing Bank to regulate or prohibit issue of prospectus or advertisement 
soliciting deposits of money.— The National Housing Bank may, if it considers necessary in the 
public interest so to do, by general or special order, —
(a) regulate or prohibit the issue by any housing finance institution of any prospectus or 
advertisement soliciting deposits of money from the public; and 
(b) specify the conditions subject to which any such prospectus or advertisement, if not 
prohibited, may be issued.
1[30A. Power of National Housing Bank to determine policy and issue directions. —(1) If the 
National Housing Bank is satisfied that, in the public interest or to regulate the housing finance 
system of the country to its advantage or to prevent the affairs of any housing finance institution being 
conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the depositors or in a manner prejudicial to the 
interest of the housing finance institutions, it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may subject to the 
provisions of sub-section ( 5) of section 5, determine the policy and give directions to all or any of the 
housing finance institution relating to income recognition, accounting standards, making of proper 
provision for bad and doubtful debts, capital adequacy based on risk weights for assets and credit 
conversion factors for off balance-sheet items and also relating to deployment of funds by a housing 
finance institution or a group of housing finance institutions or housing finance institutions generally, 
as the case may be, and such housing finance institutions shall be bound to follow the policy so 
determined and the direction so issued. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the powers vested under sub-section ( 1), the National 
Housing Bank may give directions to housing finance institutions generally or to a group of housing 
finance institutions or to any housing finance institution in particular as to — 
(a) the purpose for which advances or other fund-based or non-fund-based accommodation 
may not be made; and 
(b) the maximum amount of advances or other financial accommodation or investment in 
shares and other securities which, having regard to the paid-up capital, reserves and deposits of 
the housing finance institution and other relevant considerations, may be made by that housing 
finance institution to any person or a company or to a group of companies.] 
31. Power of National Housing Bank to collect information from housing finance institutions 
as to deposits and to give directions.— (1) The National Housing Bank may at any time direct that 
every housing finance institution accepting deposits shall furnish to the National Housing Bank in 
such form, at such intervals and within such time, such statements, information or particulars relating 
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 14 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 18 to or connected with deposits received by the housing finance institution, as may be specified by the 
National Housing Bank by general or special order. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power vested in the National Housing Bank under 
sub-section ( 1), the statements, information or particulars to be furnished under sub-section ( 1), may 
relate to all or any of the following matters, namely, the amount of the deposits, the purposes and 
periods for which, and the rates of interest and other terms and conditions on which, such deposits are 
received.  
(3) The National Housing Bank may, if it considers necessary in the public interest so to do, give 
directions to housing finance institutions accepting deposits either generally or to any group of 
housing finance institutions accepting deposits, and in particular, in respect of any matters relating to, 
or connected with, the receipt of deposits, including1[credit rating of the housing finance institution 
accepting deposits,] the rates of interest payable on such deposits, and the periods for which deposits 
may be received. 
(4) If any housing finance institution accepting deposits fails to comply with any direction given 
by the National Housing Bank, under sub-section ( 3), the National Housing Bank may prohibit the 
acceptance of deposits by that housing finance institution. 
(5) Every housing finance institution receiving deposits, shall, if so required by the National 
Housing Bank and within such time as the National Housing Bank may specify, cause to be sent at the 
cost of the housing finance institution, a copy of its annual balance-sheet and profit and loss account 
or other annual accounts to every person from whom the housing finance institution holds, as on the 
last day of the year to which the accounts relate, deposits higher than such sum as may be specified by 
the National Housing Bank. 
32. Duty of housing finance institutions to furnish statements, etc., required by National 
Housing Bank.— Every housing finance institution shall furnish the statements, information or 
particulars called for, in such form as may be prescribed and to comply with any direction given to it, 
under the provisions of this Chapter. 
33. Powers and duties of auditors.— (1) The auditor of every housing finance institution shall 
enquire whether or not the housing finance institution has furnished to the National Housing Bank 
such statements, information or particulars relating to or connected with deposits received by it, as are 
required to be furnished under this Chapter, and the auditor shall, except where he is satisfied on such 
enquiry that the housing finance institution has furnished such statements, information or particulars, 
make a report to the National Housing Bank giving the aggregate amount of such deposits held by the 
housing finance institution. 
2[(1A) The National Housing Bank may, on being satisfied that it is necessary so to do, in the 
public interest or in the interest of the depositors or for the purpose of proper assessment of the books 
of account, issue directions to any housing finance institution or any group of housing finance 
institutions or housing finance companies generally or to the auditors of such housing finance 
institution or institutions relating to balance-sheet, profit and loss account, disclosure of liabilities in 
the books of account or any matter relating thereto.] 
(2) Where, in the case of a housing finance institution, being a company, the auditor has made, or 
intends to make a report to the National Housing Bank under sub-section ( 1), he shall include in his 
report under 3[sub-section ( 2) of section 143 of the Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)] the contents of 
the report which he has made, or intends to make, to the National Housing Bank. 
 2[(3) Where the National Housing Bank is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do in the public 
interest or in the interest of the housing finance institution or in the interest of the depositors of such 
institution, it may at any time by order, direct that a special audit of the accounts of the housing 
finance institution in relation to any such transaction or class of transactions or for such period or 
periods, as may be specified in the order, shall be conducted and the National Housing Bank may 
appoint an auditor or auditors to conduct such special audit and direct the auditor or the auditors to 
submit the report to it.
1.  Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 15 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
2.  Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
3. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 170, for “sub-section ( 2) of section 227 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)”               
(w.e.f. 1-6-2018).  19 (4) The remuneration of the auditors as may be fixed by the National Housing Bank, having 
regard to the nature and volume of work involved in the audit and the expenses of or incidental to the 
audit, shall be borne by the housing finance institution so audited.] 
1[33A. Power of National Housing Bank to prohibit acceptance of deposit and alienation of 
assets.— (1) If any housing finance institution violates the provisions of any section or fails to comply 
with any direction or order given by the National Housing Bank under any of the provisions of this 
Chapter, the National Housing Bank may prohibit the housing finance institution from accepting any 
deposit. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any agreement or instrument or any law 
for the time being in force, the National Housing Bank on being satisfied that it is necessary so to do 
in the public interest or in the interest of the depositors, may direct, the housing finance institution 
against which an order prohibiting from accepting deposit has been issued, not to sell, transfer, create 
charge or mortgage or deal in any manner with its property and assets without prior written 
permission of the National Housing Bank for such period not exceeding six months from the date of 
the order. 
33B. Power of National Housing Bank to file winding up petition.— (1) The National Housing 
Bank, on being satisfied that a housing finance institution which is a company,— 
(a) is unable to pay its debt; or 
(b) has by virtue of the provisions of section 29A become disqualified to carry on the business 
of a housing finance institution; or 
(c) has been prohibited by the National Housing Bank from receiving deposit by an order and 
such order has been in force for a period of not less than three months; or 
(d) the continuance of the housing finance institution is detrimental to the public interest or to 
the interest of depositors of the company,  
may file an application for winding up of such housing finance institution under the 2[Companies Act, 
2013 (18 of 2013)]. 
(2) A housing finance institution which is a company shall be deemed to be unable to pay its debt 
if it has refused or has failed to meet within five working days any lawful demand made at any of its 
offices or branches and the National Housing Bank certifies in writing that such company is unable to 
pay its debt. 
(3) A copy of every application made by the National Housing Bank under sub-section ( 1) shall 
be sent to the Registrar of Companies. 
(4) All the provisions of the 2[Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)] relating to winding up of a 
company shall apply to a winding up proceeding initiated on the application made by the National 
Housing Bank under this provision.] 
34. Inspection .—(1) The National Housing Bank may, at any time, cause an inspection to be 
made by one or more of its officers or employees or other persons (hereafter in this section referred to 
as the inspecting authority) of any housing finance institution accepting deposits, for the purpose of 
verifying the correctness or completeness of any statement, information or particulars furnished to the 
National Housing Bank or for the purpose of obtaining any information or particulars which the 
housing finance institution has failed to furnish on being called upon to do so. 
(2) It shall be the duty of every director or member of any committee or other body or any person 
for the time being vested with the management of the whole or part of the affairs of every housing 
finance institution accepting deposits or other officer or employee  thereof to produce to the 
inspecting authority all such books, accounts and other documents in his custody or power and to 
furnish that authority with any statement and information relating to the business of the institution as 
that authority may require of him, within such time as may be specified by that authority. 
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 17 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 171, for “Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)” (w.e.f 1-6-2018).  20 (3) The inspecting authority may examine on oath any director or member of any committee or 
body or any other person for the time being vested with the management of the affairs of the housing 
finance institution, accepting deposits, or any officer or employee thereof, in relation to its business. 
35. Deposits not to be solicited by unauthorised persons.— No person shall solicit on behalf of 
any housing finance institution either by publishing or causing to be published any prospectus or 
advertisement or in any other manner deposits of money from the public unless —
(a) he has been authorised in writing by the said housing finance institution to do so and 
specifies the name of the institution which has so authorised him; and 
(b) the prospectus or advertisement complies with any order made by the National Housing 
Bank under section 30 and with any other provision of law for the time being in force applicable 
to the publication of such prospectus or advertisement. 
1[35A. Disclosure of information.— (1) Any information relating to a housing finance 
institution, —
(a) contained in any statement or return submitted by such institution under the provisions of 
this Chapter; or 
(b) obtained through audit or inspection or otherwise by the National Housing Bank, 
shall be treated as confidential and shall not, except otherwise provided in this section, be disclosed. 
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to —
(a) the disclosure by any housing finance institution, with the previous permission of the 
National Housing Bank, of any information furnished to the National Housing Bank under sub-
section ( 1); 
(b) the publication by the National Housing Bank, if it considers necessary in the public 
interest so to do, of any information collected by it under sub-section ( 1) in such consolidated 
form as it may think fit without disclosing the name of any housing finance institution or its 
borrowers; 
(c) the disclosure by the housing finance institution or by the National Housing Bank of any 
such information to any other housing finance institution or in accordance with the practice and 
usage customary amongst such institutions or as permitted or required under any other law: 
Provided that any such information received by a housing finance institution under this clause 
shall not be published except in accordance with the practice and usage customary amongst 
institutions or as permitted or required under any other law. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, 
the National Housing Bank, if it is satisfied that, in the public interest or in the interest of the 
depositors or the housing finance institution or to prevent the affairs of any housing finance institution 
being conducted in a manner detrimental to the interest of the depositors, it is expedient so to do, may, 
either on its own motion or on being requested, furnish or communicate any information relating to 
the conduct of business by any housing finance institution to any authority constituted under any law. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, no court or 
tribunal or other authority shall compel the National Housing Bank to produce or to give inspection of 
any statement or other material obtained by the National Housing Bank under any provision of this 
Chapter.
35B. Power of National Housing Bank to exempt any housing finance institution.— The 
National Housing Bank on being satisfied that it is necessary so to do, may, declare by notification 
that any or all the provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to a housing finance institution or a group 
of housing finance institutions either generally or for such period as may be specified, subject to such 
conditions, limitations or restrictions as it may think fit to impose.] 
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 18 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 21 36. Chapter V to override other laws.— The provisions of this Chapter shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force 
or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law. 
1[36A. Power to order repayment of deposit.— (1) Every deposit accepted by a housing finance 
institution which is a company unless renewed, shall be repaid in accordance with the terms and 
conditions of such deposit. 
(2) Where a housing finance institution which is a company has failed to repay any deposit or part 
thereof in accordance with the terms and conditions of such deposit, such officer of the National 
Housing Bank, as may be authorised by the Central Government for the purpose of this section 
(hereinafter referred to as the “authorised officer”) may, if he is satisfied, either on his own motion or 
on any application of the depositor, that it is necessary so to do to safeguard the interests of the 
housing finance institution, the depositors or in the public interest, direct, by order, such housing 
finance institution to make repayment of such deposit or part thereof forthwith or within such time 
and subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order: 
Provided that the authorised officer may, before making any order under this sub-section, give a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the housing finance institution and the other persons 
interested in the matter. 
36B. Nomination by depositors.— (1) Where a deposit is held by a housing finance institution to 
the credit of one or more persons, the depositor or, as the case may be, all the depositors together may 
nominate, in the manner prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under section 45ZA of 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) one person to whom in the event of the death of the 
sole depositor or the death of all the depositors, the amount of deposit may be returned by the housing 
finance institution. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, or in any 
deposition, whether testamentary or otherwise, in respect of such deposit, where a nomination made 
purports to confer on any person the right to receive the amount of deposit from the housing finance 
institution, the nominee shall, on the death of the sole depositor or, as the case may be, on the death of 
all the depositors, become entitled to all the rights of the sole depositor or, as the case may be, of the 
depositors, in relation to such deposit to the exclusion of all other persons, unless the nomination is 
varied or cancelled in the manner prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under section 
45ZA of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949). 
(3) Where the nominee is a minor, it shall be lawful for the depositor making the nomination to 
appoint, in the manner prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under section 45ZA of 
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949), any person to receive the amount of deposit in the 
event of his death during the minority of the nominee. 
(4) Payment by a housing finance institution in accordance with the provisions of this section 
shall constitute a full discharge to the housing finance institution of its liability in respect of the 
deposit: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall affect the right or claim which any 
person may have against the person to whom any payment is made under this section. 
(5) No notice of the claim of any person, other than the person or persons in whose name a 
deposit is held by the housing finance institution, shall be receivable by the housing finance 
institution, nor shall the housing finance institution be bound by any such notice even though 
expressly given to it: 
Provided that where any decree, order, certificate or other authority from a court of competent 
jurisdiction relating to such deposit is produced before a housing finance institution, the housing 
finance institution shall take due note of such decree, order, certificate or other authority.]
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 19 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 22 1[CHAPTER VA 
OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO  HOUSING  FINANCE  INSTITUTIONS
36C. Definitions.— In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal established under section 36-I; 
(b) “approved institution” means— 
(i) a housing finance institution which has been granted a certificate of registration under                 
sub-section ( 5) of section 29A; 
(ii) a scheduled bank; 
(iii) National Housing Bank acting as trustee or otherwise in a transaction of 
securitisation of housing mortgages undertaken by the National Housing Bank; 
(iv) such other institutions as the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the 
National Housing Bank, by notification, specify; 
(c) “assistance” means any direct or indirect financial assistance granted, by an approved 
institution during the course of any housing finance activity undertaken by it; 
(d) “borrower” means any person to whom any assistance has been given by an approved 
institution for the purposes of purchase, construction, repairs, extension or renovation of a 
residential house; 
(e) “dues” means any liability which is claimed as due from any person by an approved 
institution and includes interest, costs, charges and other amount payable in relation thereto; 
(f) “recovery officer” means an officer appointed under section 36D. 
 36D. Appointment of recovery officer. —(1) The Central Government may, in consultation with 
the National Housing Bank, by notification appoint such persons being the officers of the approved 
institution, as it may deem fit, to be recovery officers for the purpose of this Chapter who shall have 
such qualifications as the Central Government may by rules made under this Act specify. 
(2) The local limits within which the recovery officer shall exercise the powers conferred and 
perform the duties imposed on by or under this Chapter shall be such as may be specified by the 
Central Government by notification.
36E. Application to the recovery officer. —(1) Where any borrower, who is under a liability to 
an approved institution under an agreement, makes any default in repayment of any assistance or any 
instalment thereof or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of said agreement, then, without 
prejudice to the provisions of section 69 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882), the 
approved institution may apply, to the recovery officer within the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
borrower actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or personally works for gain, or the 
cause of action wholly or in part arises, for the sale of the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated 
or assigned to the approved institution as security for the dues. 
(2) Where an approved institution, which has to recover its dues from any borrower, has filed an 
application to the recovery officer under sub-section ( 1) and the same property is also pledged, 
mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to another approved institution or person, the other approved 
institution or person may join the approved institution at any stage of the proceedings, before the final 
order is passed, by making an application to that recovery officer. 
(3) In the application under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), the nature and extent of the liability 
of the borrower to the approved institution or person, the grounds on which it is made shall be stated 
and it be in such form and be accompanied by such documents or other evidence as may be 
prescribed. 
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 20 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 23 36F. Procedure in respect of application under section 36E. —(1) On receipt of an application 
under section 36E, if the recovery officer is of opinion that the borrower is under a liability to an 
approved institution under an agreement, or has made default in repayment of the assistance or any 
instalment thereof or has otherwise failed to comply with the terms of said agreement, he shall cause a 
written notice of demand in such form as may be prescribed to be served on the borrower, calling 
upon him to pay the amount specified in the notice within a period of ninety days from the date of 
service thereof or to show cause as to why the relief prayed for should not be granted. 
(2) The recovery officer may after giving the applicant and the borrower an opportunity of being 
heard, pass such interim or final order, including the order for payment of interest from the date on or 
before which payment of the amount is found due up to the date of realisation or actual payment, on 
the application as it thinks fit to meet the ends of justice. 
(3) The recovery officer may also consider and if satisfied, allow any claim of set-off or counter-
claim set up by the borrower against the approved institution or person. 
(4) The recovery officer shall supply a copy of every order passed by it to the approved institution 
and the borrower. 
(5) The recovery officer may make an interim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or 
attachment) against the borrower to debar him from transferring, alienating or otherwise dealing with 
or disposing of, any property which is pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the approved 
institution as security for the dues. 
(6) The application made to the recovery officer under section 36E shall be dealt with by him as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by him to dispose of the application finally 
within six months from the date of receipt of the application. 
 36G. Enforcement of order of recovery officer. —(1) Where the borrower refuses or fails to 
comply with the order within the time specified therein the recovery officer may, take possession of 
any property pledged, mortgaged, hypothecated or assigned to the approved institution as security for 
any assistance in respect of which default has been made and transfer by way of sale, lease or 
otherwise such property. 
(2) Any transfer by way of sale, lease or otherwise under this section shall be conducted in such 
manner as may be prescribed. 
(3) Any transfer of property made by the recovery officer, in exercise of its powers under sub-
section ( 1), shall vest in the transferee all rights in or to the property transferred, as if the transfer has 
been made by the owner of the property. 
(4) Where any action has been taken against the borrower under the provisions of sub-section ( 1), 
all costs, charges, expenses which in the opinion of the recovery officer have been properly incurred 
by him as incidental thereto, shall be recoverable from the borrower and the money which is received 
by it shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be held by it in trust to be applied firstly, in 
payment of such costs, charges and expenses and secondly, in discharge of debt, due to the approved 
institution, and the residue of the money so received shall be paid to the person entitled thereto. 
(5) If the dues of the approved institution, together with all costs, charges and expenses incurred 
by the recovery officer, are tendered to the approved institution or to the recovery officer at any time 
before the date fixed for sale or transfer, the property shall not be sold or transferred, and no further 
steps shall be taken for transfer or sale of that property. 
36H. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate and District Magistrate to assist recovery officer in 
taking charge of property. —(1) Where any property is sold or leased in pursuance of any power 
conferred by section 36E, the recovery officer may, for the purpose of taking into custody or under 
control any such property, request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District 
Magistrate within whose jurisdiction any such property or other documents relating thereto may be 24 situated or found to take possession thereof, and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or as the case may 
be, the District Magistrate shall, on such request being made to him, — 
(a) take possession of such property and documents relating thereto; and 
(b) forward them to the recovery officer. 
(2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate may take or cause to be taken such steps and use, 
or cause to be used, such force, as may, in his opinion, be necessary. 
(3) No act of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate done in pursuance of 
this section shall be called in question in any court or before any authority. 
36-I. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal. —(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
establish one or more Appellate Tribunals, to be known as the Housing Finance Institutions Debt 
Recovery Appellate Tribunals, to exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on such 
Tribunal by or under this Act. 
(2) The Central Government shall also specify in the notification referred to in sub-section ( 1), the 
areas in relation to which the Appellate Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), the Central Government may 
authorise the Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal to discharge also the functions of the 
Presiding Officer of other Appellate Tribunal. 
36J. Composition of Appellate Tribunal. —An Appellate Tribunal shall consist of one person 
only (hereinafter referred to as the Presiding Officer of the Appellate Tribunal) to be appointed, by 
notification, by the Central Government. 
36K. Qualifications for appointment as Presiding Officer of Appellate Tribunal. —A person 
shall not be qualified for appointment as the Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal, unless he — 
(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be a District Judge; 
(b) has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade II of that 
Service for at least three years. 
36L. Term of office. —The Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal shall hold office for a term 
of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty-five 
years, whichever is earlier. 
36M. Staff of Appellate Tribunal. —(1) The Central Government shall provide the Appellate 
Tribunal with such officers and other employees as that Government may think fit. 
(2) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their functions 
under the general superintendence of the Presiding Officer. 
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and other 
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as the Central Government may by rules made 
under this Act specify. 
36N. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Presiding 
Officers. —The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service 
(including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Presiding Officer of an Appellate 
Tribunal shall be such as the Central Government may by rules made under this Act specify: 
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of a Presiding 
Officer shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment. 
36-O. Filling up of vacancies. —If, for any reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy 
occurs in the office of the Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal, then the Central Government 
shall appoint another person in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and the 
proceedings may be continued before the Appellate Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is 
filled. 25 36P. Resignation and removal. —(1) The Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal may, by 
notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office: 
Provided that the said Presiding Officer shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government, 
to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date 
of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or 
until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earliest. 
(2) The Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed from his office except by 
an order made by the Central Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after 
enquiry made by a Judge of a High Court in which the Presiding Officer concerned has been informed 
of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of the 
charges. 
(3) The Central Government may, by rules made under this Act, regulate the procedure for the 
investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the aforesaid Presiding Officer. 
36Q. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its 
proceedings. —No order of the Central Government appointing any person as the Presiding Officer of 
an Appellate Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner, and no act or proceeding before an 
Appellate Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner on the ground merely of any defect in the 
establishment of an Appellate Tribunal. 
36R. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of Appellate Tribunal. —An Appellate Tribunal shall 
exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority to entertain appeals against any order made or deemed 
to have been made by the recovery officer under this Act. 
36S. Appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made or deemed 
to have been made by the recovery officer under this Chapter, may prefer an appeal to an Appellate 
Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter. 
(2) Every appeal under sub-section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty-five days from the 
date on which a copy of the order made or deemed to have been made by the recovery officer is 
received by him and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period. 
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, 
confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against. 
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal 
and to the concerned recovery officer. 
(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 1) shall be dealt with by it 
as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within 
six months from the date of the receipt of the appeal. 
36T. Deposit of amount due, on filing appeal. —Where an appeal is preferred by a borrower, 
such appeal shall not be entertained by the Appellate Tribunal unless such person has deposited with 
the Appellate Tribunal seventy-five per cent. of the amount due from him as determined by the 
recovery officer: 
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, waive or 
reduce the amount to be deposited under this section. 
36U. Procedure and powers of recovery officer and Appellate Tribunal. —(1) The recovery 
officer and the Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the 
other provisions of this Act and of any regulations, the recovery officer and the Appellate Tribunal 
shall have powers to regulate their own procedure including the places at which they shall have their 
sittings. 26 (2) The recovery officer and the Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging 
their functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; 
(e) reviewing its decisions; 
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passed by it 
ex parte ; and 
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(3) Any proceeding before the recovery officer or the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and the recovery officer or the Appellate Tribunal shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
36V. Limitation. —The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) shall, as far as may 
be, apply to an application made to recovery officer. 
36W. Presiding Officer, recovery officer, other officers and employees to be public 
servant. —The Presiding Officer, other officers and employees of an Appellate Tribunal and the 
recovery officer shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
36X. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings 
shall lie against the Central Government or against the Presiding Officer of an Appellate Tribunal or 
against the recovery officer for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in 
pursuance of the provisions of this Act or any rule or regulation or order made thereunder.
36Y. Bar of jurisdiction. —No Court or other authority shall have, or be entitled to exercise, any 
jurisdiction, powers or authority (except the Supreme Court, and a High Court exercising jurisdiction 
under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) in relation to the matters specified in this Chapter. 
36Z. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, till the 
establishment of the Appellate Tribunal under section 36-I for any area, the Appellate Tribunal 
established under section 8 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 
1993 (51 of 1993) and which is functioning in that area shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and 
authority conferred on the Appellate Tribunal under this Act.] 
CHAPTER VI 
FUNDS, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
37. General Fund and other funds .—(1) With effect from such date as 1[the Central 
Government] may specify, the National Housing Bank shall establish a fund to be called the General 
Fund and all payments by the National Housing Bank shall be made out of the said General Fund. 
(2) The Board may, and shall, if so directed by 1[the Central Government], create a special fund or 
a reserve fund or such other funds as may be prescribed. 
38. Preparation of balance sheet, etc., of National Housing Bank.— (1) The balance sheet and 
accounts of the National Housing Bank shall be prepared and maintained in such form and manner as 
may be prescribed. 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 172, for “the Reserve Bank” (w.e.f. 1-6-2018).  27 (2) The Board shall cause the books and accounts of the National Housing Bank to be balanced 
and closed as on the thirtieth day of June, each year. 
39. Disposal of surplus.— After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depreciation of 
assets and all other matters for which provision is necessary or expedient or which is usually provided 
for by bankers, the National Housing Bank shall transfer —
(i) for a period of fifteen years, following the accounting year during which the National 
Housing Bank is established, the amount  remaining (hereafter in this section referred to as 
surplus) such of the funds referred to in section 37 as the Reserve Bank may specify; and 
(ii) after the expiry of the said period of fifteen years, the National Housing Bank shall, after 
making provision for the funds referred to in section 37, transfer the balance of surplus to 1[the 
Central Government]. 
40. Audit .—(1) The accounts of the National Housing Bank shall be audited by auditors duly 
qualified to act as auditors under 2[sub-section ( 1) of section 141 of the Companies Act, 2013             
(18 of 2013) ], who shall be appointed by the Reserve Bank, for such term and on such remuneration 
as the Reserve Bank may fix. 
(2) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balance sheet of the National Housing 
Bank and it shall be their duty to examine it together with the accounts and vouchers relating thereto 
and they shall have a list delivered to them of all books kept by the National Housing Bank and shall 
at all reasonable times have access to the books, accounts, vouchers and other documents of the 
National Housing Bank. 
(3) The auditors may, in relation to the accounts of the National Housing Bank, examine any 
director of the Board or any officer or other employee of the National Housing Bank and shall be 
entitled to require from the Board or officers or other employees of the National Housing Bank such 
information and explanation as they may think necessary for the performance of their duties. 
(4) The auditors shall make a report to the National Housing Bank upon the annual balance sheet 
and accounts examined by them and in every such report, they shall state whether in their opinion the 
balance sheet is a full and fair balance sheet containing all necessary particulars and properly drawn 
up so as to exhibit a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the National Housing Bank and in case 
they had called for any explanation or information from the Board or any officer or other employee of 
the National Housing Bank, whether it was given and whether it was satisfactory. 
(5) The National Housing Bank shall furnish to the Central Government and the Reserve Bank 
within 3[four months] from the date on which the annual accounts of the National Housing Bank are 
closed and balanced, a copy of its balance sheet as on the close of the relevant year together with a 
copy of the profit and loss account for the year and a copy of the auditors’ report and a report of the 
working of the National Housing Bank during that year, and the Central Government shall, as soon as 
may be after they are received by it, cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
(6) Without prejudice to anything contained in the preceding sub-sections, the Central 
Government may, at any time, appoint the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India to examine and 
report upon the accounts of the National Housing Bank and any expenditure incurred by him in 
connection with such examination and report shall be payable by the National Housing Bank to the 
Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.  
41. Returns.— The National Housing Bank shall furnish, from time to time, to the Reserve Bank 
such information and returns as the Reserve Bank may require.
42. Annual report on housing .—The National Housing Bank shall make an annual report to the 
Central Government and the Reserve Bank on the trend and progress of housing in the country and in 
that report may make such suggestions as it may think necessary or expedient for the development of 
housing and the Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the report is received by it, cause 
the same to be laid before each House of Parliament. 
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 173, for “the Reserve Bank” (w.e.f 1-6-2018).  
2. Subs. by s. 174, ibid, for “sub-section ( 1) of section 226 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)” (w.e.f 1-6-2018).   
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 21, for “three months” (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 28 CHAPTER VII 
MISCELLANEOUS 
43. Staff of National Housing Bank.— (1) The National Housing Bank may appoint such 
number of officers and other employees as it considers necessary or desirable for the efficient 
performance of its functions and determine the terms and conditions of their appointment and service. 
(2) The duties and conduct, terms and conditions of service and the establishment and 
maintenance of provident fund or any other fund for the benefit of the officers and other members of 
staff of the National Housing Bank shall be such as may be prescribed. 
(3) The National Housing Bank may depute any officer or any member of its staff for such period 
and on such terms and conditions as it may determine, to any institution including a housing finance 
institution. 
(4) Nothing contained in this section shall empower the National Housing Bank to depute any 
officer or member of its staff to any institution on any salary, emoluments or other terms and 
conditions which is or are less favourable to him than that or those to which he is entitled to 
immediately before such deputation. 
(5) The National Housing Bank may, 1***, receive or take on deputation any officer or other 
employee from any institution including a housing finance institution for such period and on such 
terms and conditions as it may think necessary in the interest of the National Housing Bank. 
2[43A. Delegation of powers.— The Board may, by general or special order, delegate to an 
officer or officers of the National Housing Bank, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as 
may be specified in the order, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may deem necessary.] 
44. Obligation as to fidelity and secrecy.— (1) The National Housing Bank shall not, except as 
otherwise required by this Act or any other law, divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs 
of, its constituents except in circumstances in which it is, in accordance with the law or practice and 
usage customary among bankers, necessary or appropriate for the National Housing Bank to divulge 
such information. 
(2) Every director, member of a committee, auditor, adviser, officer or other employee of the 
National Housing Bank or of the Reserve Bank, whose services are utilised by the National Housing 
Bank under the provisions of this Act, shall, before entering upon his duties, make a declaration of 
fidelity and secrecy in the form set out in the First Schedule to this Act. 
3[(3) Nothing contained in this section shall apply to the credit information disclosed under the 
Credit Information Companies (Regulation) Act, 2005 (30 of 2005).] 
45. Defects in appointment not to invalidate acts, etc.— (1) No act or proceeding of the Board 
or of any committee of the National Housing Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely of the 
existence of any vacancy in, or defect in the constitution of, the Board or the committee, as the case 
may be. 
(2) No act done by any person acting in good faith as a director of the Board or as a member of a 
committee of the National Housing Bank shall become invalid merely on the ground that he was 
disqualified to be a director or that there was any other defect in his appointment. 
4[45A. Arrangement with National Housing Bank on appointment of directors to prevail.—
(1) Where any arrangement entered into by the National Housing Bank with a housing finance 
institution which is a company provides for the appointment by the National Housing Bank of one or 
more directors of such housing finance institution, such provision and any appointment of directors 
made in pursuance thereof shall be valid and effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in the 5[Companies Act, 2013 (18 of 2013)] or in any other law for the time being in force 
or in the memorandum, articles of association or any other instrument relating to that housing finance 
1. The words “without prejudice to the provisions of section 54AA of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934)” 
omitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 175 (w.e.f. 1-6-2018).  
2. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000. s. 22(w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
3. Ins. by Act 30 of 2005, s. 34 and the Schedule (w.e.f.  14-10-2006). 
4. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 23 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 176, for “Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)” (w.e.f. 1-6-2018).    29 institution, or any provision regarding share qualification, age limit, number of director-ships, 
removal from office of directors and such like conditions contained in any such law or instrument 
aforesaid, shall not apply to any director appointed by the National Housing Bank in pursuance of the 
arrangement as aforesaid. 
(2) Any director appointed as aforesaid shall — 
(a) hold office during the pleasure of the National Housing Bank and may be removed or 
substituted by any person by order in writing of the National Housing Bank; 
(b) not incur any obligation or liability by reasons only of his being a director or for anything 
done or omitted to be done in good faith in the discharge of his duties as a director or anything in 
relation thereto; 
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into account for computing 
the number of directors liable to such retirement.] 
46. Protection of action taken under the Act.— No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the National Housing Bank or any director or any officer or other employee of the National 
Housing Bank or any other person authorised by the National Housing Bank to discharge any 
functions under this Act for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any other law or provision 
having the force of law. 
47. Indemnity of directors.— (1) Every director shall be indemnified by the national Housing 
Bank against all losses and expenses incurred by him in, or in relation to, the discharge of his duties, 
except such as are caused by his own wilful act or default. 
(2) A director shall not be responsible for any other director or for any officer or other employee 
of the National Housing Bank or for any loss or expenses resulting to the National Housing Bank 
from the insufficiency or deficiency of the value of, or title to, any property or security acquired or 
taken on behalf of the National Housing Bank or the insolvency or wrongful act of any debtor or any 
person under obligation to the National Housing Bank or of anything done in good faith in the 
execution of the duties of his office in relation thereto. 
1[47A. Nomination in respect of deposits, bonds, etc.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law for the lime being in force, where a nomination in respect of any deposit, bonds or 
other securities is made with the National Housing Bank in the prescribed manner, the amount due on 
such deposits, bonds or securities shall, on the death of the depositor or holder thereof, vest in, and be 
payable to, the nominee subject to any right, title or interest of any other person to such deposits, 
bonds or securities. 
(2) Any payment made by the National Housing Bank in accordance with the provisions of          
sub-section ( 1) shall be a full discharge of its liability in respect of such deposits, bonds or securities.]
48.[Explanation  from tax on income .]—Omitted by the Finance Act , 2001 (14 of 2001), s. 141 
(w.e.f.  1-4-2002). 
49. Penalties .—(1) Whoever in any return, balance-sheet, or other document or in any 
information required or furnished by or under or for the purposes of any provision of this Act, wilfully 
makes a statement which is false in any material particular, knowing it to be false, or wilfully omits to 
make a material statement, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years and shall also be liable to fine. 
(2) If any person fails to produce any book, account or other document, or to furnish any 
statement or information which, under the provisions of this Act, it is his duty to produce or furnish, 
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 24 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 30 he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees in respect of each offence 
and in the case of a continuing failure, with an additional fine which may extend to one hundred 
rupees for every day during which the failure continues after conviction for the first such failure. 
1[(2A) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub-section ( 1) of section 29A, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend 
to five years and with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to five 
lakh rupees. 
(2B) If any auditor fails to comply with any direction given or order made by the National 
Housing Bank under section 33, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees. 
(2C) Whoever fails to comply with any order made by the authorised officer under sub-section ( 2) 
of section 36A, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and 
shall also be liable to a fine of not less than rupees fifty for every day during which such non-
compliance continues;] 
(3) If any person1[other than an auditor] — 
(a) receives any deposit in contravention of any direction given or order made under Chapter 
V; or  
1[(aa) fails to comply with any direction given or order made by the National Housing Bank 
under any of the provisions of Chapter V; or] 
(b) issues any prospectus or advertisement otherwise than in accordance with section 35 or 
any order made under section 30, as the case may be; 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be 
liable to fine which may extend, — 
(i) in the case of a contravention falling under clause ( a), to twice the amount of the 
deposit received; and  
(ii) in the case of a contravention falling under clause ( b), to twice the amount of the 
deposit called for by the prospectus or advertisement. 
(4) If any other provision of this Act is contravened or if any default is made in complying with 
any other requirement of this Act or of any order, regulation or direction made or given or condition 
imposed thereunder, any person guilty of such contravention or default shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to two thousand rupees and where a contravention or default is a continuing one, 
with further fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day, after the first, during which 
the contravention or default continues. 
50. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence has been committed by a company, every 
person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to 
be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed 
to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 25 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 31 Explanation. —For the purposes of this section —
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
51. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act except upon a complaint in writing made by an officer of the National Housing Bank, 
generally or specially authorised in writing in this behalf by the National Housing Bank, and no court 
other than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or a court 
superior thereto shall try any such offence. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a 
Magistrate may, if he sees reason so to do, dispense with the personal attendance of the officer of the 
National Housing Bank filing the complaint but the Magistrate may in his discretion, at any stage of 
the proceedings, direct the personal attendance of the complainant. 
1[52. Application of fine .—A court imposing any fine under this Act may direct that the fine, if 
realised shall be applied — 
(a) firstly in, or towards payment of, the cost of the proceedings, and 
(b) secondly for repayment of the deposit to the person to whom repayment of the deposit was 
to be made, and on such payment, the liability of the housing finance institution to make 
repayment of the deposit shall, to the extent of the amount paid by the Court, stand discharged. 
52A. Power of National Housing Bank to impose fine.— (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 49, if the contravention or default of the nature referred to in section 49 is 
committed by a housing finance institution which is a company, the National Housing Bank may 
impose on such institution— 
(a) a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees; or 
(b) where the contravention or default is under sub-section ( 2A) or clause ( a) or clause ( aa) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 49, a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees or twice the amount 
involved in such contravention or default, where the amount is quantifiable, whichever is more; 
and where such contravention or default is a continuing one, further penalty which may extend to 
twenty-five thousand rupees for every day, after the first, during which the contravention or 
default continues. 
(2) For the purpose of imposing penalty under sub-section ( 1), the National Housing Bank shall 
serve a notice on the housing finance institution requiring it to show cause why the amount specified 
in the notice should not be imposed as a penalty and a reasonable opportunity of being heard shall 
also be given to such housing finance institution. 
(3) Any penalty imposed by the National Housing Bank under this section shall be payable within 
a period of thirty days from the date on which notice issued by the National Housing Bank demanding 
payment of the sum is served on the housing finance institution and, in the event of failure of the 
housing finance institution to pay the sum within such period, may be levied on a direction made by 
the principal civil court having jurisdiction in the area where the registered office or the head office of 
the housing finance institution is situated: 
Provided that no such direction shall be made, except on an application made by an officer of the 
National Housing Bank authorised in this behalf, to the principal civil court. 
(4) The court which makes a direction under sub-section ( 3), shall issue a certificate specifying 
the sum payable by the housing finance institution and every such certificate shall be enforceable in 
the same manner as if it were a decree made by the court in a civil suit. 
1. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 26, for section 52 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 32 (5) No complaint shall be filed against any housing finance institution in any court of law 
pertaining to any contravention or default in respect of which any penalty has been imposed by the 
National Housing Bank under this section. 
(6) Where any complaint has been filed against a housing finance institution in a court in respect 
of contravention or default of the nature referred to in section 49, no proceedings for imposition of 
penalty against the housing finance institution shall be taken under this section.] 
53. Bankers’ Books Evidence Act 18 of 1891, to apply in relation to the National Housing 
Bank.— The Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891, shall apply in relation to the National Housing 
Bank as if it were a bank as defined in section 2 of that Act. 
54. Liquidation of National Housing Bank.— No provision of law relating to the winding up of 
companies shall apply to the National Housing Bank and the National Housing Bank shall not be 
placed in liquidation save by order of the Central Government and in such manner as it may direct. 
1[54A. Power to make rules.— (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to 
carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or 
any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) qualifications for appointment as a recovery officer under sub-section ( 1) of section 36D; 
(b) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and 
other employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 3) of section 36M; 
(c) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Presiding 
Officers of the Appellate Tribunal under section 36N; and 
(d) the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Presiding Officers 
of the Appellate Tribunals under sub-section ( 3) of section 36P.] 
55. Power of the Board to make regulations.— (1) The Board may, with the previous approval 
of 2*** the Central Government, by notification, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act to 
provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect 
to the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —
(a) the fees and allowances that may be paid to the directors for attending the meetings of the 
Board or its committees under sub-section ( 5) of section 7; 
3[(aa) the manner in which directors shall be elected under clause ( ca) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 6;] 
(b) the times and places at which the Board may meet, and the rules of procedure that may be 
followed in regard to the transaction of business under sub-section ( 1) of section 11; 
(c) the number of members that the Executive Committee may consist, the functions that it 
may discharge and times and places at which it shall meet and the rules of procedure that it may 
follow in the transaction of business under section 12; 
(d) the manner and terms of issue and redemption of bonds and debentures under clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 15; 
(e) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which the National Housing Bank may 
borrow in foreign currency under sub-section ( 1) of section 16; 
(f) the form in which the statements, information, etc., is to be furnished under section 32; 
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 27 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
2. The words “ the Reserve Bank and in consultation with” o mitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 177 (w.e.f 1-6-2018).
3. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 28 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 33 1[(fa) the form of application to be made under section 36E and the documents to be annexed 
to such application; 
(fb) the form in which notice of demand is required to be served on the borrower under                
sub-section ( 1) of section 36F; 
(fc) the manner in which the property shall be transferred under sub-section ( 2) of              
section 36G; 
(fd) the form in which the appeal can be filed with the Appellate Tribunal under section 36S 
and the amount of fee required to be deposited with such appeal;] 
(g) the special fund, reserve fund and other funds to be created under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 37; 
(h) the form and manner in which the balance-sheet and accounts shall be prepared and 
maintained under sub-section ( 1) of section 38; 
(i) the duties and conduct, salaries, allowances and conditions of service of the officers and 
other members of staff of the National Housing Bank under section 43; 
(j) the establishment and maintenance of provident fund and any other fund for the benefit of 
officers and other members of staff of the National Housing Bank under section 43; and 
1[(ja) the manner in which nomination may be made under sub-section ( 1) of section 47A; 
and] 
(k) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Any regulation which may be made by the Board under this Act may be made 2***, in 
consultation with the Central Government, before the expiry of three months from the date of 
establishment of the National Housing Bank, and any regulation so made may be altered and 
rescinded by the Board in the exercise of its powers under this Act. 
(4) The power to make regulations conferred by this section shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect to the regulations or any of them from a date not earlier than the date of 
commencement of this Act, but no retrospective effect shall be given to any regulation so as to 
prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such regulation may be applicable. 
(5) The Central Government shall cause every 3[rules, regulation or scheme] made under this Act 
to be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 2[rules, regulation or scheme] 
or both Houses agree that the 2[rules, regulation or scheme] should not be made, the2[rules, regulation 
or scheme] shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that 2[rules, regulation or scheme.] 
56.[Amendment of certain enactments. ]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  2001             
(30 of 2001), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 3-9-2001). 
57. Power to remove difficulties.— If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, 
remove the difficulty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
1. Ins. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 28 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
2. The words “by the Reserve Bank” omitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 177 (w.e.f. 1-6-2018). 
3. Subs. by Act 15 of 2000, s. 28, for “regulation or scheme” (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 34 THE FIRST SCHEDULE 
[See section 44( 2)] 
DECLARATION OF FIDELITY AND SECRECY 
I, ..........do hereby declare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability execute 
and perform the duties required of me as director, member of the..................... committee, auditor, 
advisor, officer or other employee (as the case may be) of the National Housing Bank and which 
properly relate to the office or position held by me in or in relation to the said National Housing Bank. 
I further declare that I will not communicate or allow to be communicated to any person not 
legally entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the National Housing Bank nor will I 
allow any such person to inspect or have access to any books or documents belonging to or in the 
possession of the National Housing Bank and relating to the business of the said National Housing 
Bank or the business of any person having any dealing with the said National Housing Bank. 
Signed before me.      (Signature ) 
______ 
[The Second Schedule .] — Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001 (30 of 2001), s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 3-9-2001). 
__________ 
1[THE THIRD SCHEDULE 
(See section 16A) 
DECLARATION REFERRED TO IN SECTION 16A  OF THE  NATIONAL  HOUSING BANK ACT, 1987 
Place 
Date: 
I/we ______________________ hereby declare that in consideration of the assistance 
sanctioned by the National Housing Bank to me/us at my/our request, as specified in the Annexure 
hereto, I/we agree that the immovable property specified in the said Annexure shall constitute security 
for the said assistance and I/we further agree that the dues relating to the assistance mentioned above, 
shall, on and from the date of these presents, be a charge on the said immovable property. 
1. Signed and delivered by 
 ………………………….. 
         (Borrower) 
2. Signed and delivered by 
..................................... 
(Surety) 
ANNEXURE 
I. Details of assistance. 
II. Particulars of immovable property.] 
1. Added by Act 15 of 2000, s. 29 (w.e.f. 12-6-2000). 
--------------------------The Railway Claims Tribunal Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE RAILWAY CLAIMS TRIBUNAL ACT, 1987  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF RAILWAY CLAIMS TRIBUNAL AND BENCHES THEREOF  
3. Establishment of Railway Claims Tribunal.  
4. Composition of Claims Tribunal and Benches thereof.  
5. Qualifications for appointment as Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member.  
6. Vice -Chairman to act as Chairman or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances.  
7. Term of office.  
8. Resignation and removal.  
9. Salaries and allowances and other terms and con ditions of service of Chairman, Vice -Chairman  
and other Members.  
9A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairman, Vice -Chairman and Member . 
10. Provision as to the holdin g of offices by Chairman, Vice -Chairman, etc., on ceasing to be 
such Chairman or Vice -Chairman, etc.  
11. Financial and administrative powers of Chairman.  
12. Staff of Claims Tribunal.  
 
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POW ERS AND AUTHORITY OF CLAIMS TRIBUNAL  
13. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of Claims Tribunal.  
14. Distribution of business amongst Benches.  
15. Bar of jurisdiction.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
16. Application to Claims Tribunal.  
17. Limitation.  
18. Procedure and powers of Claims Tribunal.  
19. Right to legal representation and presenting officers.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench to another.  
21. Decision to be by majority.  
22. Execution of orders of Claims Tribunal.  
 
CHAPTER V  
APPEALS  
23. Appeals.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Transfer of pending cases.  
25. Proceedings before Claims Tribunal to be judicial proceedings.  
26. Members and staff of Claims Tribunal to be public servants.  
27. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
28. Act to have overriding effect.  
29. Power to remove difficulties.  
30. Power to make rules.  
30A. Power to make rules retrospectively.  
Chapter  VII.—Amendments to the Railways Act.  [Repealed. ] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 3 
 THE RAILWAY CLAIMS TRIBUNAL ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 54 OF 1987  
 [23rd December , 1987. ]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Railway Claims Tribunal for inquiring into and 
determining claims against a r ailway administration for loss, destruction, damage, 
deterioration or non -delivery of animals or goods entrusted to it to be carried by railway or 
for the refund of fares or freight or for compensation for death or injury to passengers 
occurring as  a result of railway accidents 1[or u ntoward incidents] and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental  thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Railway Claims 
Tribunal Act, 1987.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shal l come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “application ” means an application made under section 16;  
(b) “appointed day ” means the date3 with effect from which the Claims Tribunal is established 
under section 3;  
(c) “Bench ” means a Bench of the Claims Tribunal;  
(d) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Claims Tribunal;  
(e) “Claims Tribunal ” means the Railway Claims Tribunal established under section 3;  
(f) “Judicial Member ” means a Member of the Claims Tribunal appointed as such under this Act, 
and includes the Chairman or Vice -Chairman who possesses any of the qualifications specified in 
sub-section ( 3) of section 5;  
(g) “Member ” means a Member (whether Judicial or Technical) of the Claims Tribunal, and 
includes the Chairman and Vice -Chairman;  
(h) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules;  
(j) “Railways Act ” means the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890);  
(k) “rules ” means rules made under this Act;  
(l) “Technical Member ” means a Member of the Claims Tribuna l who is not a Judicial Member, 
and includes the Chairman or a Vice -Chairman who possesses any of the qualifications specified in 
sub-section ( 4) of section 5;  
(m) “Vice -Chairman ” means a Vice -Chairman of the Claims Tribunal.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1994, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
2. 8th November, 1989, vide notification No. S. O. 783(E), dated 5th October,  1989, see Gazette of In dia, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(ii).  
3. 8th November, 1989, vide notification No. S.O. 784(E), dated 5th October, 1989, see Gazette of India, Extrao rdinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (ii).  4 
 Explanation. —References to the Vice -Chairman in this Act shall be construed as references to 
each of the Vice -Chairman;  
1[(n) “untoward incident ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( c) of section 123 of the 
Railways Act, 1989  (24 of 1989) ;] 
2[(o)] words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Railways Act or 
the rules made thereunder shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act or the 
said rules.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF RAILWAY CLAIMS TRIBUNAL AND BENCHES THEREOF  
3. Establishment of Railway Claims Tribunal. —The Central Government shall, by notification, 
establish a Claims Tribunal, to be known as the Railway Claims Tribunal, to exercise the jurisdiction, 
powers and authority confe rred on it by or under this Act 3[and under Chapter VII of the Railways 
Act,1989  (24 of 1989). ] 
4. Composition of Claims Tribunal and Benches thereof. —(1) The Claims Tribunal shall consist 
of a Chairman, four Vice -Chairmen and such number of Judicial Members and Technical Members as the 
Central Government may deem fit and, subject to the o ther provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers 
and authority of the Claims Tribunal may be exercised by Benches thereof.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this A ct, a Bench shall consist of one  Judicial Member and one 
Technical Member.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chairman — 
(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial Member or the Technical Member 
of the Bench to which he is appointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or,  as the case 
may be, the Technical Member, of any other Bench;  
(b) may transfer a Vice -Chairman or other Member from one Bench to another Bench;  
(c) may authorise  the Vice -Chairman or the Judicial Member or the Technical Member appointed 
to one Bench to discharge also the functions of the Vice -Chairman or, as the case may be, the Judicial 
Member or the Technical Member of another Bench.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, it shall be 
competent for the Chairman or any other Member authorised by the Chairman in this behalf to function as 
a Bench consisting of a single Member and exercise the jurisdiction, powers and auth ority of the Claims 
Tribunal in respect of such cla sses of cases or such matters pertaining to such classes of cases as the 
Chairman may, by general or special order, specify:  
Provided that if at any stage of the hearing of any such case or matter, it appe ars to the Chairman or 
such Member that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of 
two Members, the case or matter may be transferred by the Chairman or, as the case may be, referred to 
him for transfer, to su ch Bench as the Chairman may deem fit.  
(5) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Benches shall sit at such places as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify.  
5. Qualifications for appointment as Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Memb er.—(1) A 
person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he — 
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) has, for at least two ye ars, held the office of a Vice -Chairman.  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 8 of 1994, s. 8  (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
2. Clause  (n) re-lettered  as clause ( o)  thereof by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
3. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 162 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  5 
 (2) A person shall not be qualifi ed for appointment as  the Vice -Chairman unless he — 
(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that Service 
or any higher post for at least five years; or  
(c) has, for at least five years, held a civil judicial post carrying a scale of pay which is not less 
than that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India; or  
(d) has, for at least five years, held a post under a railway administration carrying a scale of pay  
which is not less than that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India and has adequate 
knowledge of rules and procedure of, and experience in, claims and commercial matters relating to 
railways; or  
(e) has, for a period of not less than three years,  held office as a Judicial Member or a Technical 
Member.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member unless he — 
(a) is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) has been a Member of the Indian Legal S ervice and has held a post in Grade I of that Service 
for at least three years; or  
(c) has, for at least three years, held a civil judicial post carrying a scale of pay which is not less 
than that of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India.  
(4) A pers on shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member unless he has, for at least 
three  years, held a post under a railway administration carrying a scale of pay which is not less than that 
of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India and has adequate knowledge of rules and procedure of, 
and experience in, claims and commercial matters relating to railways.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), the Chairman, Vice -Chairman and every other 
Member shall be appointed by the President.  
(6) No appointment of a person as the Chairman shall be made except after consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India.  
6. Vice -Chairman to act as Chairman or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances. —(1) In 
the event of the occurrence of any vac ancy in the office of the Chairman by reason of his death, 
resignation or otherwise, such one of the Vice -Chairm en as the Central Government may, by notification, 
authorise in this behalf, shall act as the Chairman until the date on which a new Chairman,  appointed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office.  
(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, such one of the Vice -Chairmen as the Central Gov ernment may, by notification, authorise in this 
behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Chairman until the date on which the Chairman resumes his 
duties.  
7. Term of office. —The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member shall hold office as such for a 
term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains, — 
(a) in the case of the Chairman, the age of sixty -five years; and  
(b) in the case of the Vice -Chairman or any other Memb er, the age of sixty -two years,  
whichever  is earlier.  
8. Resignation and removal. —(1) The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member may, by notice 
in writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member shall, unless he is p ermitted by the 
President to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the 
date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or 
until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.  6 
 (2) The Chairman, Vice -Chairman or any other Member shall not be removed from his office except 
by an order made by the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry 
made by a Judge  of the Supreme Court in which such Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member had 
been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of 
those charges.  
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the p rocedure for the investigation of 
misbehaviour  or incapacity of the Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member referred to in                 
sub-section ( 2). 
9. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairman,               
Vice -Chairman and other Members. —The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and 
conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairman,                    
Vice -Chairman and other Members shall be  such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Members shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
1[9A. Qualifications, terms  and conditions of service of Chairman, Vice -Chairman and         
Member .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of 
office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairman,  Vice -Chairman and other Members of the Tribunal appointed after the commencement of       
Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (27 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of 
section 184 of that Act:  
Provided that the Chairman, Vice -Chairman and Members appointed before the commencement of 
Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (27 of 2017) , shall continue to be governed by the 
provisions of this Act, and the rules made thereunder as if the provisions of se ction 184 of the Finance 
Act, 2017, had not come into force .] 
10. Provision as to the holding of offices by Chairman, Vice -Chairman, etc., on ceasing to be 
such Chairman or Vice -Chairman, etc. —On ceasing to hold office — 
(a) the  Chairman of the Claims Tribunal shall be ineligible for further employment either under 
the Government of India or under the Government of a State;  
(b) a Vice -Chairman shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be eligible for appointment 
as the Chairman of the Claims Tribunal, or as the chairman, vice -chairman or member of any other 
Tribunal established under any law for the time being in force, but not for any other employment 
either under the Government of India or under the Government of a Sta te; 
(c) a Member (other than the Chairman or Vice -Chairman) shall, subject to the other provisions 
of this Act, be eligible for appointment as the Chairman or Vice -Chairman or as the chairman,     
vice-chairman or member of any other Tribunal established u nder any law for the time being in force, 
but not for any other employment either under the Government of India or under the Government of a 
State;  
(d) the Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member shall not appear, act or plead before the 
Claims Tribunal.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, employment under the Government of India or under 
the Government of a State includes employment under any local or other authority within the territory of 
India or under the control of the Government of India o r under any corporation or society owned or 
controlled by the Government.  
11. Financial and administrative powers of Chairman. —The Chairman shall exercise such 
financial and administrative powers over the Benches as may be vested in him under the rules:  
Provided that the Chairman shall have authority to delegate such of his financial and administrative 
powers as he may think fit to the Vice -Chairman or any other officer of the Claims Tribunal, subject to 
the condition that the Vice -Chairman or such officer shall, while exercising such delegated powers, 
continue to act under the direction, control and supervision of the Chairman.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 162 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  7 
 12. Staff of Claims Tribunal. —(1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and 
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Claims Tribunal in the discharge of 
its functions and provide the Claims Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The officers and other employees of the Claims Tribunal shall discharge their  functions under the 
general supe rintendence of the Chairman.  
(3) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the 
Claims Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION, POWERS AND AUTH ORITY OF CLAIMS TRIBUNAL  
13. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of Claims Tribunal. —(1) The Claims Tribunal shall 
exercise, on and from the appointed day, all such jurisdiction, powers and  authority    as were exercisable 
immediately before that day by any civil court or a Claims Commissioner  appointed under the provisions  
of the Railways Act, — 
 (a) relating to the responsibility of the railway admin istration s as carriers under Chapter VII of 
the Railways Act in respect of claims for — 
(i) compensation  for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of animals or 
goods entrus ted to a railway administration  for carriage by railway;  
(ii) compensation payable under section 82A of the Railways Act or the rules made 
thereunder; and  
(b) in respect of the claims for refund of fares or part thereof or for refund of any freight paid in 
respect of animals or goods entrusted to a railway administration to be carried by railway.  
1[(1A) The Claims Tribunal shall also exercise, on and from the date  of commencement of the 
provisions of section 124A of the Railways Act, 1989 (24 of 1989), all such jurisdiction, powers and 
authority as were exercisable immediately before that date by any civil court in respect of claims for 
compensation now payable by the railway administration under section 124A of the said A ct or the rules 
made thereunder .] 
2[(1B) The Claims Tribunal shall also exercise, on and from the commencement of Part XIV of 
Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the 
Tribunal under Chapter VII of the Railways Act,1989  (24 of 1989) .] 
(2) The provisions of the 3[Railways Act , 1989 (24 of 1989)] and the rules made thereunder shall, so 
far as may be, be applicable to the inquiring into  or determining, any claims by the Claims Tribunal under 
this Act.  
14. Distribution of business amongst Benches. —(1) Where any Benches are constituted, the 
Central Government may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution o f the 
business of the Claims Tribunal amongst the Benches and specify the matters which may be dealt with by 
each Bench.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the purview of the business allocated to 
a Bench, the decision of the Chairman shall be final.  
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression “matters ” includes 
an application under section 20.  
15. Bar of jurisdiction. —On and from the appointed day, no court or other authority shall have, or 
be entitled to, exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relati on to the matters referred to in  
4[sub-sections ( 1), (1A) and ( 1B)] of section 13.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1994,  s. 9 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).   
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 162 (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 28 of 1994, s. 9, for “Railways Act” (w.e.f 1 -8-1994).  
4. Subs by Act 7 of 2017, s .  162, for “ sub-sections ( 1) and ( 1A)” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  8 
 CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
16. Application to Claims Tribunal. —(1) A person seeking any relief in respect of the matters 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) 1[or sub -section ( 1A)] of section 13 may make an application to the Claims 
Tribunal.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and be accompanied by such 
documents or other evidence and by such fee in respect of the filing of such application and by such other 
fees for the service or execution of processes as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no such fee shall be pa yable in respect of an application under sub -clause ( ii) of                  
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) 2[or, as the case may be , sub -section ( 1A)] of section 13.  
17. Limitation. —(1) The Claims Tribunal shall not admit an application for any claim — 
(a) under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13 unless the application is 
made within three years from the date on which the goods in question were entrusted to the railway 
administration for carriage by railway;  
(b) under sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) 3[or, as the case may be,                       
sub-section ( 1A)] of section 13 unless the application is made within one year of occurrence of the 
accident;  
(c) under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13 unless the application is made within three 
years from the date on which the fare or freight is paid to the railway administration:  
Provided that no application for any claim referred to in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) 
of section 13 shall be pr eferred to the Claims Tribunal until the expiration of three months next after the 
date on which the intimation of the claim has been preferred under section 78B of the Railways Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), an application  may be entertained after the 
period specified in sub -section ( 1) if the applicant satisfies the Claims Tribunal that he had sufficient 
cause for not making the application within such period.  
18. Procedure and powers of Claims Tribunal. —(1) The Claims Tribunal shall not be bound by the 
procedure laid down by th e Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ), but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the Claims 
Tribunal shall h ave powers to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times of its 
enquiry.  
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall decide every application as expeditiously as possible and ordinarily 
every application shall be decided on a perusal of document s, written representations and affidavits and 
after hearing such oral arguments as may be advanced.  
(3) The Claims Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the C ode of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while 
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 o f the Indian Evidence                               
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or 
document from any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 28 of 1994, s. 11  (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
2. Ins. by s.11 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1-8-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  9 
 (h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any or der passed by it    
ex parte ; 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
19. Right to legal representation and presenting officers. —(1) A person making an application to 
the Claims Tribunal may either appear in person or take the assistance of a legal p ractitioner of his choice 
to present his case before the Claims Tribunal.  
(2) A railway administration may authorise one or more legal practitioners or any of its officers to act 
as presenting officers and every person so authorised by it may present its c ase with respect to any 
application before the Claims Tribunal.  
20. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench to another. —On the application of any 
of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, 
or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench, 
for disposal, to any other Bench.  
21. Decision to be by majority. —If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, they 
shall state th e point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the Chairman who shall either 
hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the 
other Members and such point or points shall be decid ed according to the opinion of the majority of the 
Members who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.  
22. Execution of orders of Claims Tribunal. —(1) An order made by the Claims Tribunal under this 
Act shall be executable by the Claims Tr ibunal as a decree of civil court and, for this purpose, the Claims 
Tribunal shall have all the powers of a civil court.  
(2) Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), the Claims Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court havin g local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree made by that court.  
CHAPTER V  
APPEALS  
23. Appeals. —(1) Save as provided in sub -section  (2) and notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) or in any other law, an appeal shall lie from every order, not 
being an interlocutory order, of the Claims Tribunal, to the High Court having jurisdiction over the place 
where the Bench is located.  
(2) No appeal shall lie from an order passed b y the Claims Tribunal with the consent of the parties.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days from the date of  
the order appealed against.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Transfer of pending cases. —(1) Every suit, claim or other legal proceeding                          
(other than an appeal) pending before any court, Claims Commissioner or other authority immediat ely 
before the appointed day, 1[ 2[or the date of commencement of th e provisions of sub -section ( 1A), or, as 
the case may be, the date of commencement of the provisions of sub -section ( 1B)] of  section 13 ], being a 
suit, claim or proceeding the cause of action whereon it is based is such that it would have been, if it had 
arisen after the appointed day, 1[or the date of commencement of the provisions of sub -section ( 1A), or, as 
the case may be, the date of commencement of the provisions of sub -section ( 1B)] of section 13 ], within 
the jurisdiction of the Claims Tribu nal, shall stand transferred on 3[that day or, as the case may be, date ,] 
to the Claims Tribunal . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1994, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
2. Subs by Act 7 of 2017, s. 162  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by  Act 28 of 1994, s. 13, for “that day” (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  10 
 (2) Where any suit, claim or other legal proceeding stands transferred from any court, Claims 
Commissioner or other authority to the Claims Tribunal under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the court, Claims Commissioner or other authority shall, as soon as may be after such transfer, 
forward the records of such suit, claim or other legal proceeding to the Claims Tribunal;  
(b) the Claims Tribunal may, on receipt of such rec ords, proceed to deal with such suit, claim or 
other legal proceeding, so far as may be, in the same manner as an application, from the stage which 
was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo  as the Claims Tribunal may 
deem fit.  
25. Proceedings before Claims Tribunal to be judicial proceedings. —All proceedings before the 
Claims Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 
228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
26. Members and staff of Claims Tribunal to be public servants. —The Chairman, Vice -Chairman 
and other Members and the officers and other employees of the Claims Tribunal shall be deemed to be 
public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of  1860).  
27. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or against the Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member, or any 
other person authorised by the Chairman, Vice -Chair man or other Member for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
28. Act to have overriding effect. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inco nsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
29. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years from the 
appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
30. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Governmen t may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure under sub -section ( 3) of section 8 for the investigation of misbehaviour or 
incapacity of the Chairman, Vice -Chairman or other Member;  
(b) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service       
(including pension, gratuity and other retirement ben efits) of, the Chairman, Vice -Chairman and other 
Members under section 9;  
(c) the financial and administrative powers which the Chairman may exercise over the Benches 
under section 11;  
(d) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service of officers a nd other employees of  the 
Claims Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(e) the form of application, the documents and other evidence to be accompanied with such 
application and fee in respect of filing of such application and fee for the service or  execution of 
processes under sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  11 
 (f) the rules subject to which the Claims Tribunal shall have powers to regulate its own procedure 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 18 and the additional matters in which the Claims Tribunal may 
exercise powers of civil court under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 3) of that section;  
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House  
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions afo resaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of on effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modi fication or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
1[30A. Power to make rules retrospectively. —The power to make rules under clause ( b) of         
sub-section ( 2) of section 30 shall include the power to make such rules or any of them retrospectively 
from a date not earlier than the date on which this Act received the assent of the President, but no such 
retrospective effect shall be given to any such rule so as to prejudicially affect the interes ts of any person 
to whom such rule may be applicable. ] 
[Chapter VII.—Amendments to the  Railways Act. ] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001        
(30 of 2001),  s. 2 and the First Sch edule  (w.e.f. 3-9-2001).  
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 4 of 1999, s.  2 (w.e.f. 2 -1-1999 ). 
