--------------------------The Auroville Foundation Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE AUROVILLE FOUNDATION ACT, 1988  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER  II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS OF AUROVILLE  
3. Transfer to , and vesting in, the Central Government of certain undertakings of the Society, trust 
and bodies . 
4. General effect of vesting . 
5. Central Government or Foundation to be liable for certain prior liabilities . 
6. Power of Central Government to direct ves ting of the undertakings in the  Foundation . 
7. Management, etc., of the undertakings . 
8. Duties of person s in charge of management by undertakings to deliver all assets . 
9. Certain powers of the Central Government or the Foundation . 
CHAPTER  III 
THE AUROVILLE  FOUNDATION  
 
10. Establishment and incorporation of the  Foundation . 
11. Governing Board . 
12. Term of office of members . 
13. Salary and allowances and othe r conditions of service of Chairman . 
14. Meetings of the Governing Board . 
15. Secretary and other officers of the Foundation . 
16. Committees of the Governing Board . 
17. Powers and funct ions of the Governing Board . 
18. Residents ‟ Assembly . 
19. Functions of Residents ‟ Assembly . 
20. Working Committee or Residents ‟ Assembly . 
21. Advisory Council . 
22. Dissolution of the Foundation . 
23. Grant by Central Government to the Foundation . 
CHAPTER  IV 
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Duty to furnish returns, etc . 
25. Borrowing powers of the Governing Board . 
26. Accounts and audit . 
27. Act to have overriding effect . 
28. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the foundation . 
29. Penalties . 
30. Protection of action taken in good faith . 2 
 SECTIONS  
31. Power to make rules . 
32. Power to make regulations . 
33. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
34. Power to remove  difficulties . 
THE SCHEDULE  
  3 
 THE AUROVILLE FOUNDATION  ACT,  1988  
ACT NO. 54 OF 1988  
[29th September , 1988.]  
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the undertakings of Auroville and                
to vest such undertakings in a foundation established for the purpose with a view to making  
long-term arrangements for the better management and further development of Auroville in 
accordance with its original charter and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  Auroville was founded by the „ Mother ‟ on the 28th day of February, 19 68 as an 
international cultural township;  
AND WHEREAS  in view of th e serious difficulties which had  arisen with regard to the management of 
Auroville, the management thereof had been vested in the Central Government for a limited period by the 
Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980 (59 of 1980);  
AND WHEREAS under the management of the Central Govern ment and under the overall guidance of 
the International Advisory Council set up under the aforesaid Act, Auroville had been able to develop 
during the last eight  years along several important lines and the residents of Auroville have also carried 
on activ ities for the development of Auroville which need further encouragement and consolidation;  
AND WHEREAS Auroville was developed as a cultural township with the aid of funds received from 
different organisations in and outside India as also from substantial grants received from the Central and 
State Governments, and the United Nations Educational Scientific and Cultural Organisation also had, 
from time to time, reflected in its resolutions that the project on Auroville is contri buting to international 
underst anding and promotion of peace;  
AND WHEREAS for the purpose of encouraging, continuing and consolidating the aforesaid activities 
of Auroville, it is necessary in the public interest to acquire the undertakings of Auroville and to vest 
them in a body corpor ate established for the purpose ; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Auroville Foundation Act, 1988 . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date of commencement of this Act;  
(b) “Auroville ” means so much of the undertakings as form part of, or are relatable to, the cultural 
township which is known as Auroville and the charter of w hich was proclaimed by the „Mother ‟ on 
the 28th day of February, 1988;  
(c) “Council ” means the Auroville International Advisory Council constituted under                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 21;  
(d) “Custodian ” means the person who is appointed as the Custodian under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 7 in respect of the undertaking s; 
(e) “Foundation ” means the Auroville Foundation established under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(f) “Governing Board ” means the Governing Board of the Foundation constituted under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 11;  
(g) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “Residents Assembly ” means the Residents ‟ Assembly of the Foundation;   4 
 (j) “Society ” means Sri Aurobindo Society, being a Society as defined in the West Bengal 
Societies Registration Act, 1961 (West Bengal Act XXVI of 1961), and having i ts registered office  at 
Calcutta in the State of West Bengal;  
(k) “specified date ” means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose  of section 9, 
by notification, specify;  
(l) “trust” or “body ” means a trust or body specified in the Schedule ; 
(m) “undertakings ” means the undertakings of the Society, trust or body which had vested in the 
Central Government under section 3 . 
CHAPTER  II 
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS OF AUROVILLE  
3. Transfer to , and vesting in, the Central Government of certain undertakings of the Society, 
trust s and bodies .—On the appointed day, so much of the undertakings of the Society, trust and body as 
form part of, or are relatable to Auroville, and the right, title and interest of the Society, trust and body, in 
relation t o such undertakings, shall, by virtue of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the Central 
Government . 
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The undertakings vested under section 3 shall be deemed to 
include all the assets, rights, leaseholds, powers, authorities and privileges, and all property (movable and 
immovable), including lands, buildings, works, workshops, projects, stores, instrumen ts, machinery, 
automobiles and other vehicles, cash balances, funds, including reserve funds, investments and book 
debts of the Society, trust or body as form part of, or are relatable to, Auroville and all other rights and 
interests arising out of such pr operties as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, 
possession, power or control of the Society, trust or body, whether within or without India, and all    
books of account, registers, maps, plans and all other documents of whatever nature relating thereto . 
(2) All properties and assets as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under   
section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage , 
charge, lien and all other in cumbrances affecting them or of any attachment , injunction, decree or order of 
any court or other authority restricting the use of such properties or assets in any manner or appointing 
any receiver in respect of the whole or any part of such properties or as sets shall be deemed to have been 
withdrawn . 
(3) Any licence or other instrument granted to the Society, trust or body in relation to any undertaking 
which has vested in the Central Government under section 3 at any time before the appointed day and in 
force immediately before the appointed day, shall continue to be in force on and after such day in 
accordance with its tenor in relation to and for the purposes of such undertaking or where the undertaking 
is directed under section 6 to vest in the Foundat ion, the Foundation shall be deemed to be substituted in 
such licence or other instrument as if such licence or other instrument had been granted to the Foundation 
and the Foundation shall hold it for the remainder of the period for which the Society, trus t or body would 
have held it under the terms thereof . 
(4) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding, of whatever nature, in relation to 
any property or asset which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or pre ferred 
by or against the Society, trust or body is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or be, in any 
way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of the undertakings of the Society, trust or body or of 
anything contained in this Act , but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or 
enforced by or against the Central Government, or where the undertakings of the Society, trust or body 
are directed under section 6 to vest in the Foundation, by or against the Foun dation . 
5. Central Government or Foundation to be liable for certain prior liabilities .—Every liability in 
relation to any undertaking in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be enforceable against 
the Central Government and not against the Society, trust or body, or where the said undertakings are 
directed, under section 6, to vest in the Foundation, against the Foundation .  5 
 6. Power of Central Government to direct vesting of the undertakings in the          
Foundation .—(1) Notwithstandi ng anything contained in section s 3 and 4, the Central Government shall, 
as soon as may be after the appointed day, direct, by notification, that the undertakings and the right, title 
and interest of the Society, trust or body in relation to such undertakings which had vested in the Centr al 
Government under section 3, shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Central Government, vest in the 
Foundation either on the date of publication of the notification or on such earlier or later date as may be 
specified in the notification . 
(2) Where the right, title and interest of the Society, trust or body in relation to the undertakings vest, 
under sub -section ( 1), in the Foundation, the Foundation shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
deemed to have become the owner in relation to such u ndertakings and the rights and liabilities of the 
Central Government in relation to such undertakings shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be 
deemed to have become, the rights and liabilities, respectively, of the Foundation . 
7. Management, etc., of the undertakings .—(1) The general superintendence, direction, control and 
management of the affairs of the undertakings, the right, title and interest in relation to which have vested 
in the Central Government under section 3, shall, — 
(a) where a direction has been made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of    
section 6, vest in the Foundation; or  
(b) where no such direction has been made by the Central Government, vest in a Custodian 
appointed by the Central Government under sub -section ( 2), 
and, thereupon, the Foundation, or the Custodian so appointed, as the case may be, shall be entitled to 
exercise all such powers and do all such things as the Society, trust or body, as the case may be, is 
authorised to exercise and do in relation to its undertakings . 
(2) The Central Government may appoint any person as the Custodian of the undertakings in relation 
to which no direction has been made by it under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 . 
(3) The Custodian so appointed shall receive such remuneration as the Central Government may fix 
and shall hold office during the pleasure of the Central Government . 
8. Duties of person s in charge of management by undertakings to deliver all assets .—(1) On the 
vesting of the management of the  undertakings in the Foundation or on the appointment of a Custodian 
under section 7, all persons in charge of the management of the undertakings immediately before such 
vesting or appointment shall be bound to deliver to the Foundation or Custodian, as th e case may be, all 
assets, books of account, registers and other documents in their custody relating to the undertakings . 
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions as it may deem desirable in the circumstances 
of the case to the Custodian as to the powers and duties of the C ustodian and such Custodian may  also, if 
it is considered necessary so to do, apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the 
manner in which the management of the undertakings shall be conducted or in r elation to any other matter 
arising in the course of such management . 
(3) Any person, who on the appointed day, has in his possession or under his control, any books, 
document s or other papers relating to the undertakings shall be liable to account for the  said books, 
documents or other papers to the Central Government or the Foundation, as the case may be, and shall 
deliver them up to the Central Government or the Foundation or to such person or body of persons as the 
Central Government or the Foundation m ay specify in this behalf . 
(4) The Central Government or the Foundation may take or cause to be taken, all necessary steps for 
securing possession of all undertakings which have vested in the Central Government or the Foundation 
under this Act . 
(5) The Society, trust or body shall, within such period as the Central G overnment may allow in this 
behalf, furnish to that Government a complete inventory of all its properties and assets, as on the 
appointed day pertaining to the undertaki ngs and, for this purpo se, the Central G overnment or the 
Foundation shall afford to the S ociety, trust or body all reasonable facilities .  6 
 9. Certain powers of the Central Government or the Foundation .—The Central Government or 
the Foundation shall be entitled to receive up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, 
any money due to the Society, trust or body in relation to its undertakings which have vested in the 
Central Government or the Foundation, as the case may be, and realised after the appointed day, 
notwithstanding that the realisation pertains to a period prior to the appointed day . 
CHAPTER  III 
THE AUROVILLE  FOUNDATION  
10. Establishment and incorporation of the Foundation .—(1) With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification,  appoint in this behalf, there shall be established for the purpose 
of this Act, a Foundation, to be called the Auroville Foundation . 
(2) The Foundation shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and 
a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued . 
(3) The Foundation shall consist of th e following authorities, namely :— 
(a) the Governing Board;  
(b) the Residents ‟ Assembly;  
(c) the Auroville International Advisory Council  
11. Governing Board .—(1) The Governing Board shall consist o f the following members, 
namely :— 
(i) not more than seven members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst 
persons, who have— 
(a) rendered valuable service to Auroville;  
(b) dedicated themselves to the ideals of life -long education, synthesis of material and 
spiritual researches or human unity;  
(c) contributed significantly i n activities that are being per sued or are envisaged to be 
promoted in Auroville, including activities relating to environment, affore station, arts and  crafts, 
industry, agriculture, humanities, sciences and integral yoga;  
(ii) two representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by it . 
(2) The Central Government shall nominate a Chairman of the Governing Board from amongst the 
members nominated by it under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs of the Foundation shall vest 
in the Governing Board which may exercise all the powers and discharge all the functions which may be 
exercised or discharged by the Foundation . 
(4) The Governing Board may associate with itself in such manner and for such purposes as may be 
prescribed, any persons whose assistance or advice it may desire in complying with any of the provisions 
of this Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in th e discussions of the Governing 
Board relevant to the purposes for which he has been assoc iated, but shall not have the right to vote . 
(5) No act or proceeding of the Governing Board or any committee appointed by it under section 16 
shall be invalidated merely by reason of, — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Governing Board or such     
committee; or  
(b) any defect in the nomination of a person acting as a member of the Governing Board or such 
committee; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Governing Board or such committee not affecting the 
merits of the case .  7 
 12. Term of office of members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this section, the term of office of 
the members of the Governing Board including the Chairman shall be four years from the date of their 
nomination . 
(2) An outgoing member of the Governing Board shall be eligible for re -nomination . 
(3) The term of office of a member nominated to fill a casual vacancy in the Governing Board shall 
continue for the remainder of the term of the member in whose place he is nominated . 
(4) A member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government 
but he shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that Government . 
13. Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Chairman .—The Chairman of the 
Governing Board shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and such conditions of service in respect 
of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may, from time to time, be fixed by the Central 
Government . 
14. Meetings of the Governing Board .—(1) The Governing B oard shall meet at least once a year at 
Auroville at such time as may be fixed by the Chairman of the Governing Board . 
(2) All the decisions at any meeting of the Governing Board shall be taken by a majority of the 
members present and voting:  
Provided that in the case of equality of votes, the Chairman of the Governing Board shall have a 
casting  vote. 
15. Secretary and other officers of the Foundation .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint a 
Secretary to the Foundation to exercise such powers and perform such duties under the Chairman of the 
Governing Board as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairman . 
(2) The Secretary shall be entitled to such  salary and allowances and such conditions of service in 
respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as may, from time to time, be fixed by the 
Central Government . 
(3) Subject to such control, restrictions and conditions as ma y be prescribe d, the Governing B oard 
may appoint such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its 
functions . 
(4) The Chairman, Secretary and other officers and employees of the Foundation shall not undertake 
any work unconnected  with their duties under this Act except with the permission of the Central 
Government . 
16. Committees of the Governing Board .—(1) The Governing B oard may appoint such committees 
as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance  of its functions under this 
Act. 
(2) The Governing Board shall have the power to co -opt as members of any committee  appointed 
under sub -section ( 1), such number of persons who are not members of the Governing Board as it may 
think fit, and the persons so co-opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee, and 
take part in the proceedings of the committee, but shall not have the right to vote . 
17. Powers and functions of the Governing Board .—The powers and functions of the Governing 
Board  shall be — 
(a) to promote the ideals of Auroville and to coordinate activities and services of Auroville in 
consultation with the Residents‟  Assembly for the purposes of cohesion and integration of Auroville;  
(b) to review the basic policies and the programmes of Auroville and give necessary directions 
for the future development of Auroville;  
(c) to accord approval to the programmes of Auroville draw n up by the Residents‟  Assembly ; 
(d) to monitor and review the activities of Auroville and to secure pr oper management of the 
properties vested in the Foundation under section 6 and other properties relatable to Auroville;  8 
 (e) to prepare a master -plan of Auroville in consultation with the Residents‟  Assembly and to 
ensure development of Auroville as so planned;  
(f) to authorise and coordinate fund -raising for Auroville and to secure proper arrangements for 
receipts and disbursement of funds for Auroville . 
18. Residents ’ Assembly .—(1) The Residents‟  Assembly shall consist of all the residents of 
Auroville who are for the time being entered in the register of residents maintained under this section . 
(2) The Secretary to the Governing B oard shall maintain the register of residents in such manner as 
may be prescribed and all the persons who are residents of Auroville and who are of the age of eighteen 
years and above are entitled to have their names entered in the register on an application made to the 
Secretary in such form as may be prescribed . 
(3) All  the names of residents , which have been included in the register maintained by the 
Administrator appointed under section 5 of the Auroville (Emergency Provisions) Act, 1980 (59 of 1980) 
immediately before the appointed day, shall be deemed to have been in cluded in the register maintained 
under this section . 
19. Functions of Residents ’ Assembly .—(1) The Resident ‟s Assembly shall perform such functions 
as are required by this Act and shall advise the Governing Board in respect of all activities relating to the 
residents of Auroville . 
(2) In particular , and without prejudice to the foregoing powers, the Residents‟  Assembly may — 
(a) allow the admission or cause the termination of persons in the register of residents in 
accordance with the regulations made under section 32;  
(b) organise various activities relating to Auroville;  
(c) formulate the master plan  of Auroville and make necessary recommendations for the 
recognition of organisations engaged in activities relatable to Auroville for the approval of the  
Governing Board;  
(d) recommend proposals for raising funds for Auroville for the approval of the Governing Board . 
(3) For the purpose of carrying of its functions, the Residents ‟ Assembly may establish such 
committees as it may consider necessary which shall represent it in relation to the functions to be 
performed by the Governing Board . 
20. Working Committee o f Residents ’ Assembly .—(1) There shall be a Wor king Committee of the 
Residents‟  Assembly which shall assist the Residents ‟ Assembly or, as the case may be , the Governing 
Board, in discharging its duties under this Act . 
(2) The Working Committee shall consist of not more than seven members to be chosen by the 
Residents ‟ Assembly from among themselves . 
(3) The manner of choosing the member s of the Working Committee and their term of office shall be 
such as ma y be decided by the Resident s‟ Assembly . 
(4) The Working Committee may, with the approval of the Governing Board, create or constitute 
other organisations, trusts, societies or association s relatable to  Auroville if the Working Committee is 
satisfied that such organisations, trusts, societies or associations have — 
(a) their headquarters at Auroville;  
(b) declared than  in all matters relating to Auroville they shall act in conformity with the 
decisions of the Governing Board and that their main object is to promote the ideals laid down in the 
Charter of Auroville proclaimed by the „Mother‟  on the 28th day of February, 1 968. 
21. Advisory Council .—(1) The Auroville International Advisory Council shall consist of not more 
than five members nominated by the Central Government . 
(2) The Central Government may nominate the members of the Council from amongst persons who in 
its opinion are devoted to the ideals of human unity, peace and progress .  9 
 (3) The Council may, on its own motion or on a reference made to it by the Governing Board, advise 
the Governing Board on any matter relating to the development and management of Aurovi lle. 
(4) In tendering any advice  to the Governing Board, the Council shall endeavour to secure that — 
(a) the ideals for which Auroville has been established are encouraged, and  
(b) the residents of Auroville are allowed freedom to grow and develop activities and institutions 
for the fulfilment of the aspirations and programmes envisaged in the said Charter of Auroville . 
(5) There shall be a Chairman of t he Council who shall be elected  by the members of the Council 
from among themselves . 
(6) The term  of office of, the method of filling casual vacancies among, and the allowances and other 
remuneration, if any, payable to, the members of the Council, shall be such as may be determined by the 
Central Government . 
(7) The Council shall have power to regula te its own procedure . 
22. Dissolution of the Foundation .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification and for 
reasons to be specified therein, direct that the Foundation shall be dissolved from such date and for such 
period as may b e specified in the notification : 
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Foundation to make representation against the proposed dissolution and shall consider 
the representation, if any, of the Fou ndation . 
(2) When the Foundation is dissolved under the provisions of sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) all members of the Governing Board, notwithstanding that the terms of their office had not 
expired, shall, from the date of dissolution, vacate their offices as such members;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Foundation shall, during the period of dissolution, be exercised 
and performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf;  
(c) all properties vested in the Foundation shall,  during the period of dissolution, vest in the 
Central Government; and  
(d) as soon as the period of dissolution expires, the Foundation shall be reconstituted in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act . 
23. Grant by Central Government to the Foundation .—For the purpose of enabling the 
Foundation to discharge its functions under this Act, the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Foundation, in each financial year, 
such sums of money as that G overnment considers necessary by way of grant, loan or otherwise . 
CHAPTER  IV 
MISCELLANEOUS  
24. Duty to furnish returns, etc .—(1) The Governing Board shall furnish to the Central Government 
at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed, or as the Central Government may direct, 
such returns and statements and such particulars as the Central Government may, from time to time, 
require . 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Governing Board shall, as soon as 
possible aft er the end of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report in such form and 
before such date as may be prescribed giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and 
programmes during the previous year . 
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is 
received before each House of Parliament .  10 
 25. Borrowing powers of the Governing Board .—Subject to such rules as may be made in this 
behalf, the Governing Board shall have the pow er to borrow on the security of the properties of Auroville 
or any other asset for carrying out the purposes of this Act . 
26. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Governing Board shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the income and expenditure 
account and the balance -sheet in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India . 
(2) The accounts of the Foundation shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenses incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Foundation to the Comptroller and Auditor -General . 
(3) The Comptro ller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Foundation shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India has in connection with the 
audit of Governm ent accounts and, in particular , shall have the right to demand the production of books, 
accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the officer of the 
Foundation . 
(4) The acc ounts of the Foundation, as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall  cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament . 
27. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority . 
28. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the foundation .—Every contract entered 
into by the Society, tru st or body in relation to its undertakings for any service, sale or supply, and in 
force immediately before the appointed day, shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred and eight y days 
from that day, cease to have effect unless such contract is, before the expiry of the said period, ratified in 
writing by the Central Government or, as the case may be, the Foundation, and in ratifying such contract, 
the Central Government or, as the  case may be, the Foundation may make such alterations or 
modifications therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the Central Government or, as the case may be, the Foundation shall not omit to ratify a 
contract and shall not make any alteration or modifi cation therein, — 
(a) unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or has been entered into in bad faith 
or is detrimental to the interests of the Central Government or, as the case may be, the Foundation; 
and 
(b) except after giving the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being heard and 
except after recording in writing its reasons for its refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification therein . 
29. Penalties .—A person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of the undertakings of 
the Society, trust or body, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or, as 
the case may be, the Foundation or any person or body of persons authorised by  that Government or 
the Foundation; or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of any undertaking of 
the Society, trust or body or wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the Foundation or any person or body of persons authorised by that Government or the 
Foundation, any documents relating to such undertakings which may be in his possession, custody or 
control, or fails to deliver to the Central Government or, as the case m ay be, the Foundation or any  11 
 person or body of persons authorised by that Government or the Foundation any assets,                 
books of account, registers or other documents in his possession, custody or control relating to the 
undertakings of the Society, trust or body; or  
(c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of the undertaking s of the Society, 
trust or body , 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both . 
30. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Custodian or any officer or 
other person authorised by that Government or the Foundation for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act . 
31. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may , by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act . 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which and the purpose for which any person may be associated with the 
Governing Board under sub -section ( 4) of section 11;  
(b) the powers and duties which the Secretary to the Governing Board may perform under        
sub-section ( 1) of section 15;  
(c) the control, restrictions and conditions subject to which the Governing Board may app oint 
officers and employees under sub -section ( 3) of section 15;  
(d) the manner in which the register of residents may be maintained under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 18;  
(e) the time within which and the form and manner in which the Governing Board may furnish 
returns and reports under sub -section ( 1) of section 24;  
(f) the form and the date before which the Governing Board shall submit reports to the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 2) of section 24;  
(g) the rules subject to which the Governing Boa rd shall have the power to borrow under     
section 25;  
(h) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed . 
32. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Governing Board may make regulations, not inconsistent 
with this Act and the rules made thereunder, for  enabling it to discharge its function s under this Act . 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all 
or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the procedure to be followed  at meetings of the Governing Board or at the meetings of the 
committees appointed by it and the number of members which shall form a quorum at such meetings;  
(b) the delegation to the Chairman, other members, Secretary or other officers of the Governing 
Board, of any of the powers, duties of the Governing B oard under this Act ; 
(c) the travelling and other allowances payable to persons associated under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 11 or co -opted under sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  
(d) the pay and allowances and leave and other conditions of service of officers (other than those 
appointed by the Central Government) and other employees of the Foundation;  
(e) the maintenance of the accounts of the Foundation;  
(f) the maintenance of the registers and other record s of the Foundation and its various 
committees;   12 
 (g) the appointment by the Governing Board of agents to discharge on its behalf any of its 
functions;  
(h) admission or termination of persons in the register of residents . 
(3) No regulation made by the Governing Board shall have effect until it has been approved by the 
Central Government and published in the Official Gazette, and the Central Government, in approving the 
regulation, may make changes therein which appear to it to be necessary . 
33. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule or regulation made under this  
Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it is made before each House of Parliament while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be compris ed in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions and if before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or both 
Houses a gree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to t he validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation . 
34. Power to remove  difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions  of this Act, remove 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the appointed 
day. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be l aid, as soon as may be after it  is made, before each 
House of Parliament . 
  13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2 ( l)] 
TRUSTS AND BODIES  
1. Auroville Trust, Auroville . 
2. Artisane Trust, Auroville . 
3. Auroservice d ‟Auroville Trust, Pondicherry . 
4. Aurelec Trust, Auroville . 
5. Auromitra, Auroville . 
6. Centre for Scientific Research, Auroville . 
7. Sri Aurobindo International Institute of Educational Research, Auroville . 
8. Altecs Trust, Auroville . 
9. New Engineering Trust, Auroville . 
10. Auro Trust, Pondicherry . 
11. Service Trust, Pondicherry . 
12. Auro Press Trust, Pondicherry . 
13. New Trust, Pondicherry . 
--------------------------The Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (Determination of Conditions of Service of Employees ) Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE BHARAT PETROLEUM CORPORATION LIMITED (DETERMINATION OF  
 CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF EMPLOYEES)  ACT,  1988  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Power of Central Government to frame schemes to determine conditions of service of officers 
and employees.  
4. Repeal and saving . 
  2 
 THE BHARAT PETROLEUM CORPORATION LIMITED (DETERMINATION OF  
 CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF EMPLOYEES)  ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 44 OF 1988  
[3rd September , 1988 .] 
An Act to empower the Central Government to determine the conditions of service of the 
officers and employees of Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited and for matters connected 
therewith.  
WHEREAS  for the purpose of making the conditions of service of the officers and employees of the 
Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited comparable with the conditions of service of the officers and 
employees of other public sector companies, it is necessary to empower the Central Government to 
determine the conditions of service of the officers a nd employees of the said Corporation ; 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1.  Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Bharat Petroleum Corporation 
Limited (Determination of Conditions of Service of Employees) Act, 1988.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 2nd day of July , 1988.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act , unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Burmah Shell ” means the Burmah  Shell Oil Storage and Distributing Company of India 
Limited, a foreign company within the meaning of section 591 of the Companies Act, 1956                
(1 of 1956) as it existed immediately before the appointed day under the Burmah Shell (Acquisition of  
Undertakings in India) Act, 1976 (2 of 1976);  
(b) “Burmah Shell Refineries ” means the Burmah Shell Refineries Limited, a company registered 
under the Indian Companies Act, 1913  (7 of 1913) , as it existed immediately before  it became a 
Government company;  
(c) “Corporation ” means the Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited, a Government company, as 
defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 19 56 (1 of 1956);  
(d) “officers and employees of the Corporation ” includes,— 
(i) the officers and employees who were in the service of the Burmah Shell Refineries and 
who continued to be in the service of the said company after  it became a Government company;  
and 
(ii) the officers and employees who were in the service of Burmah Shell  and whose services 
were transferred to the Corporation by section 9 of the Burmah Shell (Acquisition of 
Undertakings in India) Act, 1976  (2 of 1976) ; 
(e) “public sector company ” means any corporation established by or under any Central Act or a 
Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
3. Power of Central Government to frame schemes to determine conditions of service of officers 
and empl oyees .—(1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for the purpose of making the 
conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Corporation comparable with the conditions of 
service of the officers and employees of other public sector co mpanies, it is necessary so to do , it may , 
notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or any other law or 
any agreement, settlement, award or other instrument for the time being in force, and notwithstanding any  
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority, frame one or more schemes for the 
purpose  of determination of the conditions of service of the officers and employees of the Corporation.  
(2) While framing any scheme under sub -section ( 1), it shall be competent for the Central 
Government to provide for the continuance, after the commencement of any such scheme, of such of the 
emoluments or other benefits as were payable to , or entitled to be received by , the officers and employees   3 
 of the  Corporation referred to in sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( d) of section 2 immediately 
before the Burmah Shell Refineries became a Government company , or as the case may be , immediately 
before the appointed day under the Burmah Shell (Acquisi tion of Undertakings in India) Act,1976  (2 of 
1976) . 
(3) The Central Government may make a scheme to amend or vary any scheme made                     
under  sub-section ( 1). 
(4) The power to make any scheme under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall include ,— 
(a) the power to give retrospective effect to any such scheme or any provision thereof; and  
(b) the power to amend, by way of addition, variation or repeal, any existing provisions 
determining the conditions of service of the officers and employe es of the Corporation in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act.  
(5) Every scheme made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3) shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in 
making any modifi cation in the scheme, or both Houses agree that the scheme should not be made , the 
scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be ; so, 
however , that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of any thing 
previously done under that scheme.  
4. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Bharat Petroleum Corporation Limited (Determination of Conditions 
of Service of Employees) Ordinance, 1988  (6 of 1988),  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
 
--------------------------The Chandigarh (Delegation of Powers) Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE CHANDIGARH (DELEGATION OF POWERS)  ACT, 1987  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definition . 
3. Delegation of powers, etc., vested in Administrator . 
4. Validation.  
 
 
  2 
 THE CHANDIGARH (DELEGATION OF POWERS)  ACT, 1987  
 ACT NO. 2 OF 1988 
 [3rd, January,  1988 .] 
An Act to provide for the delegation of powers vested in the Administrator of th e Union territory 
of Chandigarh.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Chandigarh (Delegation of Powers) Act, 
1987 . 
(2)  It extends to the whole of the Union territory of Chandigarh . 
2. Definition. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “Administrator ” means the 
administrator of the Union territory of Chandigarh appointed by the President under article 239 of the 
Constitution . 
3. Delegation of powers, etc., vested in Administrator. —(1) Any power, authority or jurisdiction or 
any duty which the Administrator may exercise or discharge under any law in force in the Union territory 
of Chandigarh may be exercised or discharged also by such officer or other authority as may be specified 
in this behalf by the Central Government or the Administrator by notification in the Official Gazette . 
(2)  The Administrator may transfer any appeal or application for revision or any other matter 
pending before him for disposal to an officer or other authority competent under sub -section ( 1) to 
dispose of the same . 
(3)  The Administrator  may withdraw for disposal by himself any appeal or application for revision or 
any other matter pending before an officer or other authority competent under sub -section ( 1) to dispose 
of the same . 
4.Validation. —Notwithstanding any judg ment, decree or order of any court or tribunal or other 
authority to the contrary, where any power, authority or jurisdiction or any duty which the Administrator 
may exercise or discharge under any law in force in the Union territory of Chandigarh had been  exercised 
or discharged by any officer or other authority before the commencement of this Act, such power, 
authority, jurisdiction or duty shall be deemed to have been validly and effectively exercised or 
discharged by such officer or other authority as i f the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 were in 
force at all material times when such power, authority or jurisdiction was exercised or such duty was 
discharged and that officer or other authority had been specified as an officer or other authorit y by the 
Central Government or the Administrator in that behalf under the said   sub-section, and accordingly, no 
suit or other proceeding shall be ins tituted, maintained or continued  in any court or tribunal or before 
other authority on the ground that suc h officer or other authority was not competent to exercise such 
power, authority or jurisdiction or to discharge such duty . 
 
--------------------------The Commission of Sati (Prevention ) Act, 1987--------------------------
1 
 THE COMMISSION OF SATI (PREVENTION) ACT, 1987  
________  
ARRANGEMENT  OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
PART  II 
PUNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES RELATING TO SATI  
3. Attempt to commit sati. 
4. Abetment of sati. 
5. Punishment for glorification of sati. 
PART  III 
POWERS  OF COLLECTOR  OR DISTRICT  MAGISTRATE  TO PREVENT  OFFENCES  RELATING TO SATI  
6. Power to prohibit certain acts.  
7. Power to remove certain temples or other structures.  
8. Power to seize certain properties.  
PART  IV 
SPECIAL  COURTS  
9. Trial of offences under this Act . 
10. Special Public Prosecutors . 
11. Procedure and powers of Special Courts . 
12. Power of Special Court with respect to other offences . 
13. Forfeiture of funds or property . 
14. Appeal . 
PART  V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Protection of action taken under this Act . 
16. Burden of proof . 
17. Obligation of certain persons to report about the commission of offence under this Act . 
18. Person convicted of an offence under section 4 to be disqualified from inheriting certain 
properties.  
19. [Repealed. ] 
20. Act to have overriding effect . 
21. Power to make rules.  
22. Repeal of existing laws . 
 
  2 
 THE COMMISSION OF SATI (PREVENTION) ACT, 1987  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1988  
[3rd January , 1988 .] 
An Act to provide for the more effective prevention of the commission of sati and its 
glorification and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto , 
WHEREAS  sati or the burning or burying alive of widows or women is revolting to the feelings of 
human nature and is nowhere enjoined by any of the religions of India as an im perative duty;  
ANDWHEREAS  it is necessary to take more effective measures to prevent the commission of sati and 
its glorification;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Commis sion of Sati 
(Prevention) Act, 1987.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
(b) “glorification ”, in relation to sati, whether such sati, was committed before or after the 
commencement of this Act,  includes, among other things, — 
(i) the observance of any ceremony or the taking out of a procession in connection with the 
commission of sati; or 
(ii) the supporting, justifying or propagating the practice of sati in any manner; or  
(iii) the arranging  of any function to eulogise the person who has committed sati; or 
(iv) the creation of a trust, or the collection of funds, or the construction of a temple or other 
structure or the  carrying on of any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony thereat, 
with a view to perpetuate the honour  of, or to preserve the memory of, a person who has 
committed sati; 
(c) “sati” means the act of burning or burying alive of — 
(i) any  widow along with the body of her deceased husband or any other relative or with any 
article, object or thing associated with the husband or such relative; or  
(ii) any woman along with the body of any of her relatives, irrespective of whether such 
burning or burying is claimed to be voluntary on the part of the widow or the woman or 
otherwise;  
(d) “Special Court ” means a Special Court constituted under section 9;  
(e)  “temple” includes any building or other structure, whether roofed or not, con structed or made 
to preserve the memory of a person in respect of whom sati has been committed or used or intended 
to be used for the carrying on of any form of worship or for the observance of any ceremony in 
connection with such commis sion.  
                                                           
1. 21stMarch , 198 8, vide notification No. G.S.R. 359(E), dated 21st March , 198 8, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( i). 3 
 (2) Words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the Indian Penal Code (45 
of 1860), or in the Code shall have the same meanings as are respectively assigned to them in the Indian 
Penal Code or the Code.  
PART  II 
PUNISHMENTS FOR OFFENCES RELATING  TO SATI  
3. Attempt to commit sati.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860) , whoever attempts to commit sati and does any act towards such commission shall be punishable  
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine or with both:  
Provided that the Special Court trying an offence under this section shall, before convicting any 
person, take into consideration the circumstances leading to the commi ssion of the offence, the act 
committed, the state or mind of the person charged of the offence at the time of the commission of the act 
and al l other rele vant factors.  
4. Abetment of sati.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), 
if any person commits sati, whoever abets the commission of such sati, either directly or indirectly, shall 
be punishable with death or imprisonment for life and shall also be liab le to fine.  
(2) If any person attempts to commit sati, whoever abets such attempt, either directly or indirectly, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, any of the following acts or the like shall also be 
deemed to be an abetment, namely: — 
(a) any inducement to a widow or woman to get her burnt or buried alive along with the body of 
her deceased husband or with any other rela tive or with any article, object or thing associated with the 
husband or such relative, irrespective of whether she is in a fit state of mind or is labouring under a 
state of intoxication or stupefaction or other cause impeding the exercise of her free wil l; 
(b) making a widow or woman believe that the commission of sati would result in some spiritual 
benefit to her or her  deceased husband or relative o r the general well being of the family;  
(c)  encouraging a widow or woman to remain fixed in her resolve t o commit sati and thus 
instigating her to commit sati; 
(d) participating in any procession in connection with the commission of sati or aiding the widow 
or woman in her decision to commit sati by taking her along with body of her deceased husband or 
relation  to the cremation or burial ground;  
(e) being present at the place where sati is committed as an active participant to such commission 
or to any ceremony  connected with it;  
(f) preventing or obstructing the widow or woman from saving herself from b eing burnt or buried 
alive;  
(g) obstructing, or interfering with, the police in the discharge of its duties of taking any steps to 
prevent the commission of sati. 
5. Punishment for glorification of sati.—Whoever does any act for the glorification of sati shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to 
seven years and with fine which shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty 
thousand rupees.  
PART  III 
POWERSOF  COLLECTOROR  DISTRICT  MAGISTRATETO PREVENT OFFENCES RELATING TO SATI  
6. Power to prohibit certain acts .—(1) Where the Collector or the District Magistrate is of the 
opinion that sati or any abetmen t thereof is being,  or is about to be committed, he may, by order, prohibit 
the doing of any act towards the commission of sati by any person in any area or areas specified in the 
order.   4 
 (2)The Collector or the District Magistrate may also, by order, prohibit the glorificat ion in any 
manner of sati by any person in any area or areas specified in the order.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any order made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall, if such 
contravention is not punishable under any other provision of this Act, be pu nishable with imprisonment 
for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to seven years and with fine which 
shall not be less than five thousand rupees but which may extend to thirty thousand rupees.  
7. Power to remove certain templ es or other structures .—(1) The State Government may, if it is 
satisfied that in any temple or other structure which has been in existence for not less than twenty years, 
any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony is carried on with a view to perpetuate the 
honour of, o r to preserve the memory of, any person in respect of whom sati has been committed, by 
order, direct the removal of such temple or other structure.  
(2) The Collector or the District Magistrate may, if he is satisfied that in any temple or other structure, 
other than that referred to in sub -section ( 1), any form of worship or the performance of any ceremony is 
carried on with a view to perpetuate the honour of, or to  preserve the memory of , any person is respect of 
whom sati has been committed, by order, dir ect the removal of such temple or other structure.  
(3) Where any order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) is not complied with, the State 
Government or the Collector or the District Magistrate, as the case may be, shall cause the temple or other 
structure to be removed through a police officer not below the rank of a Sub -Inspector at the cost of the 
defaulter.  
8.  Power to seize certain properties .—(1) Where the Collector or the District Magistrate has reason 
to believe that any funds or property have been collected or acquired for the purpose of glorification of 
the commission of any sati or which may be found under circumstances which create suspicio n of the 
commission of any offence under this Act, he may seize such funds or property.  
(2) Every Collector or District Magistrate acting under sub -section ( 1) shall report the seizure to the 
Special Court, if any, constituted to try any offence in relatio n to which such funds or property were 
collected or acquired and shall await the orders of such Special Court as to the disposal of the same.  
PART  IV 
SPECIAL  COURTS  
9. Trial of offences under this Act .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code, all 
offences under this Act shall be triable only by a Special Court constituted under this section.  
(2) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette , constitute one or more Special 
Courts for the tri al of offences under this Act and every Special Court shall exercise jurisdiction in respect 
of the whole or such part of the State as may be specified in the notification.  
(3) A Special Court shall be presided over by a Judge to be appointed by the State Government with 
the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court.  
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a Special Court unless he is, 
immediately before such appointment, a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge in  any State.  
10. Special Public Prosecutors .—(1) For every Special Court, the State Government shall appoint a 
person to be a Special Public Prosecutor.  
(2) A person shall be eligible to be appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this section only if  
he had been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years or has held any post for a period of 
not less than seven years under the State requiring special knowledge of law.  
(3) Every person appointed as a Special Public Prosecutor under this se ction shall be deemed to be a 
Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code and the provisions of the 
Code shall have effect accordingly.   5 
 11. Procedure and powers of Special Courts .—(1) A Special Court may take cognizance of any 
offence, without the accused being committed to it for trial, upon receiving a complaint of facts which 
constitute such offence, or upon a police report of such facts.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Special Court shall, for the purp ose of th e trial of any 
offence, have all the  powers of a Court of Session and shall try such offence as if it were a Court of 
Session, so far as may be, in accordance with the procedure prescribed in the Code for trial before a Court 
of Session.  
12. Power  of Special Court with respect to other offences .—(1) When trying any offence under 
this Act, a Special Court may also try any other offence with which the accused may, under the Code, be 
charged at the same trial if the offence is connected with such othe r offence.  
(2) If, in the course of any trial of any offence under this Act it is found that the accused person has 
committed any other offence under this Act or under any other law, a Special Court may convict such 
person also of such other offence and pa ss any sentence authorised by this Act or such other law for the 
punishment thereof.  
(3) In every inquiry or trial, the proceedings shall be held as expeditiously as possible and, in 
particular, where the examination of witnesses has begun, the same shall be continued from day to day 
until all the witnesses in attendance have been examined, and if any Special Court finds the adjournment 
of the same beyond the following date to be necessary, it shall record its reasons for doing so.  
13. Forfeiture of funds o r property .—Where a person has been convicted of an offence under this 
Act, the Special Court trying such offence may, if it is considered necessary so to do, declare that any 
funds or property seized under section 8 shall stand forfeited to the State.  
14. Appeal .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, an appeal shall lie as a matter of 
right from any judgment, sentence or order, not being an interlocutory order, of a Special Court to the 
High Court both on facts and on law.  
(2) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date of 
the judgment, sentence or order appealed from:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain an appeal after the expi ry of the said period of thirty  days 
if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the period of 
thirty days.  
PART  V 
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Protection of action taken under this Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the State Government or any officer or authority of the State Government for anything which is 
in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules or orders made under this 
Act. 
16. Burden of proof .—Where any person is prosecuted of an of fence under section 4, the burden of 
proving that he had not committed the offence under the said section shall be on him.  
17. Obligation of certain persons to report about the commission of offence under  this Act .—(1) 
All officers of Government are hereby  required and empowered to assist the police in the execution of the 
provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder . 
(2) All village officers and such other officers as may be specified by the Collector or the District 
Magistrate in relation to any area and the inhabitants of such area shall, if they have reason to believe or 
have the knowledge that sati is about to be, or  has been, committed in the area shall forthwith report such 
fact to the nearest police station.  
(3) Whoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be punishable with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may e xtend to two years and shall also be liable to 
fine.  6 
 18. Person convicted of an offence under section 4 to be disqualified from inheriting certain 
properties .—A person convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 in relation to the 
commission of sati shall be disqualified from inheriting the property of the person in respect of whom 
such sati has been committed or the property of any other person which he would have been entitled to 
inherit on the de ath of the person in respect of whom such sati has been committed.  
19.[Amendment of Act 43 of 1951 ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001 ( 30 of 2001 ) s.2 
and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
20. Act to have over riding effect .—The provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith con tained in any enactment other than 
this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act . 
21. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesa id, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica tion or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
22. Repeal of existing laws .—(1) All laws in force in any State immediately before the 
commencement of this Act in that State which provide for the pr evention or the glorification of sati shall, 
on such commencement, stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under any law repealed under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act, and, in particular, any case taken cognizance of by a Special Court under the provisions of any law 
so repealed and pending before it immediately before the commencement of this Act in that State shall 
continue to be d ealt with by that Special Court after such commencement as if such Special Court had 
been constituted under section 9 of this Act.  
 
  
--------------------------The Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE JAMIA MILLIA ISLAMIA ACT, 1988  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. The University.  
4. Dissolution of the Jamia Millia Islamia Society and transfer of all property to the University.  
5. Objects of the University.  
6. Powers of the University.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
8. The Visitor.  
9. Officers of the University.  
10. The Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor).  
11. The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor).  
12. The Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor).  
13. The Musajjil (Registrar).  
14. Deans of Faculties.  
15. The Finance Officer.  
16. Other officers.  
17. Authorities of the University.  
18. The Anjuman (Court).  
19. The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council).  
20. The M ajlis-i-Talimi (Academic Council).  
21. The Planning Board.  
22. Other authorities of the University.  
23. Power to make Statutes.  
24. Statutes how to be made.  
25. Power to make Ordinances.  
26. Power to make Regulations.  
27. Annual report.  
28. Annual accounts.  
29. Conditions of services of employees.  
30. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
31. Right to appeal.  
32. Provident and pension funds.  
33. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies.  
34. Constitution of Committees.  
35. Filling of casual vacancies.  
36. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
37. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
38. Mode of proof of University record.  
39. Statutes, Ordinance s and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament.  
40. Power to remove difficulties.  
41. Transitional provisions.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  2 
 THE JAMIA MILLIA IS LAMIA ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 58 OF 1988  
[8th October , 1988 .] 
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching University in the Union territory of  Delhi and to 
provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
WHEREAS it is expedient to establish and incorporate a teaching University at New Delhi, to dissolve 
the “Jamia Millia Is lamia Society, Delhi ”, a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860  
(21 of 1860)  and to transfer to and vest in the said University all properties and rights of the said Society ; 
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Y ear of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1988.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette , appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all S tatutes made hereunde r, unless the contes t otherwise  
requires, — 
(a) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(b) “Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) ” and “Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) ” mean, respec tively, 
the Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) and Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) of the University;  
(c) “Anjuman (Court) ” means the Anjuman (Court) of the University;  
(d) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(e) “Department ” means a Department o f Studies, and includes a Centre  of Studies and Research;  
(f) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University , and includes teachers and other 
staff of the Universi ty; 
(g) “Faculty ” means a Faculty of the University;  
(h) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University;  
(i) “Institution ” means an Academic Institution, established or maintained by the University;  
(j) “Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) ” means the Majlis -i-Muntazimah                 
(Execu tive Council) of the University;  
(k) “Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) ” means the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) of the 
University;  
(l) “Principal ” means the head of  an Institution,  School or Polytechni c and includes where there is 
on Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, and, in the absence of 
the Principal or acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
(m) “Statutes ”, “Ordinances ” and “Regulations ” mean , respectively, the Statutes, Ordinances and 
Regulations of the University for the time   being in force;  
(n) “teachers of the University ” means Professors, Readers, L ecturer s and such other persons as 
may be ap pointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University and are 
designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(o) “University ” means the educational institution known as “Jamia Millia Islamia ” founded in 
1920 during the Khilafat and Non -Co-operation Movements in response to Gandhiji ’s call for a 
boyc tt of all Government -sponsored educational institutions which was subsequently registered in 
1939 as Jamia Millia Islamia Society, and declared in 1962 as an institution deemed to be a 
                                                           
1. 26th December, 1988,  vide notifications No. S.O. 1195(E), dated 21st December, 1988, See Gazette of  India,  Extraordinary, 
part II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 University under s ection 3 of the Univers ity Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956),  and which is 
incorporated as a University under this Act.  
3. The University .—(1) There shall be established a University by the name  of the Jamia Millia 
Islamia.  
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at New Delhi.  
(3) The persons holding office as Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) and Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) 
and the members of the Anjuman (Court), the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) and the     
Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) of the University, for the time being, shall be a body corporate by the 
name of the Jamia , Millia Islamia and shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue 
and be sued by that name.  
4. Dissolution of the Jamia Millia Islamia Society and transfer of all property to the 
University .—On and from the commencement of this Act, — 
(i) the Society known as the Jamia Millia Islamia Society, Delhi, shall be dissolved, and all 
property, movable or immovable, and all rights, powers and privileges of the said Society shall be 
transferred to and vest in the University and shall be applied to the objects and purposes for which the 
University is established;  
(ii) all debts, liabi lities and obligations of the said Society shall be transferred to the University 
and shall thereafter be discharged and satisfied by it;  
(iii) all references in any enactment to the said Society shall be construed as references to the 
University;  
(iv) any  will, deed or other documents, whether made or executed before or after the 
commencement of this Act, which contains any bequest, gift or trust in favour of the said Society 
shall be construed as if the University was therein named instead of the Society;  
(v) subject to any orders which the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may make, the 
buildings which belonged to the Jamia Millia Islami a, Delhi, shall continue to be known and 
designated by the names and style as they were known and designated immed iately before the 
commencement of this Act;  
(vi) subject to the provisions of this Act, every person employed immediately before the 
commencement of this Act in the Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi, shall hold such employment in the 
University by the same tenur e and on the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and 
privileges as to pension and gratuity as he would have held under the Jamia Millia Islamia, Delhi, if 
this Act had not been passed.  
5. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and advance 
knowledge by providing instructional, research and extension faciliti es in such branches of learning  as it 
may deem fit and the University shall endeavour to provide to students and teachers the necessary 
atmo sphere and facilities for the promotion of — 
(i) innovations in education leading to restructuring of courses, new methods of teaching and 
learning, and integral development of personality;  
(ii) studies in various disciplines;  
(iii) inter -disciplinary students;  
(iv) national integration, secularism and international understanding.  
6. Powers of the University .—The University shall have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provisions for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
  4 
 (ii) to promote the study of the religions, philosophy and culture of India;  
(iii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic di stinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iv) to organise and to undertake extra -mural studies, extension services and other measures for 
the promotion of adult education;  
(v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by th e Statutes;  
(vi) to provide, instruction, including correspondence and such other courses, to such persons as 
are not members of the University, as it may determine;  
(vii) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships  and other te aching or 
academic posts required by the Unive rsity and to appoint persons to such Principalships, 
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other posts;  
(viii) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or organisation as teachers of the 
University for a specified period;  
(x) to co -operate, collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution in 
such manner and for such purpose s as the University may determine;  
(xi) to establish and maintain Schoo ls, Institutions and such Centre s, Specialised Laboratories or 
other units for research and instructions as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the 
furtherance of its objects;  
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiii) to establish and maintain Halls for the students of the University;  
(xiv) to make provision for research and advisory services, and for that purpose to  enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions or bodies as the University may deem necessary;  
(xv) to declare a Centre , an Institution, a Department, a School as an  autonomous Centre , 
Institution, Department or s chool, as the case may be, in accord ance with the Statutes;  
(xvi) to determine standards for admission into the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xvii) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xviii) to supervise the resid ences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xix) to make special arrangements in respect of woman students as the University may consider 
desirable;  
(xx) to regulate and enforce discipline among the employees and students of the University and 
take such disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxi) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees of  the 
University;  
(xxii) to receive donations and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any property, movable or 
immovable, including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the University;  
(xxiii) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Go vernment, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the University;  
  5 
 (xxiv) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of the objects of the Universi ty. 
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person any test whatsoever o f religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
admitted therein as a teacher or student, or to hold any office therein or to graduate thereat:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making 
appropriate provisions for reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, the physically 
handicapped persons and women.  
8. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment, and of any Centre , Department, 
Institution or School maintained by the University  and also of the examinations, teaching and other work 
conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any 
matter connected with the administration or fi nances of the University, Centre , Department,  Institution or 
School.  
(3) The Visitor shall, in every case, give n notice to the University of his intention to cause an 
inspection or inquiry to be made, and the University shall, on receipt of such notice, have the right to 
make, within thirty days from the d ate of receipt of the notice or such other period as the Visitor may 
determine, such representations to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to be 
made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to present and be heard at  such inspection 
or inquiry.  
(6) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect  of the University or any Centre , 
Department, Institution or School maintained by it, address the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) with 
reference to the resul t of such inspection or inquiry, and the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) shall 
communicate to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) the views of the Visitor with such advice 
as the Visitor may offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(7) Where th e Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) does not, within a reasonable time, take 
action to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor, may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council ) issue such directions as he may 
think fit and the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), shall comply with such directions.  
(8) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in writing, 
annul any proceeding of  the University which is not in conformity with this Act,  the Statutes or the 
Ordinances : 
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the University to show cause why 
such an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider 
the same.  
(9) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
9. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the U niversity :— 
(i) the Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor);  
(ii) the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor);  
(iii) the Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor);  
  6 
 (iv) the Musajjil (Registrar);  
(v) the Deans of Faculties;  
(vi) the Dean of Students ’ Welfare;  
(vii) the Finance Officer; and  
(viii) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
10. The Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) .—(1) The Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) shall be elected by the 
Anjuman (Court) in such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) shall, if present, preside at the Convocation of the Univers ity held 
for conferring degrees.  
11. The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) .—(1) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) shall be 
appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) shall be the principal executive and academic officer of 
the University, and shall exercise g eneral supervision and control over the affairs of the University and 
give effect to the decision of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary 
on any matter,  exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and 
shall report to such authority the act ion taken by him on such matter : 
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) under this sub -section shal l have the right to appeal against 
such action to the  Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) within three months from the date on which 
decision on such action is communicated to him , and thereupon the Majlis -i-Muntaiimah            
(Executive Council) may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Shaikh -ul-Jamia            
(Vice -Chancellor).  
(4) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) shall exercise such other powers and perform such other 
functions as may be prescribed by the  Statutes or Ordinances.  
12. The Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro-Vice -Chancellor ).—The Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia                  
(Pro-Vice -Chancellor) shall be appointed in such manner, and shall exercise such powers and perform 
such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
13. The Musajjil (Registrar) .—(1) The Musajjil (Registrar) shall be appointed in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Musajjil (Registrar) shall have the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and 
authenticate records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such other powers and perform such 
other duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
14. Deans of Faculties .—Every Dean of a F aculty shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authorities of the University: — 
(i) the Anjuman (Court);  
(ii) the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council);  7 
 (iii) the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council);  
(iv) the Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee);  
(v) the Faculties;  
(vi) the Planning Board; and  
(vii) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of the University.  
18. The Anjuman (Court) .—(1) The c onstitution of the Anjuman (Court) and the term of office of 
its members shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Anjuman (Court) shall have the following powers and 
functions, namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual  report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as  may be prescribed by this Act or Statutes.  
19. The Majiis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) .—(1) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah          
(Executive Council) shall be the principal executive body of the University.  
(2) The constit ution of the Majlis -i-Talim  (Academic Council), the term of office of its members and 
its powers and duties shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) .—(1) The Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) shall 
be the principal academic body of the University and shall, subject to the provisions of this A ct, the 
Statutes and Ordinances  co-ordinate and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council), the term of office of its members and 
its powers and duties shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. The Planning Board .—(1) The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Planning Board, term of office of its members and its powers and duties 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. Other authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Faculties 
and of such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be authorities of th e University, shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the election and continuance in office of the mem bers of the said authorities, fi lling of 
vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities for which i t may be 
necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers of the University and other academic staff and their emoluments;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and other academic staff working in any other University or 
Institution for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;   8 
 (f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fund, the manner  of termination of service and disciplinary actions;  
(g) the principles governing seniority of service of employees;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in case of disputes between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the  Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) by any employee or 
student against the action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the establishment and recognition of the students’  union or  association of teachers, academic 
staff or other employees ; 
(k) the participation of the students in the affairs of the University;  
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(n) the institutions of fellowships, scholarships, stud entships, medals and prizes;  
(o) the maintenance of discipline among the students;  
(p) the establishment and abolition of  Faculties, Departments, Centre s and Schools;  
(q) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University; and  
(r) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may, from time to time, make new or additional 
Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) , shall not make, amend or repeal any 
Statute affecting the status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such aut hority 
has been given an opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any 
opinion so expressed shall be considered by Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council).  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendmen t or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council) for consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute s hall have no validity unless  
it has been  assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1) during  the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the       
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) is unable to implement such a direction within sixty days of its 
receipt, the Visitor may, after considering the reasons, if a ny, communicated by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council) for i ts inability to comply with such direction make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
25. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  9 
 (d) the award of degrees, diplomas, c ertificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinatio ns, degrees, diplomas and certificates of the University;  
(f) the conditions for the award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties  of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of s pecial courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of Centre s of Studies, Boards of Studies, Inter -disciplinary Studies, Special 
Centr es, Specialised Laboratories and other Committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities including 
learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is con sidered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) the remuneration to be paid to the examiners, moderators, invigilators and tabulators;  
(o) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(p) the management of institutions established by the University; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) The regulations and by -laws in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be 
the first Ordinances of the University and may be repealed or amended at any time by the                
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council).  
26. Power to ma ke Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations 
consistent with this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business, and that of 
the Committees appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statu tes or the Ordinances in the 
manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) and shall be submitted to the Anjuman (Court) on  or after 
such date as may be prescribed by the Statutes and the Anjuman (Court) shall consider the report in its 
annual meeting.  
(2) The Anjuman (Court) shall submit the annual report to the Visitor along with its comments, if 
any. 
(3) A copy of the annual report as submitted to the Visitor shall also be submitted to the Central 
Governmen t, which  shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both the Houses of 
Parliament.  
28. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) and shall, once at least 
every year and at intervals of not more than fif teen mon ths, be audited by the C omptroller and       
Auditor -General of India or by  such persons as he may authorise in this behalf.  10 
 (2) A copy of the annual accounts, together with the audit report thereon, shall be submitted to the 
Anjuman (Court) and the Visitor along with the observations of the Majlis -i-Muntazimah                
(Executive Council).  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Anjuman (Court) and the observations of the Anjuman (Court), if any, shall, after being considered by the 
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Execut ive Council), be submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts, together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be subm itted to the Central Government  which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both the Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both the Houses of Parliament, shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
29. Conditions of service s of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University a nd a copy of which shall be furn ished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the University and any of  the employees shall  at the 
request o f the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), one member nominated by the employee concerned and an 
umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribu nal of Arbitration referred to in sub -section ( 2), shall be final, and no suit 
shall lie in any civil court in respect of the matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meani ng of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940).  
30. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of  the University by the 
orders of  resolution of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor), Discipline Committee or Examination 
Committee, as the case may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the 
University  for more than one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of 
such resolution by him , appeal to Majlis -i-Muntazi mah (Executive Council) and the Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council) may confirm, modify  or reverse the deci sion of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia                   
(Vice -Chancellor) or the concerned Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be refer red to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of                  
sub-sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 29 shall  as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this  
sub-section.  
31. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University shall, notwith standing anything 
contained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the  
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), against the decision of any officer or authority of the 
University and the reupon the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may confirm, modify or reverse 
the decision appealed against.  
32. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such pension  or provident fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted , the Central Government may 
decla re that the provisions o f the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925),  shall apply to such f und as if it 
were a Government provident f und. 
33. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereupon shall 
be final.   11 
 34. Constitution of Committees .—Where any authorit y of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise p rovided, consist of the 
members  of the authority concerned and of such other persons (if any) as the authority in each case may 
think fit.  
35. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies a mong the members                                 
(other than ex officio  members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as 
conveniently may be, by the person or body who appointed, elected or co -opted the members whose place 
has become vacant and the person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member 
of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have 
been a member.  
36. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
37. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
38. Mode of proof of University record .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession 
of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by t he 
Musajjil (Registrar), shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding or resolution, documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as 
evidence of the matters and transaction t herein where the original thereof would, if produced, have been 
admissible in evidence, notwith standing anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) 
or in any other law for the time being in force.  
39. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act, shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act  shall be laid as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute,  Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
40. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with  the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedi ent for removing the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be mad e under this section  after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
41. Transitional provision s.—(1) The Anjuman (Court), the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive 
Council), the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council), the Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee) and 
Faculties of the University shall, as soon as may be , after the commencement of this Act, be constituted in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and until so constituted, the Anjuman (Court), the           
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council), the Majlis -i-Maliyat 
(Finance Committee) and Faculties of the Jamia Millia Islamia functioning immediately before such 
commencement, shall continue to exercise all the powers and perform all the functions of such authority 
under this Act.  12 
 (2) The Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) , the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) , the Musajjil (Registrar), 
Deans of Faculties, Heads of the Departments, Principals of Institutions , other officers and employees of 
the Jamia Millia Islamia holding office immediately before the commencement of this  Act, shall, on and 
from such commencement, continue to hold their respective offices by the same tenure and upon the same 
terms and conditions as they held it immediately before such commencement.  
(3) Anything done or any action taken or any degree or oth er academic distinction conferred by the 
Jamia Millia Islamia before the  commencement of this Act shall,  notwithstanding any change made by 
this Act in the constitution of the Anjuman (Court), the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), the 
Majlis -i-Talim i (Academic Council), the Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee), Faculties and other 
officers be valid, as if such thing was done, action taken, or degree or academic distinction conferred 
under this Act.   13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 24)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. THE  AMIR -I-JAMIA (CHANCELLOR) : 
(1) The Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) shall be elected by the Anjuman (Court) by a simple majority.  
(2) The Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) shall hold office for a term of five years, and shall be eligible for 
re-election.  
(3) The Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) shall, if present, preside over the meetings of the Anjuman (Court) 
and the Convocation of the University.  
2. THE SHAIKH -UL-JAMIA (VICE -CHANCELLOR ): 
(1) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) sh all be appointed by the Visitor  from a panel of at least 
three persons recommended by a Commit tee consisting of three persons:  two to be nominated by the 
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) an d one, who shall be the Chairman of the Committee  to be 
nominated by the Visitor : 
Provided that no member of the above Committee shall be connected with the University:  
Provided further that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may 
call for fresh recommendations.  
(2) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancell or) shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(3) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re -appointment  for not more than a nother term : 
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the  said period of five years, he s hall continue in office 
until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 3), a person appointed as Sha ikh-ul-Jamia       
(Vice -Chancellor) shall, if he completes the age of sixty -five years during the term of his office, retire 
from office.  
(5) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia                   
(Vice -Chancellor) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(6) If the office of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) becomes vacant due to his death, 
resignation or otherwise or if he is unable to perform his duties owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, the Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Pro-Vice -Chancellor) shall discharge the duties of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia                    
(Vice -Chancellor) and will be designated as Qaim Maqam Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (officiating Vice -Chancello r) 
until a new Shaikh -ul-Jamia ( Vice -Chancellor)  assumes office or the existing Shaikh -ul-Jamia          
(Vice -Chancellor) attends to the duties of his office, as the case may be:  
Provided that if the Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor) is  not available, the senior -most 
Professor shall discharge the duties of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor) until a new Shaikh -ul-Jamia 
(Vice -Chancellor) or the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor), as the case may be, assumes office.  
3. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE SH AIKH -UL-JAMIA (VICE -CHANCELLOR) : 
(1) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) shall be the ex officio  Chairman of the                      
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council),  the Majlis -i-Maliyat 
(Finance Committee) and the Planning Board and shall, in the absence of the Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor) 
preside at the meeting of the Anjuman (Court) and the Convocation held for conferring degrees and shall 
be entitled to be present at,  and to address, any meeting of any authority or other body of the University, 
but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such authority or body.  14 
 (2) It shall be the duty of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) to see that the Act,  the Statutes, the 
Ordinances and the Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all powers necessary to ensure such 
observance.  
(3) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened 
meetings of the Anjuman (Court), the Majlis -i-Muntazimah  (Executive Council), the Majlis -i-Talimi 
(Academic Council), and the Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee) and the Planning Board.  
4. NAIB SHAIKH -UL-JAMIA (P RO-VICE -CHANCELLOR) : 
(1)The Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro-Vice -Chancellor) shall be appointed by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council) on the recommendation of the  Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) on such terms and 
conditions as may be laid down in the Ordinances : 
Provided that where the recommendatio n of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) is not accepted by 
the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either 
appoint the person recommended by the  Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) or ask the Shaikh -ul-Jamia 
(Vice -Chancellor) to recommend another person to the Majlis -i-Muntaziman (Executive Council):  
Provided further that the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may, on th e recommendation of 
the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of the Naib        
Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor) in addition to his own duties as a Professor.  
(2) The term of office of the Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor) shall be such as may be 
decided by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), but it shall not in any case exceed five years or 
until the expiration of the term of office of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) whichever is earlier, 
and he shall be eligible for re-appointment : 
Provided that the Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor) shall retire on attaining the age of 
sixty -five years:  
Provided further that the Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor) shall, while discharging the 
duties of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue in office 
notwithstanding the expiration of the term of office until a new Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor), or the 
Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor), as the case may be, assumes office.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Naib  Shaikh -ul-Jamia          
(Pro-Vice -Chancellor) shall be such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor) shall assist the Shaikh -ul-Jamia                    
(Vice -Chancellor) in respect of such matter s as may be specified by the  Shaikh -ul-Jamia                     
(Vice -Chancellor) from time to time in this behalf and shall also exercise such powers  and perform such 
duties as may  be assigned or delegated to him by the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor).  
5. THE MUSAJJIL (REGISTRAR) : 
(1) The Musajjil (Registrar) shall be a whole -time salaried employee of the University and shall be 
appointed on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose under Statute 
25. 
(2) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Musajjil  (Registrar) shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided that the Musajjil (Registrar) shall retire on at taining the age of sixty years.  
(3) When the office of the Musajjil (Registrar) is vacant or when the Musajjil  (Registrar) is, by reason 
of illness, absence or any other cause, unable to  perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office 
shall be performed by such person as the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) may appoint for the purpose.  
(4) (i) The Musajjil (Registrar) shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the 
employees of the University, excluding teachers and academic st aff, as may be specified in the orders of 
the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) and to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer 
warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of censure or the withholding of increment:  15 
 Provided that no such pen alty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be  taken in regard to him.  
(ii) An appeal shall lie to the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) against any order of the Musajjil 
(Registrar) imposing any of the penalties specified in sub -clause ( i). 
(iii) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the powers of the Musajjil 
(Registrar) is called for, the Musajjil (Registrar) shall, upon conclusion of th e inquiry, make a report to 
the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor)  along with his recommendations : 
Provided that an appeal sha ll lie to the Majlis -i-Muntazim ah (Executive Council) against an order of 
the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) imposing any penalty.  
(5) The Musajjil (Registrar) shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Majlis -i-Muntazimah            
(Executive Council), the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) and the Faculties, but shall not be deemed 
to be a member of any of these authorities. He shall be ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Anjuman 
(Court).  
(6) It shall be the duty of the Musajjil (Registrar):  
(i) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), shall commit to his ch arge; 
(ii) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Anjuman (Court), the  Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council), the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) and Faculties, the Boards of Studies, 
the Boards of Examiners and  of any Committee appointed by the authorities of the University;  
(iii) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Anjuman (Court), the  Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council), the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council), Faculties and of any Committee 
appo inted by the authorities of the University;  
(iv) to conduct  the official correspondence of the Anjuman (Court), the  Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council) and the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council);  
(v) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of t he University in accordance with the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(vi) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(vii) to represe nt the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign   
powers -of-attorney and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(viii) to perform such other duties as may be specified in these Statutes, or prescribed by the 
Ordinances or the Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council) or the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor).  
6. FINANCE OFFICER : 
(1) The Finance Officer shall be a whole -time salaried em ployee of the University and shall be 
appointed on the recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose under Statute 
25 on such terms and conditions as may  be prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided that a person appointed as a Finance  Officer shall retire from office when he attains the age 
of sixty years.  
(2) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause , unable to perform the duties of his office, the  duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the  Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Finance Officer shall be  the ex officio  Secretary of the Majlis -i-Maliyat  (Finance Committee), 
but shall not be deemed to be a member of such Committee.  16 
 (4) The Finance Officer shall advise the University as regards its financial policy and perform such 
other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the  Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) or 
as may be prescribed b y these Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(5) Subject to the control of the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Coun cil), the Finance Officer 
shall — 
(i) hold and manage the property and investments including trust and endowed property;  
(ii) ensure that the limits fixed by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) for recurring and 
non-recurring expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the 
purposes for which they are granted or allotted;  
(iii) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University for the 
next financial year and for their presentation to the  Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council);  
(iv) keep a constant watch on  the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
investment;  
(v) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(vi) have the accounts of the University regularly audited by an internal audit party;  
(vii) ensure that the registers of buildings, land , furniture and equipment are maintained            
up-to-date and that the stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in 
all offices, Centre s, Institutions and Schools maintained by the University;  
(viii) call for explanation for unauthorise d expenditure and for other financial irregularities and 
suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(ix) call for from any office, Institution,  Centre , Department or School, under the University, any 
information or return that he may consider necessary for the performance of his duties.  
(6) The receipt issued by the Finance Officer or by the person or persons duly authorised in this 
behalf by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) for any money payable to the University shall be 
sufficient discharge for payment of such money.  
7. DEANS OF FACULTIES : 
(1) Each Faculty shall have a Dean who shall be appointed by the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor) 
from amongst the Professors in the Faculty for a per iod of three years by rotation : 
Provided that if at any time there is no Professor in a Faculty, the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor) 
may appoint a Reader as Dean from amongst the Readers. However, if a Professor is appointed in the 
Faculty during the period of the Reader as Dean, his t enure will cease from the date of the appointment of 
a Professor who shall then be the Dean.  
(2) A Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shall cease to hold office as such.  
(3) A Dean may resign his office at any time during his tenure, and a Professor may decline the offer 
of appointment as the Dean of a Faculty.  
(4) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be pe rformed by such 
person as the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor) may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Dean shall be the Head of the Faculty and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the Faculty. He  shall have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(6) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Board of Studies or 
Committee of the Faculty, as the case may be, but not the right to vote thereat unless he is a member 
thereof.  17 
 8. HEADS OF DEPARTMENT : 
(1) Each Department shall have a Head of the Department who shall be a Professor and whose duties 
and functions and terms and conditions of appointment shall be prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided that if there are more than one Professor s in any Department the Head of the Department 
shall be appointed in accordance with the provisions made in re spect thereof by the Ordinances : 
Provided further that in a Department where there is no Professor, a Rea der may be appointed as the 
Head of the Department in accordance with the provision made in re spect thereof by the Ordinances : 
Provided also that if there is no Professor or Reader in a Department, Dean of the Faculty concerned 
shall act as Head of the Dep artment.  
(2) It shall be open to a Professor or a Reader to decline the offer of appointment as the Head of the 
Department.  
(3) A person appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office as such for a period of three 
years and shall be eligible for  re-appointment.  
(4) A Head of the Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of office.  
9. DEAN OF STUDENTS ’ WELFARE : 
(1) Every Dean of Students ’ Welfare shall be appointed from amongst the teachers of the University, 
not below the rank of a Reader by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah  (Executive Council) on the recommendation 
of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor).  
(2) Every Dean appointed under clause ( 1) shall be a whole -time officer and shall hold office for a 
term of three years and shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may, if it is considered necessary, 
appoint on the recommendation of the Shai kh-ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor) a teacher, not below the rank of 
a Reader to discharge duties of the Dean of Students ’ Welfare in addition to his duties and in such a case 
the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may sanction a suitable allowance to be pa id to him.  
(3) A person who is appointed as the Dean of Students ’ Welfare shall continue to hold his lien on his 
substantive post and shall be eligible to all the benefits that would have otherwise accrued to him but for 
his appointment as Dean of Students’  Welfare.  
(4) When the  office of the Dean of Students’  Welfare is vaca nt or when the Dean of Students’  
Welfare is, by reason of illness or absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, 
the duties of the office shall be pe rformed by such person as the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) may 
appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The duties and  powers of the Dean of Students’  Welfare shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
10. LIBRARIAN : 
(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose under Statute 25 and shall be a 
whole time officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as  may be assigned to him by 
the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council).  
11. ANJUM AN (COURT) : 
(1) The Court  shall consist of the following persons, namely: — 
Ex officio  Members : 
(i) Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor).  
(ii) Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor).  
(iii) Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor).  18 
 (iv) All Deans of Faculties.  
(v) Dean of Students’  Welfare.  
(vi) Musajjil (Registrar).  
(vii) Finance Officer.  
(viii) Librarian.  
(ix) Ten Heads of Departments by rotation according to seniority.  
(x) Two Heads of other Institutions.  
Life Members : 
(xi) Persons, who signed the pledge of 20 years of service to the Jamia.  
Representatives of Teachers : 
(xii) Two Professors who are not Heads of Departments of Studies, by rotation according to 
seniority.  
(xiii) Two Readers  by rotation according to seniority to be appointed by the  Shaikh -ul-Jamia 
(Vice -Chancellor).  
(xiv) Two L ecturers by rotation according to seniority , to be appointed by the  Shaikh -ul-Jamia 
(Vice -Chancellor).  
Repres entatives of Non -teaching staff : 
(xv) Three representatives of non -teaching staff according to seniority by rotation.  
Nominated Members : 
(xvi) Eight persons to be nominated by the Visitor and two persons to be nominated by the   
Amir -i-Jamia (Chancellor).  
Co-opted Members : 
(xvii) Six persons representing learned professions and special interests including representatives 
of industry, commerce, trade unions, banking and agriculture to be co -opted by the Anjuman (Court).  
Representatives of Legislatures : 
(xviii) Three members of Parliament, two t o be nominated by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and 
one by the Chairman of the Rajya Sabha.  
(xix) One representative of Delhi Administration to be nominated by the  Union territory 
administration.  
(xx) The Chairman of the Central Board of Secondary Education , Delhi.  
(2) All members of the Anjuman (Court) other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a term of 
three years.  
(3) An ex officio  member shall cease to be a member of the Anjuman (Court) as soon as he vacates 
the office by virtue of which he is such a member.  
12. MEETINGS OF THE ANJUMAN (COURT) : 
(1) An annual meeting of the Anjuman (Court) shall be held on a date to be fixed by the                   
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) unless some other date has been fixed by the Anjuman (Court) 
in respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Anjuman (Court), a report on the working of the University during 
the previous ye ar, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet as audited 
and the financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.  19 
 (3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the financial estim ates 
referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Anjuman (Court) at least seven days before 
the date of the annual meeting.  
(4) One-fourth of the members of the Anjuman (Court) shall form the quorum for a meeting of the 
Anjuman (Court).  
(5) Special meetings of the Anjuman (Court) may be convened by the  Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council) or the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) or if there is no Shaikh -ul-Jamia        
(Vice -Chancellor), by the Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Pro-Vice -Chairman ), or, if there is no                       
Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Pro-Vice -Chancellor) by the Musajjil (Registrar).  
13. MAJLIS -I-MUNTAZIMAH (EXECUTIVE COUNCIL) : 
(1) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) shall consist o f the following members, namely :— 
(i) Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor);  
(ii) Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor);  
(iii) two D eans of Faculties by rotation according to seniority;  
(iv) Dean of Students’  Welfare;  
(v) one of the Directors  of Boards of Management, Centre s of the University, by rotation 
according to seniority;  
(vi) three teachers -one each from amongst Professors, Readers and Lecturers of the University to 
be appointed by the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) by rotation according to seniority;  
(vii) four persons to  be nominated by the Visitor;  
(viii) two persons from amongst the Life Members under Statute 11  (1) (xi) chosen by the 
Anjuman (Court) by rotation.  
(2) Five members shall form quorum for a meeting of the Majlis -i-Muntazimah  (Executive Council).  
(3) All the  members of the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) other than the ex officio  
members shall hold office for a period of three years.  
14. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF MAJLIS -I-MUNTAZIMAH (EXECUTIVE COUNCIL) : 
(1) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) shall have the management and administration of 
the revenue and property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University 
not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances , the Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council) s hall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, 
namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts to determine the number and emoluments of such posts 
and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lecturer s and other 
academic staff and Principals of Institutions and Schools:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) in respect 
of the number, qualifications and the emoluments of teachers and academic staff otherwise than after 
consideration of the recommendation of the  Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council);  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers , Lecturers and other academic staff, as may  be necessary 
and Principals of Institutions on the recommendations of the Selection Committee constituted for the 
purpose under Statute 25 and to fill up temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the O rdinances ; 20 
 (iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Amir -i-Jamia, 
(Chancellor), and the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor), and to make necessary arrangements for th e 
discharge of the functions of such officer during hi s absence ; 
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among members of the teaching, administrative and other 
staff of the University in accordance with th ese Statutes and the Ordinances ; 
(vi) to manage and  regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administr ative affairs of the University ; 
(vii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or securities as it may, from time to time, think fit , or in the purchase of 
immovable p roperty in India, with the like power of varying suc h investments from time to time ; 
(viii) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  
(ix) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(x) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xi) to entertain, adjudicate u pon and, if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the officers of the 
University, the teaching staff, other employees and the Students of the University, who may, for any 
reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xii) to appoint examiners and moderators and to fix thei r fees, emoluments and trave lling and 
other allowances, after consulting the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council);  
(xiii) to maintain a register of donors to the University;  
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use  of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence and discipline of 
women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor), the Naib         
Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro-Vice -Chancellor), the Musaj jil (Registrar) or the Finance o fficer or such other 
employee or authority of the University or to a Committee appo inted by it, as it may deem fit ; 
(xvii) to institute fellowship s, scholarships, studentships, medals and priz es; and  
(xviii) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or 
imposed on it by the Act or these Statutes.  
15. MAJLIS -I-TALIMI (ACADEMIC COUNCIL) : 
(1) The Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) shall consist o f the following  members, namely :— 
(i) Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor);  
(ii) Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor);  
(iii) Directors of Centre s; 
(iv) Deans of Faculties;  
(v) Dean of Students’  Welfare;  
(vi) Heads of the Departments;  
(vii) Principals and Heads of Institutions and Schools;  
(viii) Librarian;  
(ix) two Professors other than Heads of Departments, according to seniority, to be nominated by 
the Sh aikh-ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) ; 21 
 (x) two Teachers of the University, at least one of whom should be a Reader, by rotation 
according to seniority, to be appointed by the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor);  
(xi) three persons not in the service of the University, co -opted by the  Majlis -i-Talimi   
(Academic Council) for their special knowledge.  
(2) One-third of the to tal members of the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) shall form the quorum.  
(3) All the members of the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) other than the ex officio  members 
shall hold office for a period of three years.  
16. POWERS OF THE MAJLIS -I-TALIMI (ACADEMIC COUNCIL) : 
Subject to this Act, these Statutes and the Ordinances, the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) shall, 
in addition to all other powers vested in it, have  the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instruction, cooperative teaching among Departments and 
institutions, evaluation of research or im provement in academic standards ; 
(ii) to bring about inter -faculty co -ordinati on, to establish or appoint Committees or Boards , for 
taking up projects on an interfaculty basis;  
(iii) to consider matters of general academic interest either at its own initiative or referred to by a 
Faculty, or the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Counci l), and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(iv) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with these Statutes and Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studen tships, fee concessions, corporate life and attendance.  
17. FACULTIES AND DEPARTMENTS : 
The University shall have the following Faculties, namely: — 
(i) the Facu lty of Humanities and Languages ; 
(ii) the Faculty of Social Sciences ; 
(iii) the Faculty of Natural Sciences ; 
(iv) the Faculty of Education ; 
(v) the Facult y of Engineering and Technology ; 
(vi) the Faculty of Law; and  
(vii) such other Faculties as may be prescribed by these Statutes.  
18. CONSTITUTION OF FACULTIES : 
(1) Each Faculty, other than the Faculty of Engineering and Technology, shall consist of the 
following members, namely: — 
(i) Dean of the Fa culty who shall be the Chairman ; 
(ii) all Professors in the Faculty ; 
(iii) all Heads of Departments assigned to the Faculty who are not Professors;  
(iv) one Reader from each Department by rotation according to seniority ; 
(v) two Lecturers from each Department (one above ten years of service and one below ten years) 
by rotation according to seniority;  
  22 
 (vi) four persons nominated by the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) from other Faculties of 
the University; and  
(vii) five persons, not in the service of the University to be co -opted by the Faculty for their 
special knowledge of any subject assigned to the Faculty, provided that not more than one person  may 
be co -opted in respect of a subject assigned to a single Department.  
(2) The Faculty of Engineering and Technology shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) Dean of the Faculty, who shall be the Chairman;  
(ii) Head of the University Polytechnic;  
(iii) all Professors in the Faculty;  
(iv) one Reader and one Lecturer by rotation according to seniority from  each Department in the 
Faculty ; 
(v) not more than three Readers from the University Polytechnic;  
(vi) one Lecturer at the University Polytechnic, by rotation according to seniority;  
(vii) one person not in the service of the University, having expert knowledge of the subject or 
subjects concerned, to be co -opted by the Faculty for each Department; and  
(viii) three members to be nominate d by the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) for their special 
knowledge of any subject assigned to the Faculty or of any allied branches of knowledge.  
(3) All members of a Faculty, other than the ex officio  members, shall hold office for a term of three 
years. 
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a Faculty and the quorum required for each Faculty shall be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
19. POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE F ACULTIES : 
In addition to the powers and functions of the Faculties prescribed under the Ordi nances, they shall 
have power, — 
(i) to co -ordinate teaching and research activities of Departments assigned to the Faculty, and to 
promote and provide for inter -disciplinary teaching and research and to arrange for examination and 
periodical tests in subjects falling within the purview of the Faculty;  
(ii) to appoint Boards of Studies or C ommittees or to undertake research projects common to 
more than one Department;  
(iii) to approve courses of st udy proposed by the Departments ; 
(iv) to forward to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) the recommendations of the 
Boards of Studies or Committee f or Advance Studies and Research ; 
(v) to propose the draft of Ordinances for the examination for c ourses conducted by the Faculty ; 
(vi) to recommend proposals  for the creation and abolition of teaching posts; and  
(vii) to perform such other functions as the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council)  and   
Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) may prescribe.  
20. DEPARTMENTS : 
(1) Each Faculty shall have such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances.  
(2) No Department shall be established or abolished except by these Statutes.  
(3) The Departments in existence at the commencement of the Jamia Millia Islamia Act, 1988 and the 
Faculties relating thereto shall continue to function heretofore until decided otherwise by the Statutes.  
  23 
 (4) Each Department shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) teachers of the Department;  
(ii) persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the Faculty or Deans of the Faculties;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions of 
the Ordinances.  
(5) Each Department shall have a Head of the Department who shall be appointed in accordance with 
these Statutes and shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
21. BOARDS OF STUDIES : 
(1) Each Department shall have a Board of S tudies which shall consist of: — 
(i) the Head of the Department, who shall be the Chairman;  
(ii) Dean of the Faculty concerned;  
(iii) all members of the Department;  
(iv) two persons teaching allied or cognate subjects in the University to be nominated by the 
Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council); and  
(v) two experts not in the service of the University to be co -opted by the Board of Studies.  
(2) The appointment of members specified in items ( iv) and ( v) of sub -clause ( 1) shall be for a period 
of three years.  
(3) The functions of Board of Studies shall be, — 
(i) to recommend to the Faculty in the mann er prescribed by the Ordinances : 
(a) courses of studies;  
(b) appointment of examiners for under -graduate and post -graduate courses, but excluding 
research degrees;  
(c) creation, abolition or upgrading of teaching posts;  
(d) field of study of each post at the time of its creation;  
(e) measures for improvement of standard of teaching and research;  
(f) subjects for research for various degrees and other requirements of research work; and  
(g) appointment of su pervisors for research work;  
(ii) to allocate teaching work among the teachers;  
(iii) to consider matters of general and academic interest to the Department and of its functioning;  
(iv) to perform such other functions as may be assigned to it by the Facult y: 
Provided that a Department, for reasons of its size or otherwise shall, in the interest of efficient 
discharge of its functions, constitute Committee and assign them responsibilities in specified areas as may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
22. MAS S COMMUNICATION RESEARCH CENTRE : 
(1) Subject to the provisions of the Act and these Statutes, the Mass Communication Research Cen tre 
will be an autonomous Centre  of the University and shall organize instructions and research in the Mass 
Media in consonance w ith the objectives of the University.  24 
 (2) There shall be a Board of Management for the Ma ss Communication Research Centre  which shall 
consist o f the following members, namely :— 
(i) the Chairman to be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of three persons recommended by 
the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) for a period of five years or till he attains the age of 
sixty -five years whichever is earlier. He shall be eligible for re -appointment;  
(ii) four eminent persons in the field of Mass Communication s to be nominated from outside the 
University by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) in consultation with the Chairman;  
(iii) a nominee of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor);  
(iv) two persons to be nominated by the University Grants Commission;  
(v) one except  from among st the Mass Communication Centre s in other Universities to be 
nominated by the Majlis -i-Muntazim ah (Executive Council);  
(vi) Heads of all Departments of the Centre . 
(3) The Admi nistrative Officer of the Centre  shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the Board of 
Management, but he shall not be a member of the Board.  
(4) The ter ms of members other than the ex officio  members shall be for a period of three years.  
(5) The Centre  shall be a separate administrative unit of the University and shall enjoy administrative 
academics, financial and budget ary autonomy in its functions : 
Provided that the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may issue from time to time, such 
directions o n all matters as it may consider necessary, for the smooth functioning of the Centre  and in 
case the Board of Management does not agree with such directions , the matter may be referred to the 
Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(6) The Board sha ll be competent to exercise all or any of t he following powers, namely :— 
(i) to appoint, from time to time, Professors, Readers, Lecturers, Librarian and such other 
members of the teaching staff, officers a nd other employees of the Centre  on the recommendations of 
the Selection Committees constituted for the purpose and all such appointees shall be employees of 
the University and shall be governed by the Act, these Statu tes, Ordinances and Regulations ; 
(ii) to delegate administrative, fina ncial and other powers to such officer or officers subject to 
such conditions as it may deem necessary;  
(iii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, business and all other admin istrative affairs of 
the Centre ; 
(iv) to institute and regulate the awa rd of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals , prizes, 
certificates and merit certificates ; 
(v) to appoint on the recommendations of the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council), Examiners, 
Moderators and other persons concerned with the conduct of the e xaminations and to fix their 
remuneration;  
(vi) to entertain, adjudicate upon and redress any grievances of the officers, teaching staff or other 
employees of the Centre  who may feel ag grieved or for any other reason ; 
(vii) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions and discharge such other 
duties as may be deemed necessary to achieve the objectives of the University.  
(7) The Board of Management shall submit its annual report, in respect of all matters conc erning the 
affairs of the Cen tre, to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah  (Executive Council).  
(8) The annual accounts and f inancial estimates of the Centre  shall be submitted to the              
Majlis-i-Maliyat (Finance Committee ). 
  25 
 (9) The Chairman of the Board of Management shall be an officer of the University and shall be 
responsible to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), for the overall functioni ng and supervision 
of the Centre  and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him from 
time to time by the Board.  
(10) The Chairman of the Board of Management shall be invited to participate in all meetings of the 
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), whenever any matter concerning the Centre  is on the agenda.  
(11) The Board of Management shall make r egulations for regulating the proper work ing and 
management of the Centre . 
(12) The Board of Management may constitute such bodies as it deems necessary f or the functioning 
of the Centre  and frame regulations therefor . 
(13) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) shall have the privilege to attend any or all the meetings 
of the Board of Management of t he Centre . 
23. JAMIA SCHOOLS : 
(1) Subject to the provisions of the Act and these Statutes, the Schools established and maintained by 
the University shall functio n as an autonomous unit with a B oard of Management to man age and 
supervise their working : 
Provided that the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may issue, from time to time, such 
directions on all matters, as it may consider necessary, for  the smooth functioning of the Schools and in 
case the Board of Management does not agree with such directions, the matter may be referred to the 
Visitor, whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(2) The Board of Management  shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor), who shall be the Chairman;  
(ii) The Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor);  
(iii) the Dean, Faculty of Education;  
(iv) the Pri ncipal, Senior Secondary School ; 
(v) the Headmaster, Middle School ; 
(vi) the Director, Nursery School ; 
(vii) the Director, Balak Mata Centre s; 
(viii) one Principal from among the Principals of the Senior Secondary Schools  of Delhi, to be 
nominated by the  Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor);  
(ix) the Secretary, Central Board of Secondary Education, Delhi;  
(x) the Assistant Registrar for Schoo ls, who shall be the Secretary.  
(3) The Board of Management shall be competent to exerci se the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to appoint the members of the teaching and administrative staff on the recommendation of the 
Selection Committees constituted for the purpose and all such appointees shall be the employees of 
the University and shall be governed by the Act, these Statutes, Ordinances and Regulation s; 
(ii) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, business and all other administrative affairs of 
the Schools;  
(iii) to appoint examiners, moderators and other s concerned with th e conduct of examination and 
to fix their remuneration;  
(iv) to institute and regulate the award of scholarships, studentships, certificates, medals and 
prizes ; 26 
 (v) to entertain and adjudicate upon any grievances of the members of the teaching and 
administrative staff of the Schools; and  
(vi) to exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be deemed necessary 
for the smooth functioning of the Schools.  
24. THE MAJL IS-I-MALI YAT (FINANCE COMMITTEE) : 
(1) The Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee) shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor);  
(ii) the Naib Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor);  
(iii) two Deans of the F aculties to be nominated by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council);  
(iv) two persons to be nominated by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Execut ive Council) from amongst 
its members other than those in the service of the University;  
(v) three persons to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) The Finance Officer shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the Committee but shall not be the 
member of the Committ ee. 
(3) The Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee) shall meet at least twice a year to examine the 
accounts and to scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(4) All the members of the Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee) other than ex officio  members, shall 
hold office for a term of three years.  
(5) Five members of the Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee) shall form the quorum.  
(6) The Annual A ccounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance 
Officer shall be laid b efore the Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee) for consideration and comments 
and thereafter submitted to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) for approval.  
(7) The Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee) shall fix limits for the total recurring expend iture and 
the total non -recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University 
(which , in the case of productive works may include the proceeds of loans) and expenditure shall not be 
incurred by the University in excess of the limits so fixed.  
(8) No expenditure other than that provided for in the budget shall be incurred by the University 
without the approval of the Majlis -i-Maliyat (Finance Committee).  
25. SELECTION COMMITTEES : 
(1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendation to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executive Council) for appointment to the posts of Professors, Readers, Lecturers, Librarian, Registrar, 
Finance Officer and Principals of Institutions maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Commit tee for appointment to the posts specified in column ( 1) of the Table below 
shall consist of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor), Naib  Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Pro -Vice -Chancellor), a 
nominee of the Visitor and the persons specified in the corresponding entry in column ( 2) of the said 
Table : 
Provided that where the appointment of teacher is to be made in an Institution, the Principal of that 
Institution shall also be an ex officio  member of the Selection Committee c onstituted for such 
appointment : 27 
 TABLE  
 
(1)  (2) 
Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned, if he is a Professor.  
 (ii) One Professor to be n ominated by the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor).  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated by the  
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) out of a panel of names 
recommended by the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) for their special 
knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with which the Professor will be 
concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department concer ned. 
 (ii) One Professor to be nominated by th e Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor).  
 (iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, nominated by the    
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council)  out of a panel of names 
recommended by the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council), for their special 
knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with which the Reader or Lecturer 
will be concerned.  
Musajjil 
(Registrar)/Finance 
Officer  (i) Two members of the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) nominated 
by it.  
 (ii) One person not connected with the University nominated by the           
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council).  
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University, who have special 
knowledge of the subject of Library Science/Library Adm inistration to be 
nominated by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council).  
 (ii) One person, not in the service of the University, nominated by the         
Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council).  
Principal of an 
Institution 
maintained by the 
University   Three persons not in the service of the University of whom two shall be 
nominated by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah  (Executive  Council) and one by 
the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) for their special knowledge of, or 
interest in, a subject in which instruct ion is being provided by the 
Institution.  
Principal, Higher 
Secondary School;  (i) The Dean, Faculty of Education;  
Headmaster,  
Middle  School; 
Director, Nursery 
School; and 
Director, Balak 
Mata Centre  (ii) Three persons, who are not employees of the Jamia and not members of the 
Majlis -i-Muntazimah or the Majlis -i-Talimi, out of whom two be 
nominated by the Shaikh -ul-Jamia out of a panel of 7 persons to be 
suggested by the Majlis -i-Talimi and one be nominated  by the            
Majlis -i-Muntazimah.  
  28 
 (1)  (2) 
Other Teachers  (i) The Dean, Faculty of Education;  
 (ii) The Head of the School concerned;  
 (iii) One person, who is not engaged in teaching at the Jamia and not member 
of the Majlis -i-Muntazimah or the Majlis -i-Talimi, be nominated by the 
Shaikh -ul-Jamia out of a panel of four persons for their experience of 
school education and administration.  
Library Staff   The Majlis -i-Muntazimah will appoint a permanent Selection Committee 
for the Library Staff,  other than Librarian (from time to time).  
Administrative Staff   The Ma jlis-i-Muntazimah will appoint a permanent Selection Committee 
for Administrative Staff (from time to time).  
 
(3) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) or in his absence, the Naib  Shaikh -ul-Jamia                
(Pro-Vice -Chancellor) shall preside at the meetings of the Selection Committee.  
(4) The meetings of the Selection Committee shall be convened by the Shaikh -ul-Jamia               
(Vice -Chancellor) or in his absence by the Naib  Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Pro-Vice -Chancellor).  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations shall be laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) is unable to accept the recommendations mad e by 
the Committee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) if the temporary vacancy is for a duration longer than one academic session, it shall be filled 
on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure laid down in the 
foregoing clauses;  
(ii) if the temporary vacancy is for a period less than one academic session, an appointment to 
such vacancy shall be made on the recommendation of a Local Selection Committee consisting of the 
Dean of the Faculty, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia              
(Vice -Chancellor):  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor):  
Provided further  that in case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or any 
other reason, the Dean , may, in con sultation with the Head of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) and the 
Musajjil (Registrar) about such appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under these Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary 
employment, or given a fresh appointment unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection 
Committee or a regular Selecti on Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case 
may be.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing clauses, the Majlis -i-Muntazimah  
(Executive Council) may invite a person of high academic distinction and professional atta inment to 
accept a post of Professor in the University, on such terms and conditions as it deems fit, and on the 
person agreeing to do so, appoint him to the post.  
(9) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) of the University may appoint a teacher or a ny 
other academic staff working in any other University or institution for undertaking a joint project in 
accordance with the manner prescribed in the Ordinances.  29 
 Note: —1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the Head of t he 
Project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
2. The Profes sor to be nominated shall be a P rofessor concerned with the specialty for which the 
selection is being made and that the Shaikh -ul-Jamia  (Vice -Chancellor) shall consult the Head of the 
Department and the Dean of the Faculty before nominating the Professor.  
(10) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may appoint a person selected in accordance with 
the procedure laid down in the foregoing clauses for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it 
deems fit.  
26. COMMITTEES : 
Any authority of the University may appoint as many Standing or Special Committees as it may deem 
fit, consisting of members of the authority making such appointment and of such other persons (if any) as 
that authority in each case may think fit; and any such Committee may deal with any subject assigned to it 
subject to subsequent confirmation of the authority appointing it.  
27. TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF SE RVICE OF UNIVERSITY TEA CHERS: 
(1) All the teachers of the University, shall, in the absence of any agreement to the contrary, be 
governed by the terms and conditions of service as specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher of the University shall be appointed on a written contract, the form of which shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances and a copy of the contract shall be deposited with the Musajjil 
(Registrar).  
28. SENIORITY LISTS : 
(1) Whenever, in accordance with t hese Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be a member of an 
authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined 
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade, and in accorda nce with such 
other principles as the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may, from time to time, determine.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Musajjil (Registrar) to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of 
persons to whom the provisions of thes e Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in 
accordance with the provisions of the foregoing clause.  
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Musajjil (Registrar) may, on his own motion 
and shall at the request of any such p erson, submit the matter to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah              
(Executive Council) whose decision thereon shall be final.  
29. HONORARY DEGREES : 
(1) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may, on the recommendation of the              
Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) and by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds 
of the members present and voting, make proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees : 
Provided that in case of emergency, the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may, on its own, 
make such proposals.  
(2) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not 
less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanc tion of the 
Visitor, any honorary degree conferred by the University.  
  30 
 30. WITHDRAWAL OF DEGREES, ETC .: 
The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of 
not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic distinction 
conferred on, or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University for good and 
sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been give n to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council).  
31. MAINTENANCE OF DISCIPLINE AMONG STUDENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY : 
(1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students shall vest in the 
Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor).  
(2) The Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper 
to any officer as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice  to the generality of his power  relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action in the interest of maintaining discipline as may seem to him appropriate, the       
Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) may, in the exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student or  
students be expelled or rusticated, for a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of 
study in a Department or an Institution of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for 
an amount to be specified in the order, or  be debarred from taking an examination or examinations 
conducted by the University or a Department or an Institution for one or more years, or that the results of 
the student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they hav e appeared 
be cancelled.  
(4) The Chairman of the Centre , the Chairman of the Board of Management of the School, the Deans 
of Faculties, the Heads of Departments and the Principals of Institutions, shall have the authority to 
exercise all such disciplinary powers over the stu dents in their respective Centre s, Schools, Faculties, 
Institutions and Departments as may be necessary for t he proper conduct of such Centre s, Schools, 
Faculties, Departments and Institutions.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor), the detailed rules of 
discipline and proper conduct shall be framed by the Univer sity. The Chairman of the Centre , the 
Chairman of the Board of Management of  the School, Directors of Centre s, Deans of Faculties and Heads 
of Departments and Principals of Institutions may frame such supplementary rules, as they may deem 
necessary for the aforesaid purposes.  
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himse lf to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) and the other 
authorities of the University.  
32. ESTABLISHMENT OF INSTITUTIONS : 
The establishment of Institutions and the abolition thereof shall be governed by these Statutes.  
33. CONVOCATION : 
The Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes shall be held 
in such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
34. ACTING CHAIRMAN OF MEETINGS : 
Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to preside over a meeting of an authority of 
the University or any Committee of such authority or when the Presiden t or Chairman so provided for i s 
absent, the members present shall elect one from among themselves to preside at such meeting.  
  31 
 35. RESIGNATION : 
(1) Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Anjuman (Court), the Majlis -i-Muntazimah 
(Executiv e Council), the Majlis -i-Talimi  (Academic Council) or any other authority of the University or 
any Committee of such authority may resign by letter addressed to the Registrar, and the resignation shall 
take effect as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar.  
(2) Any officer of t he University, whether salaried or otherwise, may resign his office by letter 
addressed to the Registrar:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date from which the same is accepted by 
the authority competent to fill the vacancy.  
36. DISQUALIFICATIONS : 
(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of any of the 
authorities of the Univer sity— 
(i) if he is of unsound mind or is a deaf -mute;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications me ntioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred for the decision of the Visitor and 
his decision shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
37. REMOVAL OF TEACHERS : 
(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, or a member of the academic staff, 
the Shaikh -ul-Jamia (Vice -Chancellor) may, if he thinks fit, by order in writing, place the teacher under 
suspension and shall forthwith report to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Execu tive Council) the circumstances 
in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may, if it is of the opinion, that the 
circumstances of the case do not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic  staff, 
revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of his contract of service or of his appointment, 
the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) shall be entitled to remove a teacher or a member of the 
academic staff on the grou nd of misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) shall not be entitled to remove a 
teacher or a member of the academic staff except for good caus e and after giving three months’  notice in 
writin g or on payment of three m onths’  salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher or a member of the academic staff shall be removed under clause ( 2) or under      
clause ( 3) until he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard t o him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher or a member of the academic staff shall require a t wo-thirds majority of 
the members of the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) present and voting.  
(6) The removal of a teacher or a member of the academic staff shall  take effect from the date on 
which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where a teacher or a member of the academic staff is under suspension at the time of his 
removal, the removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under suspe nsion.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a teacher or a member of the academic staff 
may resign by giving three months ’ notice in writing to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) or 
on payment to  the University of three months’  salary in lieu thereof.   32 
 38. REMOVAL OF EMPLOYEES OTHER THAN TEACHERS OF THE UNIVERSITY : 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of his contract of service or of his appointment, 
an employee other than a teacher or a member of the academic staff, may be removed by the authority 
which is competent to appoint the employee — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind or is a deaf -mute;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has bee n convicted by a court of law or  an offence involving moral turpi tude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months;  
(iv) if he is otherwise guilty of misconduct:  
Provided that no employee shall be removed from his office unless a resolution to that effect is passed 
by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) by a majority of two -thirds of its members present and 
voting.  
(2) No employee shall be removed under clause ( 1) until he has been given a reasonable opportunity 
of showing cause against the action proposed to be tak en in regard to him.  
(3) Where the removal of such employee is for a reason other than that specified in sub-clause ( iii) of 
sub-clause ( iv) of clause ( 1), he shall be given three mont hs’ notice in writing or paid three months’  salary 
in lieu thereof.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, an employee, not being a teacher or a member 
of the academic staff , shall be entitled to resign, — 
(i) if he is a permanent employee,  only after giving three months ’ notice in writing to the 
appointing authority or paying  to the University three months’  salary in lieu thereof;  
(ii) if he is not a permanent employe e, only after giving one month ’s notice in writing to the 
appointing authority or pay ing to the University  one month’ s salary in lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect from the date on which the resignation is accepted by 
the appointing authority.  
39. ORDINANCES HOW MADE:  
(1) The Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 25 of the Act may be  amended, repealed or 
added to at any time by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in section 25 , other than those enumerated in 
clause ( p) of sub -section ( 1) thereof, shall be made by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) 
unless a draft of such Ordinance has been proposed by the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council).  
(3) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) shall not have power to amend any d raft of any 
Ordinance proposed by the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) under clause ( 2), but may reject the 
proposal or return the draft to the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) for re -consideration, either in 
whole or in part, together with any amendme nt which the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may 
suggest.  
(4) Where the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) has rejected or returned the draft of an 
Ordinance proposed by the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council), the Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) 
may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than 
two-thirds of the members present and voting and more than half the total number of members of the 
Majlis -i-Talimi (Academic Council) the draft may be sent back to the Majlis -i-Muntazimah       
(Executive Counci l) which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) shall come into effect 
immediately.  
  33 
 (6) Every Ordinance made by the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council), shall be submitted to the 
Visitor within two weeks from the date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the 
University within four weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such 
Ordinance and he shall, as soon as possible, inform the Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) about 
his objection to the proposed Ordinance. The Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, 
either withdraw the order suspending  the Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision thereon 
shall be final.  
40. REGULATIONS : 
(1) The authorities of the University may make regulations consistent with the Act, the Statutes and 
the Ordinances fo r the following matters, namely :— 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations; and  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or Committee appointed by 
them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of noti ce to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meetings and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Majlis -i-Muntazimah (Executive Council) may direct the amendment, in such manner as it 
may specify, of any Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
41. DELEGATION OF POWERS : 
Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of the University may 
delegate his or its  powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective control and 
subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated shall 
continue to v est in the officer or authority  delegating such powers.  
42. RESIDENCE CONDITION FOR MEMBERSHIP AND OFFICE : 
Notwithstanding anything contained in these Statutes, no person who is not ordinarily resident in 
India shall be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the  
SHIP OF OTHER BODIES : 
43. MEMBERSHIP OF AUTHORITIES BY VIRTU E OF MEMBERSHIP OF OTHER BODIES : 
Notwithstanding anything contained in these Statutes, a person who holds any post in the Un iversity or is 
a member of any A uthority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority 
or body or as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold office so long only as he continues to be a 
member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that particular appointment, as the case  may 
be. 
44. ALUMNI (OLD BOYS ) ASSOCIATION : 
(1) There shall be an Alumni (Old Boys’ ) Association for the University.  
(2) No person shall be a mem ber of the Association unless — 
(i) he has paid such subscription and satisfies such conditions as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances; and  
(ii) he is a graduate of  the Jamia Millia Islamia or the University.  
 
 
--------------------------The Labour Laws (Exemption from Furnishing Returns and Maintaining Registers by certain Establishments) Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE LABOUR LAWS (EXEMPTION FROM FURNISHING RETURNS AND 
MAINTAINING REGISTERS BY CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS) ACT, 1988  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Amendment of certain labour laws . 
4. Exemption from returns and registers required under certain labour laws . 
5. Savings.  
6. Penalty.  
7. Power to amend Form . 
8. Power to remove difficulties . 
FIRST SCHEDULE . 
SECOND SCHEDULE.  
  2 
 THE LABO UR LAWS (EXEMPTION FROM FURNISHING RETURNS AND 
MAINTAINING REGISTERS BY  CERTAIN ESTABLISHMENTS) ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 51 OF 1988  
[24th September , 198 8.] 
An Act to provide for the exemption of employers in relation to establishments employing a small 
number of persons from furnishing returns and maintaining registers under certain labo ur 
laws. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic  of India as follows: — 
1. Short title , extent  and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Labo ur Laws (Exemption 
from Furnishing Returns and Maintaining Registers by certain Establishments) Act, 1988.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that nothing contained in this Act, in relation to the Plantations Labo ur Act , 1951                  
(69 of 1951) shall extend to the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notifica tion in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different States, and any reference in 
any provision of this Act to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision in  that State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “employer ”, in relation to a Scheduled Act, which defines such expression, has the same 
meaning assigned to it in that Act , and in relation to any other S cheduled Act , means the person who is 
required to furnish returns or ma intain registers under that Act;  
(b) “establishment ” has the meaning assigned to it i n a Scheduled Act, and includes — 
(i) an „ industrial or other establishment ‟ as defined in section 2 of the Payment  of Wages Act, 
1936 (4 of 1936);  
(ii) a „factory ‟ as defined in section 2 of the F actories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);  
(iii) a factory, workshop or place where employees are employed or work is given out to 
workers, in any scheduled employment to which the Minimum Wages Act, 1948 (11 of 1948), 
applies;  
(iv) a „plantation ” as defined in s ection 2 of the Plantations Labo ur Act,  1951 (69 of 1951),  
and 
(v) a „newspaper establishment ‟ as defined in section 2 of the Working Journalistsand  other 
Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and MiscellaneousProvisions Act, 1955 (45 of 
1955);  
(c) “Form ” means a Form  specified in the Second Schedule ; 
(d) “Scheduled Act ” means an  Act specified in the First Schedule and is in force on the 
commenc ement of this Act in the territories to which such Act extends generally, and includes the 
rules made thereunder;  
(e) “small establishment ” means an establishment in which not less than ten and not more than 
nineteen persons are employed or were employed o n any day of the preceding twelve months;  
(f) “very small establishment ” means an establishment in which not more than nine persons are 
employed or were employed on any day of the preceding twelve months.  
                                                           
1. 1st May, 19 89, vide notification  No. G.S.R .436(E), dated 10th April , 198 9, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(i). 3 
 3. Amendment of certain labo ur laws .—On and from the commencement of this Act, the Scheduled 
Acts shall have effect subject to the provisions of this Act.  
4. Exemption from returns and registers required under certain labo ur laws .—(1) On and from 
the commencement of this Act , it shall not be ne cessary for an employer in relation to any small 
establishmentor very small establishment to which a Scheduled Act applies to furnish the returns or to 
maintain the registers required to be furnished or maintained under that Scheduled Act:  
Provided that su ch employer — 
(a) furnishes, in lieu of such returns, a Core Return in Form A;  
(b) maintai ns, in lieu of such registers, — 
(i) registers in Form B, Form C and Form D, in t he case of small establishments:  and 
(ii) register  in Form E, in the case of very small establishments:  
Provided further that every such employer shall continue to — 
(a) issue wage slips in the Form pr escribed in the Minimum Wages (Central) Rules, 1950 made 
under s ections 18 and 30 of the Minimum Wages Act , 1948(11 of 1948) and slips relating to 
measurement of the amount of work done by piece -rated workers required to be issued under the 
Payment of Wages (Mines) Rul es, 1956 made under s ections 13 A and 26 of the Payment of Wages 
Act, 1936 ( 4 of 1936); and  
(b) file retur ns relating to accidents under sections 88 and 88 A of the Factories Act, 19 48 (63 of 
1948) and sections 32A and 32 B of the Plantations Labo ur Act, 1951 (69 of 1951).  
(2) Save as provided in sub -section ( 1), all other provisions of a Schedule d Act, including in particular, 
the inspection of the registers by, and furnishing of their copies to, the authorities under that Act, shall 
apply to the returns and registers required to be furnished or maintained under this Act as they apply to the 
return s and registers under that Scheduled Act.  
(3) Where an employer in relation to a small establishment or very small establishment to which a 
Scheduled Act applies, furnishes returns or maintains the registers as provided in the proviso to sub -section 
(1), nothing contained in that Scheduled Act shall render him liable to any penalty for his failure to furnish 
any return or to maintain any register under that Scheduled Act.  
5. Savings .—The commenceme nt of this Act shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of any provision of any Scheduled Act or the validity, invalidity, effect 
or consequence of anything done or suffered under that provision, before the relevant period;  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred under any 
Scheduled Act, before the relevant period;  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or inflicted in respect of any offen ce committed 
under any Scheduled Act, before the relevant period;  
(d) any investigation, legal p roceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, obligation, 
liability, penalty , forfeitureor punishment shall be instituted, continued or disposed of, as the case may be, 
in accordance with that Scheduled Act.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, the expression “relevant period ” means the period 
during which an establishmen t is or was a small establishment or a very small establishment under this 
Act. 
6. Penalty .—Any employer who fails to comply with the provisions of this Act shal l, on conviction, 
be punishable — 
(a) in the case of the first conviction, with fine which may extend to rupees five thousand; and  4 
 (b) in the case of any second or subsequent conviction, with imprisonment for a period which shall 
not be less than one month but which may extend to six months or w ith fine which shall not be less 
than rupees ten thousand but may extend to rupees twenty -five thousand, or with both.  
7. Power to amend Form .—(1) The Central Government may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient so 
to do, by notification in the Officia l Gazette , amend any Form and there upon such Form shall, subject to 
the provisions of sub -section( 2), be deemed to have been amended accordingly.  
(2) Any notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament, if it is 
sitting as soon as may be after the issue of the notification, and if it is not sitting, within seven days of its 
re-assembly and the Central Government shall seek the approval of Parliament to the notification by a 
resolution moved within a period of fift een days beginning with the day on which the notification is so laid 
before the House of the People, and if Parliament makes any modification in the notification or directs that 
the notification should cease to have effect, the notification shall thereafte r have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, but without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done thereunder.  
8. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of t his Act, 
the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
  5 
  
FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section  2(d)] 
(1) The Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).  
(2) The Weekly Holidays Act, 1942 (18 of 1942).  
(3) The Minimum Wag es Act, 1948 (11 of 1948).  
(4) The Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948).  
(5) The Plantations Labo ur Act, 1951 (69 of 1951).  
(6) The Working Journalists and other Newspaper Employees (Conditions of Service) and 
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1955 (45 of 1955).  
(7) The Contract Labo ur (Regulation and Abolition) Act, 1970 (37 of 19 70). 
(8) The Sales Promotion Employees (Conditions of Service) Act, 1976 (11 of 1976).  
(9) The Equal Remuneration Act, 1976 (25 of 1976).  
  6 
 SECOND  SCHEDULE  
[See section  2(c)] 
FORM  A 
[See section 4(1) proviso ( a)] 
CORE RETURN  
RETURNFOR THE YEAR ENDING  31ST DECEMBER  
(To be furnished on or before the 15th February of the succeeding Year by small establishments and very 
small establishments ) 
1.   (a) Name and postal address of the establishment.  
(b) Name and residential address of the employer.  
(c) Name and residential address of the Manager or person responsible for supervision and control 
of the establishment.  
(d) Name of the principal employer in the case of a contractor ‟s establishment.  
(e) Date of commencement of the establishment.  
NATUREOF  OPERATION / INDUSTRY  /WORKCARRIED ON  
2.   (a) Number of days worked during the year.  
(b) Number of man -days worked during the year.  
(c) Daily hours of work.  
(d) Day of weekly holiday.  
3.   (a) Average number of persons employed during the year.  
(i) Males.  
(ii) Females.  
(iii) Adolescents (those who have completed 14 years but have not completed 18 years of age).  
(iv) Children (those who have not completed 14 years of age).  
(b) Maximum number of workers employed on any day during the year.  
(c) Number of workers discharged , dismissed, retrenched or whose services were terminated 
during the year.  
4.    Rates of wages —category  wise: 
(1) Males (2) Females (3) Adolescents (4) Children  
5.    Gross wages paid:  
(a) in cash  
(b) in kind.  
6.    Deductions:  
(a) Fines.  
(b) Deductions for damage or loss.  
(c) Other deductions.  
7.    Number of workers who were granted leave with wages during the year.  
8.    Nature of Welfare amenities provided: Statutory (specify the Statute).   7 
 9.    Does the establishment carry out any hazardous process or dangerous operation coming within the 
meaning of the Factories Act, 1948. If so, give particulars.  
10.   Number of Accidents:  
(a) Fatal.  
(b) Non -fatal.  
11.   Nature of safety measures provided as required under the Factories Act, 1948.  
 
Signature of the employer with full name in capitals . 
Date ………………….  
Place...........................  
 
 
  8 
 FORM B  
(See section  4(1) proviso  (b)(i)] 
REGISTER OF WAGES REQUIRED TO BE MAINTAINED BY SMALL ESTABLISHMENTS  
(To be maintained within seven days of the expiry of the wage period ) 
 
Name of establishment _________________ Name and address of employer _________________ _ 
Address (Local)  ______________________ Nature of work ______________________________ _ 
(Permanent)  _________________________ Wage period  _______________________________ _ 
Serial 
Number  Name of 
the 
employee  Sex Designation  Classification, 
whether permanent/ 
temporary /casual/part -
time or any other  Father ‟s 
or 
husband ‟s 
name  Total days /number of 
units worked  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
 
 
 
 
DEDUCTIONS  
Advances  
 
 Fines due  to damage or 
loss by neglect or default  Provident Fund  Employees ‟ State Insurance  
Employers ‟ 
contribution  Employees' 
contribution  Employers‟  
contribution  Employees ‟ 
contribution  
17 18 19 20 21 22 
 
 
DEDUCTIONS  
Other deductions 
indicating the nature  Total 
deductions  Net amount 
payable  Signature or thumb 
impression of 
employee with date  Signature of 
Inspector with date  Remarks  
23 24 25 26 27 28 
  Wages earned  
Basic wage  Dearness 
allowance  Overtime  Bonus or 
exgratia  Maternity 
benefits  Gratuity  Any other 
allowance  Total 
amount  Statutory 
Minimum 
rate Actual  
8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 9 
 Notes:  1. In case of deduction of any advance taken by an employee, the employer shall  also indicate 
therein the number of instalments paid/total insta lments by which advance is to be repaid such as 
“5/20, 6/20 ” etc. The purpose of advance shall also be mentioned in the Remarks column.  
2. In case of imposition of fines or deduction for damage or loss, the  specific act or omission for 
which the penalty has been imposed has to be indicated in the Remarks column. A certificate 
shall also be recorded in the said column to the effect that an opportunity to show cause was 
given to the employee concerned before i mposition of fine or deduction.  
 
Signature of the employer with full name in capitals . 
Date ………………………  
Place ……………………..  
  10 
 FORM C  
[See section  4(1) proviso  (b)(i)] 
MUSTERROLL TO BE MAINTAINED BY SMALL ESTABLISHMENTS  
 
Name of establishment _________________  Name and address of theemployer ___________________  
Address (Local _______________________             _______________________________________________  
(Permanent __________________________  Wage period ____________________________________  
 
  
 
Total 
overtime 
worked1 Total production in 
case of piece -rated 
workers2 Compensatory rest3 Signature of Inspector 
with date  Remarks  
Brought forward 
from previous 
wage period  Given during the 
wage period  
9 10 11 12 13 14 
 
Notes:1 . In the case of daily -rated workers, the extent of overtime done on each occasion has to be 
reflected against each concerned date, such as “P/1” meaning “Present with one hour ‟s 
overtime ”, “P/1-2” meaning  “Present with oneandahalf hour ‟s overtime ”, and so on.  
2. The number of units of work done by a piece -rated worker has to be noted for each day in the 
Register. In c ase of employment of any child/ adolescent , the employer shall indicate the hours 
worked each day with intervals of rest . 
3. The compen satory rest availed by the worker has to be marked in the Register in red ink as 
„CR‟. 
4. Column 7 to be filled up on each working day and the remaining columns to be completed 
within seven days of the expiry of the wage period.  
 
Signature of the employer with full name in capitals . 
Date ………………………  
Place ………………………   Serial 
Number  Name of 
the 
employee  Date of 
employment  Permanent 
address  Age 
or 
date 
of 
birth  Father ‟s or 
husband ‟s 
name  For the period 
ending ____  
Number of units of 
work done 
during ____  Total 
attendance  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 11 
 FORM D  
[See section  4(1) proviso ( b)(i)] 
MONTHLY REGISTER SHOWING WELFARE AMENITIES TO BE MAINTAINED BY SMALL ESTABLISHMENTS  
 
Name an d address of the 
employer _________________  Address of the establishment: 
Local/ Permanent  For the month of ________________  
 
 
Whether Welfare Amenities 
provided for  Whether Scheduled 
Caste/ Scheduled 
Tribe , 
Handicapped , or 
any other particular 
category  Signature of 
the 
employer or 
his agent  Remarks of 
the Inspecting 
Officer  Signature of 
Inspector with 
date Rest 
room  Drinkingwater  First aid  
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 
 
 
 
Note :  To be completed within seven days of the expiry of each calendar  month.  
 
Signature of the employer with full name in capitals . 
Date ………………………  
Place ………………………  
 
  Serial  
Number  Name of 
the 
employee  Sex Designation  Weekly day 
of rest  Dates of 
holidays for 
festivals or 
similar other 
occasions  Number 
of casua l 
leave 
availed by 
the 
employee  Quantum of 
annual leave 
with wages  
Due Availed  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 12 
 FORM E  
[See section 4(1) proviso ( b) (ii)] 
MONTHLY REGISTER OF MUSTER ROLL -CUM -WAGES REQUIRED TO BE MAINTAINED BY VERY SMALL 
ESTABLISHMENTS  
Year _________________  
Month ______________ or 
         Wage period  
(where different) ________  
 
Name of  establishment ___________________________________________________  
Name of employee __________________________  Father ‟s Name _______________________ _ 
Nature of work _________________ _________ ___ Rate of wages ________________________  
Wage period _______________________________  Date of employment _________________ __ 
 
Date  
 Hours of work  Interval for Rest 
and Meal  Hours worked 
with theemployer  
 
 Overtime  Casual or sickness 
leave availed 
during the 
month/wage  
period   
From  To From  To Hours  
worked  Wages e
arned 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 
 
 
 
Note : Columns 1 to 12 to be filled up on each working day and the remaining columns to be completed 
within seven days of the expiry of the wage period . 
 
Signature of the employer with full name in capitals . 
Date ………………………  
Place ………………………  Privilege Leave  Signature 
of 
theemplo
yer Remarks 
of the 
employer  Remuneration Due 
Leave 
Due Leave 
availe d Balance  Basic 
salary or 
wage  Overtime  Other 
allowance s,  
if any  Total  
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 
Deductions  Net amount 
of payment  Date of 
payment  Signature or 
thumb 
impression of 
the employee  Signature 
of 
Inspector 
with 
remarks, 
if any , 
and date  Fines and 
deductions  
on account 
of damage 
or loss by 
neglect or 
default  Other 
deductions  Advance paid , if any  
Date  Amount  Total  
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 
--------------------------The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
LICENSING OF DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES  
3. Necessity for driving licence.  
4. Age limit in connection with driving of motor vehicles.  
5. Responsibility of owners of motor vehicles for contravention of sections 3 and 4.  
6. Restrictions on the holding of driving licences.  
7. Restrictions on the granting of learner’s licences for certain vehicles.  
8. Grant of learner’s licence.  
9. Grant of driving licence.  
10. Form and contents  of licences to drive.  
11. Additions to driving licence.  
12. Licensing and regulation of schools or establishments for imparting instruction in driving of 
motor vehicles.  
13. Extent of effectiveness of licences, to drive motor vehicles.  
14. Currency of licences to drive motor vehicles.  
15. Renewal of driving licences.  
16. Revocation of driving licence on grounds of disease or disability.  
17. Orders refusing or revoking driving licences and appeals therefrom.  
18. Driving Licences to drive motor vehicles, belonging to the Central Government.  
19. Power of licensing authority to disqualify from holding a driving licence or revoke such licence.  
20. Power of Court to disqualify.  
21. Suspension of driving licence in certain cases.  
22. Suspensio n or cancellation of driving licence on conviction.  
23. Effect of disqualification order.  
24. Endorsement.  
25. Transfer of endorsement and issue of driving licence free from endorsement.  
26. Maintenance of State Registers of Driving Licences.  
27. Power of Central Government t o make rules.  
28. Power of State Government to make rules.  
 
 
CHAPTER III  
LICENSING OF CON DUCTORS OF STAGE CARRIAGES  
29. Necessity for conductor’s licence.  
30. Grant of conductor’s licence.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
31. Disqualifications for the grant of conductor’s licence . 
32. Revocation of a conductor’s licence on grounds of disease or disability . 
33. Orders refusing, etc, conductor’s licences and appeals therefrom . 
34. Power of licensing authority to disqualify . 
35. Power of Court to disqualify . 
36. Certain provisions of Chapter II to apply to conductor’s licence . 
37. Savings . 
38. Power of State Government to make rules . 
 
 
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES  
39. Necessity for registration . 
40. Registration, where to be made . 
41. Registration, how to be made . 
42. Special provision for registration of motor vehicles of diploma tic officers, etc . 
43. Temporary registration . 
44. Production of vehicle at the time of registration . 
45. Refusal of registration or renewal of the certificate of registration . 
46. Effectiveness in India of registration . 
47. Assignment of new registration mark on removal to a nother State . 
48. No objection certificate . 
49. Change of residence or place of business . 
50. Transfer of ownership . 
51. Special provisions regarding motor vehicle subject to hire -purchase agreement, etc . 
52. Alteration in motor vehicle . 
53. Suspension of registration . 
54. Cancellation of registration suspended under section 53 . 
55. Cancellation of registration . 
56. Certificate of fitness of transport vehicles . 
57. Appeals . 
58. Special provisions in regard to transport vehicles . 
59. Power to fix the age limit of motor vehicle . 
60. Registration of vehicles belonging to the Central Government . 
61. Application of Chapter to trailers . 
62. Information regarding stolen and recovered motor vehicles to be furnished by the police to the 
State Transport Authority . 
63. Maintenance of State Registers of Motor Vehicles . 
64. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
65. Power of State Government to make rules . 
 
 
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL OF TRANSPORT VEHICLES  
66. Necessity for permits . 
67. Power to State Government to control road transport . 
68. Transport Authorities . 3 
 SECTIONS  
69. General provision as to applications for permits . 
70. Applic ation for stage carriage permit . 
71. Procedure of Regional Transport Authority in considering application for stage carriage permit.  
72. Grant of stage carriage permits . 
73. Application for contract carriage permit . 
74. Grant of contract carriage permit . 
75. Scheme for renting of motor cabs . 
76. Application for private service vehicle permit . 
77. Application for goods carriage permit . 
78. Consideration of application for goods carriage permit . 
79. Grant of goods carriage permit . 
80. Procedure in applying for and granting permits . 
81. Duration and renewal of permits . 
82. Transfer of permit . 
83. Replacement of vehicles . 
84. General conditions attaching to all permits . 
85. General form of permits . 
86. Cancellation and suspension of permits . 
87. Temporary permits . 
88. Validation of permits for use o utside region in which granted . 
89. Appeals . 
90. Revision . 
91. Restriction of hours of work of drivers . 
92. Voidance of contracts restrictive of liability . 
93. Agent or canvasser to obtain licence . 
94. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts . 
95. Power of State Government to make rules a s to stage carriages and contract carriages . 
96. Power of State Government to make rules for the purposes of this Chapter . 
 
 
CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO STATE TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS  
97. Definition . 
98. Chapter to override Chapter V and other laws . 
99. Preparation and publication of proposal regarding road transport service of a State transport 
undertaking . 
100. Objection to the proposal . 
101. Operation of additional services by a State transport undertaking in certain circumstances . 
102. Cancellation or modification o f scheme . 
103. Issue of permits to State transport undertakings . 
104. Restriction on grant of permits in respect of a notified area or notified route . 
105. Principles and method of determining compensation and payment thereof . 
106. Disposal of article found in vehicles . 
107. Power  of State Government to make rules . 
108. Certain powers of State Government exercisable by the Central Government . 
 4 
 CHAPTER VII  
CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AND MAINTENANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES  
SECTIONS  
109. General provision regarding construction and maintenance of vehicl es. 
110. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
111. Power of State Government to make rules . 
 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
CONTROL OF TRAFFIC  
112. Limits of speed . 
113. Limits of weight and limitations on use . 
114. Power to have vehicle weighed . 
115. Power to restrict the use of vehicles . 
116. Power to erect traffic signs . 
117. Parking places and halting stations . 
118. Driving regulations . 
119. Duty to obey traffic signs . 
120. Vehicles with left hand control . 
121. Signals and signalling devices . 
122. Leaving vehicle in dangerous position . 
123. Riding on running board, etc . 
124. Prohibition against travelling without pass or ticket . 
125. Obstruction of driver . 
126. Stationary vehicles . 
127. Removal of motor vehicles abandoned or left unattended on a public place . 
128. Safety measures for drivers and pillion riders.  
129. Wearing of protective headgear . 
130. Duty to produce  licence and certificate of registration . 
131. Duty of the driver to take certain precautions at unguarded railway level crossing . 
132. Duty of driver to stop in certain cases . 
133. Duty of owner of motor vehicle to give information . 
134. Duty of driver in case of accident an d injury to a person . 
135. Schemes to be framed for the investigation of accident cases and wayside amenities, etc . 
136. Inspection of vehicle involved in accident . 
137. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
138. Power of State Government to make rules . 
 
 
CHAPTER IX  
MOTOR VEHICLES TEMPORARILY LEAVING OR VISITING INDIA  
139. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
 
 
  5 
 CHAPTER X  
LIABILITY WITHOUT FAULT IN CERTAIN CASES  
SECTIONS  
140. Liability to pay compensation in certain cases on the principle of no fault . 
141. Provisions as to other right to claim compensation for death or permanent disablement . 
142. Permanent disablement . 
143. Applicability of Chapter to certain claims under Act 8 of 1923 . 
144. Overriding effect . 
 
CHAPTER XI  
INSURANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES AGAINST THIRD PARTY RISKS  
145. Definitions . 
146. Necessity for insurance against third party risk . 
147. Requirements of policies and limits of liability . 
148. Validity of policies of insurance issued in reciprocating countries . 
149. Duty of insurers to satisfy judgments and awards against persons insured in respect of third party 
risks . 
150. Rights of third parties against insurers on insolvency of the insured.  
151. Duty to give information as to insurance . 
152. Settlement between insurers and insured persons . 
153. Saving in respect of sections 150, 151 and 152 . 
154. Insolvency of insured perso ns not to affect liability of insured or claims by third parties . 
155. Effect of death on certain causes of action . 
156. Effect of certificate of insurance . 
157. Transfer of certificate of insurance . 
158. Production of certain certificates, licence and permit in certain cases . 
159. Production of certificate of Insurance on application for authority to use vehicle . 
160. Duty to furnish particulars of vehicle involved in accident . 
161. Special provisions as to compensation in case of hit and run motor accident . 
162. Refund in certain cases of compe nsation paid under section 161 . 
163. Scheme for payment of compensation in case of hit and run motor accidents . 
163A.  Special provisions as to payment of compensation on structured formula basis.  
163B. Option to file claim in certain cases.  
164. Power of Central Gov ernment to make rules . 
 
CHAPTER XII  
CLAIMS TRIBUNALS  
165. Claims Tribunals . 
166. Application for compensation . 
167. Option regarding claims for compensation in certain cases . 
168. Award of the Claims Tribunal . 
169. Procedure and powers of Claims Tribunals . 
170. Impleading insurer in certain cases . 
171. Award of interest where any claim is allowed . 6 
 SECTIONS  
172. Award of compensatory costs in certain cases . 
173. Appeals . 
174. Recovery of money from insurer as arrear of land revenue . 
175. Bar on jurisdiction of Civil Courts . 
176. Power of State Government to make rules . 
 
CHAPTER XIII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
177. General provision for punishment of offences . 
178. Penalty for travelling without pass or ticket and for dereliction of duty on the part of conductor 
and refusal to ply contract carriage, etc . 
179. Disobedience of orders, obstruction and refusal of information . 
180. Allowing unauthorised persons to drive vehicles . 
181. Driving vehicles in contravention of section 3 or section 4 . 
182. Offences relating to licences . 
182A. Punishment for offences relating to construction and maintenance of vehicles.  
183. Driving at excessive speed, etc . 
184. Driving dangerously . 
185. Driving by a drunken person or by a person under the influence of drugs . 
186. Driving when mentally or phycically unfit to drive . 
187. Punishment for offences relating to accident . 
188. Punishment for abetment of certain offences . 
189. Racing and trails of speed . 
190. Using vehicle in unsafe condition . 
191. Sale of vehicle in or alteration of vehicle to condition contravening this Act . 
192. Using vehicle without registration.  
192A. Using vehicle without perm it. 
193. Punishment of agents and canvassers without proper authority . 
194. Driving vehicle exceeding permissible weight . 
195. Imposition of minimum fine under certain circumstances . 
196. Driving uninsured vehicle . 
197. Taking vehicle without authority . 
198. Unauthorised interference w ith vehicle . 
199. Offences by companies . 
200. Composition of certain offences . 
201. Penalty for causing obstruction to free flow of traffic . 
202. Power to arrest without warrant . 
203. Breath tests . 
204. Laboratory test . 
205. Presumption of unfitness to drive . 
206. Power of police officer to impound document . 
207. Power to detain vehicles used without certificate of registration permit, etc . 
208. Summary disposal of cases . 
209. Restriction on conviction . 
210. Courts to send intimation about conviction . 7 
 CHAPTER XIV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
211. Power to levy fee . 
212. Publication, commencement and laying of rules and notifications . 
213. Appointment of motor vehicles officers . 
214. Effect of appeal and revision on orders passed by original authority . 
215. Road Safety Councils and Committees . 
216. Power to remove difficulties . 
217. Repeal and savings . 
217A. Renewal of permits, driving licences and registration granted under the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1939.  
THE  FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
  8 
 THE MOTOR VEHICLES ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 59 OF 1988  
[14th October , 1988. ]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to motor vehicles.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be calle d the Motor Vehicles Act, 
1988.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into fo rce on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different State and any ref erence in 
this Act to the commencement of this Act shall, in relation to a State, be construed as a reference to the 
coming into forc e of this Act in that State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “area”, in relation to any provision of this Act, means such area as the State Government may, 
having regard to the requirements of that provision, specify by notifi cation in the Official Gazette;  
(2) “articulated vehicle ” means a motor vehicle to w hich a semitrailer is attac hed; 
(3) “axle weight ” means in relation to an axle of a vehicle the total weight transmitted by the 
several wheels attached to that axle to the surf ace on which the vehicle rests;  
(4) “certificate of registration ” means the certificate issued by a competent authority to the effect 
that a motor vehicle has been duly registered in accordance with the provisions of Chapte r IV;  
(5) “conductor ”, in relation to a stage carriage, means a person engaged in collecting fares  from 
passengers, regulating their entrance into, or exit from, the stage carriage and performing such other 
functions as may be prescribed;  
(6) “conductor ’s licence ” means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter III 
authorising the perso n specified  therein to act as a conductor;  
(7) “contract carriage ” means a motor vehicle which carries a passenger or passenger or 
passengers for hire or reward and is engaged under a contract, whether expressed or implied, for the 
use of such vehicle as a  whole for the carriage of passengers mentioned therein and entered into by a 
person with a holder of a permit in relation to such vehicle or any person authorised by him in this 
behalf on a fixed or an agreed ra te or sum — 
(a) on a time basis, whether or n ot with referen ce to any route or distance; or  
(b) from one point to another,  
and in either case, without stopping to pick up or set down passengers not included in the contract 
anywhere during the journey, and includes — 
(i) a maxicab; and  
(ii) a motor cab notwithstanding that separate fares are charged for its passengers;  
(8) “dealer ” includes a person who is engaged — 
2*   *   *   *  * 
(b) in building bodies for attachment to chassis ; or 
                                                           
1. 1st July, 1989, vide notification No. S.O. 368(E), dated 22nd May, 1989, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3  (ii). 
2. Sub-clause ( a) omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  9 
 (c) in t he repair of motor vehicles; or  
(d) in the business  of hypothecation, leasing or hire -purchase of motor vehicle;  
(9) “driver ” includes, in relation to a motor vehicle which is drawn by another motor vehicle, the 
person who acts as a steersman  of the drawn vehicle;  
(10) “driving licence ” means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter II authorising 
the person specified therein to drive, otherwise than as a learner, a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of 
any specified class or de scription;  
(11) “educational institution bus ” means an omnibus, which is owned by a college, school or other 
educational institution and used solely for the purpose of transporting students or staff of the educational 
institution in connection with any of its activities;  
(12) “fares ” includes sums pa yable for a season ticket or in respect of the hire of a contract carriage;  
(13) “goods ” includes live -stock, and anything (other than equipment ordinarily used with the 
vehicle) carried by a vehicle except living persons, but does not include luggage or p ersonal effects 
carried in a motor car or in a trailer attached to a motor car or the personal luggage of passen gers 
travelling in the vehicle;  
(14) “goods carriage ” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted for use solely for the carriage 
of goods, o r any motor vehicle not so constructed or adapted when used for the carriage of goods;  
(15) “gross vehicle weight ” means in respect of any vehicle the total weight of the vehicle and load 
certified and registered by the registering authority a s permissible  for that vehicle;  
(16) “heavy goods vehicle ” means any goods carriage the gross vehicle weight of which, or a tractor 
or a road -roller the unladen weight of either of w hich, exceeds 12,000 kilograms;  
(17) “heavy passenger motor vehicle ” means any public s ervice vehicle or private service vehicle or 
educational institution bus or omnibus the gross vehicle weight of any of which, or a motor car the 
unladen weight of w hich, exceeds 12,000 kilograms;  
(18) “invalid carriage ” means a motor vehicle specially desi gned and constructed, and not merely, 
adapted, for the use of a person suffering from some physical defect or disability, and used solely by or 
for such a person;  
(19) “learner ’s licence ” means the licence issued by a competent authority under Chapter II 
authorising the person specified therein to drive as a learner, a motor vehicle or a motor vehicle of any 
specified class or description;  
(20) “licensing authority ” means an authority empowered to issue licences under Chapter II or, a s the 
case may be, Chap ter III;  
(21) “light motor vehicle ” means a transport vehicle or omnibus the gross vehicle weight of either of 
which or a motor car or tractor or road -roller the unladen weight of any of which, d oes not exceed  
1[7500] kilograms;  
2[(21A) “manufacturer ” means a person who is engaged in the manufacture of motor vehicles;]  
(22) “maxicab ” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six passengers, 
but not more than twelve passengers, excluding the driver, for hire or reward;  
(23) “medium goods vehicle ” means any goods carriage other than a light motor ve hicle or a heavy 
goods vehicle;  
(24) “medium passenger motor vehicle ” means any public service vehicle or private service vehicle, 
or educational institution bus other than a motor c ycle, invalid carriage, light motor vehicle or  heavy 
passenger motor vehicle;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2, for “6000” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  10 
 (25) “motorcab ” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry not more than six 
passengers excluding  the driver for hire or reward;  
(26) “motor car ” means any motor veh icle other than a transport vehicle, omnibus, road -roller, 
tractor, m otor cycle or invalid carriage;  
(27) “motor cycle ” means a two -wheeled motor vehicle, inclusive of any detachable side -car having 
an extra wheel,  attached to the motor vehicle;  
(28) “motor vehicle ” or “vehicle ” means any mechanically propelled vehicle adapted for use upon 
roads whether the power of propulsion is transmitted thereto from an external or internal source and 
includes a chassis to which a body has not been attached and a tr ailer; but does not include a vehicle 
running upon fixed rails or a vehicle of a special type adapted for use only in a factory or in any other 
enclosed premises or a vehicle having less than four wheels fitted with engine capacity of not exceeding  
1[twent y-five cubic centimetres ]; 
(29) “omnibus ” means any motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six persons 
excluding the driver;  
(30) “owner ” means a person in whose name a motor vehicle stands registered, and where such 
person is a minor, the  guardian of such minor, and in relation to a motor vehicle which is the subject of a 
hire-purchase, agreement, or an agreement of lease or an agreement of hypothecation, the person in 
possession of th e vehicle under that agreement;  
(31) “permit ” means a p ermit issued by a State or Regional Transport Authority or an authority 
prescribed in this behalf under this Act authorising the use of a motor vehicle as a transp ort vehicle;  
(32) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(33) “private service vehicle ” means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six 
persons excluding the driver and ordinarily used by or on behalf of the owner of such vehicle for the 
purpose of carrying persons for, or in connection with, his trade or business otherwise than for hire or 
reward but does not include a motor ve hicle used for public purposes;  
(34) “public place ” means a road, street, way or other place, whether a thoroughfare or not, to which 
the public have a right of access, and includes any place or stand at which passengers are picked up o r set 
down by a stage carriage;  
(35) “public service vehicle ” means any motor vehicle used or adapted to be used for the carriage of 
passengers for hire or reward, and includes a maxicab, a motorcab, co ntract carriage, and stage carriage;  
(36) “registered axle weight ” means in respect of the axle of any vehicle, the axle weight certified and 
registered by the registering authorit y as permissible for that axle;  
(37) “registering authority ” means an author ity empowered to register m otor vehicles under Chapter 
IV; 
(38) “route ” means a line of travel which specifies the highway which may be traversed by a motor 
vehicle be tween one terminus and another;  
2[(39) “semi -trailer ” means a vehicle not mechanically pro pelled (other than a trailer), which is 
intended to be connected to a motor vehicle and which is so constructed that a portion of it is  super -
imposed on, and a part  of whose weight is borne by, that motor vehicle;]  
(40) “stage carriage ” means a motor vehicle constructed or adapted to carry more than six passengers 
excluding the driver for hire or reward at separate fares paid by or for individual passengers, either for the 
whole journe y or for stages of the journey;  
(41) “State Government ” in relation to a Union territory means the Administrator thereof appointed 
under a rticle 239 of the Constitution;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 2, for  “thirty -five cubic centimetres” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( 39) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  11 
 (42) “State transport undertaking ” means any undertaking providing road transport service, where 
such undertaking is carr ied on by, — 
(i) the Central Governm ent or a State Government;  
(ii) any Road Transport Corporation established under section 3 of the Road Transport 
Corpor ations Act, 1950 (64 of 1950 ); 
(iii) any municipality or any corporation or company owned or controlle d by the Central 
Government or one or more State Governments, or by the Central Government and  one or more State 
Governments ; 
1[(iv) Zilla Parishad or any other similar local authority.]  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “road transport service ” means a service of motor 
vehicles carrying passengers or goods or both by road for hire or r eward;  
(43) “tourist vehicle ” means a contract carriage constructed or adapted and equipped and maintained 
in accordance with such specifications as ma y be prescr ibed in this behalf;  
(44) “tractor ” means a motor vehicle which is not itself constructed to carry any load (other than 
equipment used for the purpose of propulsio n); but excludes a road -roller;  
(45) “traffic signs ” includes all signals, warning sign posts, direction posts, markings on the road or 
other devices for the information, guidance or directio n of drivers of motor vehicles;  
(46) “trailer ” means any vehicle, other than a semi -trailer and a side -car, drawn or intended to be 
drawn by a motor vehicle;  
(47) “transport vehicle ” means a public service vehicle, a goods carriage, an educational institution 
bus or a private service vehicle;  
(48) “unladen weight ” means the weight of a vehicle or trailer including all eq uipment ordinarily used 
with the vehicle or trailer when working, but excluding the weight of a driver or attendant; and where 
alternative parts or bodies are used the unladen weight of the vehicle means the weight of the vehicle with 
the heaviest  such alt ernative part or body;  
(49) “weight ” means the total weight transmitted for the time being by the wheels of a vehicle to the 
surface on  which the vehicle rests.  
2[2A. e-cart and e -rickshaw .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of 
section 7 and sub -section ( 10) of section 9, the provisions of this Act shall apply to e -cart and e -rickshaw.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, “e -cart or e -rickshaw” means a special purpose battery powered 
vehicle of power not exceeding 4000 watts,  having three wheels for carrying goods or passengers, as the 
case may be, for hire or reward, manufactured, constructed or adapted, equipped and maintained in 
accordance with such specifications, as may be prescribed in this behalf.]  
CHAPTER II  
LICENSING OF DRIVERS OF MOTOR VEHICLES  
3. Necessity for driving licence .—(1) No person shall drive a motor vehicle in any public place 
unless he holds an effective driving licence issued to him authorising him to drive the vehicle; and no 
person shall so drive a transport vehicle [other than 3[a motor cab  or motor cycle] hired for his own use or 
rented u nder any scheme made under sub -section ( 2) of section 75] unless his driving licence spec ifically 
entitles him so to do.  
(2) The conditions subject to which sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to a person receiving instructions 
in driving a motor vehicle shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central Governmen t. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1988, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2015).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “a motor cab” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  12 
 4. Age limit in connection with driving of motor vehicles .—(1) No person under the age of 
eighteen years  shall drive a mot or vehicle in any public place:  
Provided that 1[a motor cycle with  engine capacity not exceeding 50cc] out gear may be driven in a 
public place by a person after atta ining the age of sixteen years.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section  18, no person under the age of twenty years shall drive a 
transpo rt vehicle in any public place.  
(3) No learner ’s licence or driving licence shall be issued to any person to drive a vehicle of the class 
to which he has made an application unless he is eligible to drive that class of vehicle under this section.  
5. Responsibility of owners of motor vehicles for con travention of sections 3 and 4 .—No owner 
or person in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or permit any person who does not satisfy the 
provisions of section 3 or section 4 to drive the veh icle. 
6. Restrictions on t he holding of driving licences .—(1) No pe rson shall, while he holds any driving 
licence for the time being in force, hold any other driving licence except a learner ’s licence or a driving 
licence issued in accordance with the provisions of section 18 or a document authorising, in accordance 
with the rules made under section 139, the person specified th erein to drive a motor vehicle.  
(2) No holder of a driving licence or a learner ’s licence shall permit it to be used by any other person.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall prevent a licensing authority having the jurisdiction referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 9 from adding to the classes of vehicles which the driving licence authorises the 
holder to drive.  
7. Restrictions on the granting of learner ’s licences for certain vehicles .—2[(1) No person shall 
be granted a learner's licence to drive a transport vehicle unless he has held a driving licence to 
drive a light motor vehicle for at least one year: ] 
3[Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to an e -cart or e-rickshaw.]  
 (2) No person under the age of eighteen years shall be granted a learner ’s licence to drive a motor 
cycle without gear except with the consent in writing of the person having the care of the person desiring 
the learner ’s licence.  
8. Grant of learner’s licence .—(1) Any person who is not disqualified under section 4 for driving a 
motor vehicle and who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence 
may, subject to the provisions of section 7, apply to the licens ing authority having jurisdiction in the 
area— 
(i) in which he ordinarily res ides or carries on business, or  
(ii) in which the school or establishment referred to in section 12 from where he intends to 
receive instruction in driv ing a motor vehicle is situ ate, 
for the issue  to him of a learner ’s licence.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such 
documents and with such fee as may be prescribed by the Central Gov ernment.  
(3) Every application under sub-section ( 1) shall be accompanied by a medical certificate in such 
form as may be prescribed by the Central Government and signed by such registered medical practitioner, 
as the State Government or any person authorised in this behalf by the State Gover nment may, by 
notification in the Official Gaz ette, appoint for this purpose:  
 4[Provided that no such medical certificate is required for licence to drive a vehicle other than a 
transport vehicle.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1988, s. 4, for “a motor cycle without gear” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 3 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2015).  
4. Ins. by Act 54 of 1988, s. 6 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  13 
 (4) If, from the application or from the medical certificate referred to in sub -section ( 3), it appears that 
the applicant is suffering from any disease or disability which is likely to cause the driving by him of a 
motor vehicle of the class which he would be authorised by the learner ’s licence applied for to drive to be 
a source of danger to the public or to the passengers, the licensing authority shall refuse to issue the 
learner ’s licence:  
Provided that a learner ’s licence limited to driving an invalid carriage may be issued to the applicant, 
if the l icensing authority is satisfied that he i s fit to drive such a carriage.  
(5) No learner ’s licence shall be issued to any applicant unless he passes to the satisfaction of the 
licensing authority such test as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(6) When an application has been duly made to the appropriate licensing authority and the applicant 
has satisfied such authority of his physical fitness under sub -section ( 3) and has passed to the satisfaction 
of the licensing authori ty the test referred to i n sub -section ( 5), the licensing authority shall, subject to the 
provisions of section 7, issue the applicant a learner ’s licence unless the applicant is disqualified under 
section 4 for driving a motor vehicle or is for the time being disqualified for hol ding or obtaining a 
licence to drive a motor vehicle:  
Provided that a licensing authority may issue a learner ’s licence to drive a motor cycle or a light 
motor vehicle notwithstanding that it is not the appropriate licensing authority, if such authority is  
satisfied that there is good reason for the applicant ’s inability to apply to the appropriate licensing 
authority.  
(7) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
rules made in this behalf, exempt generally, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in the rules, any class of persons from the provisions of sub -section ( 3), or sub -section ( 5), or 
both.  
(8) Any learner ’s licence for driving a motor cycle in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall, after such commencement, be deemed to be effective for driving a mo tor cycle with or 
without gear.  
9. Grant of driving licence —(1) Any person who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or 
obtaining a d riving licence may apply to the licensing authority having jur isdiction in the area — 
(i) in which he ordinarily res ides or carries on business, or  
(ii) in which the school or establishment referred to in section 12 from where he is receiving or 
has received instruction in driving a motor vehicle is situated,  
for the issue to him of a driving licence.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such 
fee and such documents as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
1[(3) If the applicant passes such test as may be prescribed by the Central Government, he shall be 
issued the driving licence:  
Provided that no such test shall be necessary where the appli cant p roduces proof to show that — 
(a) (i) the applicant has previously held a driving licence  to drive such class of vehicle and that 
the period between the data of expiry of that licence and the date of the application  does not exceed 
five years, or  
(ii) the applicant holds or has previously held a driving licence to drive such class of vehicle 
issued under section 18, or  
(iii) the applicant holds a driving licence to   drive such class of vehicle issued by a competent 
authority of any country outside India, subject to the condition that the applicant com plies with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 8 , 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 7, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  14 
 (b) the applicant is not suffering from any disability  which is likely  to cause the  driving by him to 
be a source of danger to the public; and the licensing authority may, for that purpose, require the 
applicant to produce a medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is referred to in 
sub-section ( 3) of section 8:  
Provided further that where the application is for a driv ing licence to drive a motor vehicle 
(not being a transport  vehicle), the licensing authority may exempt the applicant from the test of 
competence to drive a vehicle prescribed un der thi s sub-section, if the applicant possesses a driving 
certificate issued by any insti tution recognised in this behalf  by the State Government.]  
 (4) Where the application is for a licence to drive a transport vehicle, no such authorisation shall be 
granted to any applicant unless he possesses such minimum educational qualification as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government and a driving certificate issued by a school or establish ment 
referred to in section 12.  
1[(5) Where the applicant does not   pass th e test; he may be permitted to re -appear for the test 
after a period of seven days:  
Provided that where the applicant does not pass the test even after three appearances, he shall 
not be qualified to re -appear for such test before the expiry of a period of  sixty days from the date 
of last such test.]  
 (6) The test of competence to drive shall be carried out in a vehicle of the type t o which the 
application refers:  
Provided that a person who passed a test in driving a motor cycle with gear shall be deemed also to 
have passed a test in driv ing a motor cycle without gear.  
(7) When any application has been duly made to the appropriate licensing authority and the applicant 
has satisfied such authority of his competence to drive, the licensing authority shall is sue the applicant a 
driving licence unless the applicant is for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving 
licence:  
Provided that a licensing authority may issue a driving licence to drive a motor cycle or a light motor 
vehicle notwiths tanding that it is not the appropriate licensing authority, if the licensing authority is 
satisfied that there is good and sufficient reason for the applicant ’s inability to apply to the a ppropriate 
licensing authority:  
Provided further that the licensing authority shall not issue a new driving licence to the applicant, if 
he had previously held a driving licence, unless it is satisfied that there is good and sufficient reason for 
his inability to obtain a duplicate copy of his former li cence.  
(8) If the li censing authority is satisfied, after giving the applicant an opport unity of being heard, that 
he— 
(a) is a habitual crim inal or a habitual drunkard; or  
(b) is a habitual addict to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance within the meaning of the 
Narco tic Drugs and Psychotropic Substan ces Act, 1985 (61 of 1985 ); or 
(c) is a person whose licence to drive any motor vehicle has, at any time earlier, been revoked,  
it may, for reasons to be recorded tin writing, make an order refusing to issue a driving licence to such 
person and any person aggrieved by 586 an order made by a licensing authority under this sub -section 
may, within thirty days of the receipt of the order , appe al to the prescribed authority.  
(9) Any driving licence for driving a motor cycle in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Act shall, after such commencement, be deemed to be effective for driving a mo tor cycle with or 
without gear.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 7, for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  15 
 1[(10) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the driving licence to drive e -cart or  
e-rickshaw  shall be issued in such manner and subject to such conditions , as may be prescribed.]  
10. Form and contents of licenc es to drive .—(1) Every learner ’s licence and driving licence, except 
a driving licence issued under section 18, shall be in such form and shall contain such information as may 
be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(2) A learner ’s licence or, as the case may be, driving licence shall also be expressed as entitling the 
holder to drive a motor vehicle of one or more of t he following classes, namely: — 
(a) motor cycle without gear;  
(b) motor cycle with gear;  
(c) invalid carriage;  
(d) light motor vehicle;  
2[(e) transport vehicle;]  
 (i) road-roller;  
(j) motor vehi cle of a specified description.  
11. Additions to driving licence .—(1) Any person holding a driving licence to drive any class or 
description of motor vehicles, who is not for the time being disqualified for holding or obtaining a  driving 
licence to drive any other class or description of motor vehicles, may apply to the licensing authority 
having jurisdiction in the area in which he resides or carries on his business in such form and 
accompanied by such documents and with such fee s as may be prescribed by the Central Government for 
the addition of such other class or description of  motor vehicles to the licence.  
(2) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed by the Central Government, the provisions of section 9 
shall apply to an application under this section as if the said application were for the grant of a licence 
under that section to drive the class or description of motor vehicles which the applicant desi res to be 
added to his licence.  
12. Licensing and regulation of schools  or establishments for imparting instructio n in driving of 
motor vehicles .—(1) The Central Government may make rules for the purpose of licensing and 
regulating, by the State Governments, schools or establishments (by whatever name called) for imparting 
instruction in driving of motor vehicles and m atters connected therewith.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) licensing of such school s or establishments including grant, renewal a nd revocation of such 
licences;  
(b) supervision of such schools or establishments;  
(c) the form of application and the form of licence and the parti culars to be contained therein;  
(d) fee to be paid with the  application for such licences;  
(e) conditions subject to whic h such licences may be granted;  
(f) appeals against the orders of refusal to grant or renew such licences and appeals against the  
orders revoking such licences;  
(g) conditions subject to which a pe rson may establish and maintain any such school or 
establishment for imparting instructio n in driving of motor vehicles;  
(h) nature, syllabus and duration of course or courses for efficient instructio n in driving any motor 
vehicle;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 4 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2015).  
2. Su bs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 8, for clauses ( e) to ( h) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  16 
 (i) apparatus  and equipments (including motor vehicles fitted with dual control) required for the 
purpose  of imparting such instruction;  
(j) suitability of the premises at which such schools or establishments may be established or 
maintained and facilities to be  provid ed therein;  
(k) qualifications, both educational and professional (including experience), which a person 
imparting instruction in driving  a motor vehicle shall possess;  
(l) inspection of such schools and establishments (including the services rendered by t hem and the 
apparatus, equipments and motor vehicles maintained by them f or imparting such instruction);  
(m) maintenance of records by such schools or establishments;  
(n) financial stability of such schools or establishments;  
(o) the driving certificates, if any, to be issued by such schools or establishments and the form in 
which such driving certificates shall be issued and the requirements to be complied with for the 
purpose s of issuing such certificates;  
(p) such other matters as may be necessary to car ry ou t the purposes of this section.  
(3) Where the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by 
rules made in this behalf, exempt generally, either absolutely or subject to such conditions as may be 
specified in th e rules, any class of schools or establishments imparting instruction in driving of motor 
vehicles or matters connected therewith from the provisions of this section.  
(4) A school or establishment imparting instruction in driving of motor vehicles or matte rs connected 
therewith immediately before the commencement of this Act whether under a licence or not, may 
continue to impart such instruction without a licence issued under this Act for a period of one month from 
such commencement, and if it has made an a pplication for such licence under this Act within the said 
period of one month and such application is in the prescribed form, contains the prescribed particulars and 
is accompanied by the prescribed fee, till the disposal of such application by  the licens ing authority.  
13. Extent of effectiveness of lic ences, to drive motor vehicles .—A learner ’s licence or a driving 
licence issued under this Act shall be effective throughout India . 
14. Currency of li cences to drive motor vehicles .—(1) A learner ’s licence issued under this Act 
shall, subject to the other provisions of this Act, be effective for a period of six months from the date of  
issue of the licence.  
(2) A driving licence issued or renewed under this Act shall, — 
(a) in the case of a licence to drive a transport vehicle, be effecti ve for a period of three years: 
1*** 
2[Provided that in the case of licence to drive a transport vehi cle carrying goods of dangerous 
or  hazardous nature be effective for a period of one year and renewal thereof shall be subject to the 
condition that   the driver   undergoes     one   day   refresher course of the prescribed syllabus; 
and;] 
(b) in t he case of any other licence, — 
(i) if the person obtaining the licence, either originally or on renewal thereof, has not attained 
the age of 3[fifty years ] on the date of issue or, as the case may be, renewal thereof, — 
(A) be effective for a period of twenty years from the  date of such is sue or renewal;or  
(B) until the date on which such person attains the age of 3[fifty years ], 
whichever is earlier;  
                                                           
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 9 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “forty years” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  17 
 1[(ii) if the person referred to in sub -clause ( i), has attained the age of fifty years on the 
date of issue or as the case may be. renewal thereof, be effective, on payment of such fee as 
may be prescribed, for a period of five years from the date of such issue or renewal: ] 
Provided that every driving licence shall, notwithstanding its expiry under this sub -section, conti nue 
to be effective for a period o f thirty days from such expiry.  
15. Renewal of driving licences .—(1) Any licensing authority may, on application made to it, renew 
a driving licence issued under the provisions of this Act with effe ct from the date of its expiry:  
Provided that in any case where the application for the renewal of a licence is made more than thirty 
days after the date of its expiry, the driving licence shall be renewed with effec t from the date of its 
renewal:  
Provided further that where the application is for the renewal of a licence to drive a transport vehicle 
or where in any other case the applicant has attained the age of forty years, the same shall be accompanied 
by a medical certificate in the same form and in the same manner as is refe rred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 8, and the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 8 shall, so far as may be, apply in relation to 
every such case as they apply in r elation to a learner’s licence.  
(2) An application for the renewal of a driving lice nce shall be made in such form and accompanied 
by such documents as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(3) Where an application for the renewal of a driving licence is made previous to, or not more than 
thirty days after the date of its expiry, t he fee payable for such renewal shall be such as may be prescribed 
by the Cen tral Government in this behalf.  
(4) Where an application for the renewal of a driving licence is made more than thirty days after the 
date of its expiry, the fee payable for such renewal shall be such amount as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government:  
Provided that the fee referred to in sub -section ( 3) may be accepted by the licensing authority in 
respect of an application for the renewal of a driving licence made under this s ub-section if it is satisfied 
that the applicant was prevented by good and sufficient cause from applying within the tim e specified in 
sub-section ( 3): 
Provided further that if the application is made more than five years after the driving licence has 
ceased to be effective, the licensing authority may refuse to renew the driving licence, unless the applicant 
undergoes and passes to its satisfaction the test of competence to drive referred to i n sub -section ( 3) of 
section 9.  
(5) Where the application for re newal has been rejected, the fee paid shall be refunded to such extent 
and in such manner as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(6) Where the authority renewing the driving licence is not the authority which issued the driving 
licence it shall in timate the fact of renewal to the authority which issued the  driving licence.  
16. Revocation of driving licence on gr ounds of disease or disability .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the foregoing sections, any licensing authority may at any time revoke a driving licence or 
may require, as a condition of continuing to hold such driving licence, the holder thereof to produce a 
medical certificate in the same form and in the same m anner as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) of  
section 8, if the licen sing authority has reasonable grounds to belive that the holder of the driving licence 
is, by virtue of any disease or disability, unfit to drive a motor vehicle and where the authority revoking a 
driving licence is not the authority which issued the same,  it shall intimate the fact of revocation to the 
autho rity which issued that licence.  
17. Orders refusing or revoking driving l icences and appeals there from —(1) Where a licensing 
authority refuses to issue any learner ’s licence or to issue or renew, or rev okes, any driving licence, or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 9, for sub -clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  18 
 refuses to add a class or description of motor vehicle to any driving licence, it shall do so by an order 
communicated to the applicant or the holder, as the case may be, giving the reasons in writing for such 
refusal or revoc ation.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 1) may, within thirty days of the 
service on him of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority which shall decide the appeal after giving 
such person and the authority which made the order an opportunity of being heard and the decision of the 
appellate a uthority shall be binding on the authority which made the order.  
18. Driving licences to drive motor vehicles, belon ging to the Central Government .—(1) Such 
authority as may be prescribed by the Central Government may issue driving licence valid throughout  
India to persons who have completed their eighteenth year to drive motor vehicles which are the property 
or for the time being under the exclusive control of the Central Government and are used for Government 
purposes relating to the defence of the countr y and unconnected wi th any commercial enterprise.  
(2) A driving licence issued under this section shall specify the class or description of vehicle which 
the holder is entitled to drive and the peri od for which he is so entitled.  
(3) A driving licence issu ed under this section shall not entitle the holder to drive any motor vehicle 
except a motor vehicle referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(4) The authority issuing any driving licence under this section shall, at the request of any State 
Government, furnish suc h information respecting any person to whom a driving licence is issued as that 
Gove rnment may at any time require.  
19. Power of licensing authority to disqualify from holding a driving  licence or revoke such 
licence .—(1) If a licensing authority is satisfied, after giving the holder of a driving licence an 
opport unity of being heard, that he — 
(a) is a habitual crim inal or a habitual drunkard; or  
(b) is a habitual addict to any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance within the meaning of the 
Narcotic  Drugs and Psychotropic Su bstances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985); or 
(c) is using or has used a motor vehicle in the commiss ion of a cognizable offence; or  
(d) has by his previous conduct as driver of a motor vehicle shown that his driving is likely to be 
attende d with danger to the public; or  
(e) has obtained any driving licence or a licence to drive a particular class or description of motor 
vehicle by  fraud or misrepresentation; or  
(f) has committed any such act which is likely to cause nuisance or danger to th e public, as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government, having regard  to the objects of this Act; or  
(g) has failed to submit to, or has not passed, the tests referred to in the proviso to su b-section ( 3) 
of section 22; or  
(h) being a person under the ag e of eighteen years who has been granted a learner ’s licence or a 
drivi ng licence with the consent in writing of the person having the care of the holder of the licence 
and ha s ceased to be in such care,  
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, make an order — 
(i) disqualifying that person for a specified period for holding or obtaining any driving licence to 
drive all or any classes or descriptions of vehicles specified in the licence; or  
(ii) revoke  any such licence.  
(2) Where an order under sub -section ( 1) is made, the holder of a driving licence shall forthwith 
surrender his driving licence to the licensing authority making the order, if the driving licence has not 
already been surrendered, and t he licensing authority shall, — 
(a) if the driving licence is a driving licence issued under this Act, keep it until the 
disqualification has expired or has been removed; or  19 
 (b) if it is not a driving licence issued under this Act, endorse the disqualificatio n upon it and send 
it to the licensing autho rity by which it was issued; or  
(c) in the case of revocation of any licence, endorse the revocation upon it and if it is not the 
authority which issued the same, intimate the fact of revocation to the autho rity which issued that 
licence:  
Provided that where the driving licence of a person authorises him to drive more than one class or 
description of motor vehicles and the order, made under sub -section ( 1), disqualifies him from driving 
any specified class or desc ription of motor vehicles, the licensing authority shall endorse the 
disqualification upon the driving licence and  return the same to the holder.  
(3) Any person aggrieved by an order made by a licensing authority under sub -section ( 1) may, within 
thirty da ys of the receipt of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority, and such appellate authority shall 
give notice to the licensing authority and hear either party if so required by that party and may pass such 
order as it thinks fit and an order passed by  any such appe llate authority shall be final.  
20. Power of Court to disqualify .—(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this Act or 
of an offence in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used, the Court by which such person is 
convicted may, subject to the provisions of this Act, in addition to imposing any other punishment 
authorised by law, declare the persons so convicted to be disqualified, for such period as the Court may 
specify, from holding any driving licence to drive all classes  or description of vehicles, or any particular 
class or description of such vehicles, as  are specified in such licence:  
Provided that in respect of an offence punishable under section 183 no such order shall be made f or 
the first or second offence.  
(2) Whe re a person is convicted of an offence under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 132, 
section 134 or section 185, the Court convicting any person of any such offence shall order the 
disqualification under sub -section ( 1), and if the offence is relatab le to clause ( c) of sub -section  (1) of 
section 132 or section 134, such disqualification shall be for a period of not less than one month, and if 
the offence is relatable to section 185, such disqualification shall be for a peri od of not less than six 
mont hs. 
(3) A Court shall, unless for special reasons to be recorded in writing it thinks fit to order otherwise, 
order the disqualification  of a person — 
(a) who having been convicted of an offence punishable under section 184 is again convicted of 
an offence  punishable under that section,  
(b) who is convicted of an offence p unishable under section 189, or  
(c) who is convicted of an offence p unishable under section 192:  
Provided that the period of disqualification shall not exceed, in the case referred to in clause ( a), five 
years, or, in the case referred to in clause ( b), two years or, in the case referred to in clause ( c), one year.  
(4) A Court ordering the disqualification of a person convicted of an offence punishable under section 
184 may direct that suc h person shall, whether he has previously passed the test of competence to drive as 
referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 9 or not, remain disqualified until he has subsequent to the making 
of the order of disqualification passed that test to the satis faction of the licensing authority.  
(5) The Court to which an appeal would ordinarily lie from any conviction of an offence of the nature 
specified in sub -section ( 1) may set aside or vary any order of disqualification made under that  
sub-section notwiths tanding that no appeal would lie against the conviction as a result of which such 
order of disqualification was made.  
21. Suspension of dr iving licence in certain cases .—(1) Where, in relation to a person who had 
been previously convicted of an offence pun ishable under section 184, a case is registered by a police 
officer on the allegation that such person has, by such dangerous driving as is referred to in the said 
section 184, of any class or description of motor vehicle caused the death of, or grievous h urt to, one or 20 
 more persons, the driving licence held by such person shall in relation to such class or description of 
motor vehicle become suspended — 
(a) for a period of six months from the date on w hich the case is registered, or  
(b) if such person is discharged or acquitted before the expiry of the period aforesaid, until such 
discharge or  acquittal, as the case may be.  
(2) Where by virtue of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the driving licence held by a person becomes 
suspended, the police officer, by whom the case referred to in sub -section ( 1) is registered, shall bring 
such suspension to the notice of the Court competent to take cognizance of such offence, and thereupon, 
such Court shall take possession of the driving licence, endo rse the suspension thereon and intimate the 
fact of such endorsement to the licensing authority by which the licen ce was granted or last renewed.  
(3) Where the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) is acquitted or discharged, the Court shall cancel 
the end orsement on such driving licence with re gard to the suspension thereof.  
(4) If a driving licence in relation to a particular class or description of motor vehicles is suspended 
under sub -section ( 1), the person holding such licence shall be debarred from h olding or obtaining any 
licence to drive such particular class or description of motor vehicles so long as the suspension of the 
driving licence remains in force.  
22. Suspension or cancellation of driving licence on conviction .—(1) Without prejudice to the  
provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 20 where a person, referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 21 is 
convicted of an offence of causing, by such dangerous driving as is referred to in section 184 of any class 
or description of motor vehicle the death of, or grievous hurt to, one or more persons, the Court by which 
such person is convicted may cancel, or suspend for such period as it may think fit, the driving licence 
held by such person in so far as it relates to that class o r description of moto r vehicle.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 20, if a person, having been 
previously convicted of an offence punishable under section 185 is again convicted of an offence 
punishable under that section, the Court, making such subsequent conviction, shall, by order, cancel the 
drivi ng licence held by such person.  
(3) If a driving licence is cancelled or suspended under this section, the Court shall take the driving 
licence in its custody, endorse the cancellation or, as the  case may be, suspension, thereon and send the 
driving licence so endorsed to the authority by which the licence was issued or last renewed and such 
authority shall, on receipt of the licence, keep the licence in its safe custody, and in the case of a 
suspended licence, return the licence to the holder thereof after the expiry of the period of suspension on 
an applicati on made by him for such return:  
Provided that no such licence shall be returned unless the holder thereof has, after the expiry of the 
perio d of suspension, undergone and passed, to the satisfaction of the licensing authority by which the 
licence was issued or last renewed, a fresh test of competence to drive referred to in sub -section ( 3) of 
section 9 and produced a medical certificate in the  same form and in the same manner as is referred to i n 
sub-section ( 3) of section 8.  
(4) If a licence to drive a particular class or description of motor vehicles is cancelled or suspended 
under this section, the person holding such a licence shall be deba rred from holding, or obtaining, any 
licence to drive such particular class or description of motor vehicles so long as the cancellation or 
suspension of the dr iving licence remains in force.  
23. Ef fect of disqualification order .—(1) A person in respect of  whom any disqualification order is 
made under section 19 or section 20 shall be debarred to the extent and for the period specified in such 
order from holding or obtaining a driving licence and the driving licence, if any, held by such person at 
the date of the order shall cease to be effective to such ext ent and during such period.  
(2) The operation of a disqualification order made under section 20 shall not be suspended or 
postponed while an appeal is pending against such order or against the conviction as a result of which 
such order is made, unless the appellate court so directs.  21 
 (3) Any person in respect of whom any disqualification order has been made may at any time after the 
expiry of six months from the date of the order apply to the Court or other authority by which the order 
was made, to remove the disqualification; and the Co urt or authority, as the case may be, may, having 
regard to all the circumstances, either cancel or v ary the disqualification order:  
Provided that where the Court or other authority refuses to cancel or vary any disqualification order 
under this section, a  second application thereunder shall not be entertained before the expiry of a period of 
three months  from the date of such refusal.  
24. Endorsement .—(1) The Court or authority making an order of disqualification shall endorse or 
cause to be endorsed upon the driving licence if any, held by the person disqualified, particulars of the 
order of disqualification and of any conviction of an offence in respect of which an order of 
disqualification is made; and particulars of any cancellation or variation of an o rder of disqualification 
made under sub -section ( 3) of section 23 shall be similarly so endorsed.  
(2) A Court by which any person is convicted of an offence under this Act as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government, having regard to the objects of this  Act, shall, whether or not a disqualification 
order is made in respect of such conviction, endorse or cause to be endorsed particulars of such conviction 
on any driving licenc e held by the person convicted.  
(3) Any person accused of an offence prescribed under sub -section ( 2) shall when attending the Court 
bring with him his driving lice nce if it is in his possession.  
(4) Where any person is convicted of any offence under this Act and sentenced to imprisonment for a 
period exceeding three months the Court awarding the sentence shall endorse the fact of such sentence 
upon the driving licence of the person concerned and the prosecuting authority shall intimate the fact of 
such endorsement to the authority by which the driving licen ce was granted or last renew ed. 
(5) When the driving licence is endorsed or caused to be endorsed by any Court, such Court shall 
send the particulars of the endorsement to the licensing authority by which the driving licen ce was 
granted or last renewed.  
(6) Where on an appeal against  any conviction or order of a Court, which has been endorsed on a 
driving licence, the appellate court varies or sets aside the conviction or order, the appellate court shall 
inform the licensing authority by which the driving licence was granted or last r enewed and such 
authority shall amend or cause to be amended the endorsement.  
25. Transfer of endorsement and issue of driving  licence free from endorsement .—(1) An 
endorsement on any driving licence shall be transferred to any new or duplicate driving licence obtained 
by the holder thereof until the holder becomes entitled under the provisions of this section to have a 
driving licence issue d to him free from endorsement.  
(2) Where a driving licence is required to be endorsed and the driving licence is n ot in the possession 
of the Court or authority by which the endorsement is to be made, then — 
(a) if the person in respect of whom the endorsement is to be made is at the time the holder of a 
driving licence, he shall produce the driving licence to the Cour t or authority within five days, or such 
longer time as the Court or au thority may fix; or  
(b) if, not being then the holder of a driving licence, he subsequently obtains a driving licence, he 
shall within five days after obtaining the driving licence prod uce it to the Court or authority,  
and if the driving licence is not produced within the time specified, it shall, on the expiration of such time, 
be of no effect until it is produced for the purpose of endorsement.  
(3) A person whose driving licence has be en endorsed shall, if during a continuous period of three 
years after such endorsement no further endorsement has been made against him, be entitled on 
surrendering his driving lice nce and on payment of a fee of five rupees, to receive a new driving licenc e 
free from all endorsements:  
Provided that if the endorsement is only in respect of an offence contravening the speed limits 
referred to in section 112, such person shall be entitled to receive a new driving licence free from such 
endorsements on the expi ration of one year of the date of the endorsement:  22 
 Provided further that in reckoning the said period of three years and one year, respectively, any period 
during which the said person was disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving licence shall be ex cluded.  
26. Maintenance of Stat e Registers of Driving Licences .—(1) Each State Government shall 
maintain, in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government, a register to be known as the 
State Register of Driving Licences, in respect of driving licences issued and renewed by the licensing 
authorities of the State Government, containing the f ollowing particulars, namely: — 
(a) names and addresses of holders of driving licences;  
(b) licence numbers;  
(c) dates o f issue or renewal of licences;  
(d) dates of expiry of licences;  
(e) classes and types of vehicles authorised to be driven; and  
(f) such other particulars as the Ce ntral Government may prescribe.  
(2) Each State Government shall supply to the Central Government a 1[printed copy  or copy in such 
other form as the Central Government may require] of the State Register of Driving Licences and shall 
inform the Central Government without delay of all additions to and other amendments in such r egister 
made from time to time.  
(3) The Sta te Register of Driving Licences shall be maintained in such manner as may be pres cribed 
by the State Government.  
27. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—The Cent ral Government may make rules — 
2[(a) specifications relating to e -cart and e -rickshaw un der sub -section (2) of section 2A;]  
3[(aa)] regarding conditions referred to i n sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
(b) providing for the form in which the application for learner ’s licence may be made, the 
information it shall contain and the documents to be submitted with the application referred to in  
sub-section ( 2) of section 8;  
(c) providing for the form of medical certificate referred to i n sub -section ( 3) of section 8;  
(d) providing for the particulars for the test referred to i n sub -section ( 5) of section 8;  
(e) providing for the form in which the application for driving licence may be made, the 
information it shall contain and the documents to be submitted with the applica tion referred to in  
sub-section ( 2) of section  9; 
(f) providing for the particulars regarding test of competence to drive, referred to i n sub -section 
(3) of section 9;  
 2[(ff) the manner and the conditions subject to which the driving licence may be issue d under  
sub-section (10) of section 9;]  
(g) specifying the minimum educational qualifications of persons to whom licences to drive 
transport vehicles may be issued under this Act and the time within which such qualifications are to 
be acquired by such persons;  
(h) providing for the form and contents of the licences referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(i) providing for the form and contents of the application referred to in sub -section ( 1) of  
section 11 and documents to be submitted with the a pplica tion and the fee to be charged;  
(j) providing for the conditions subject to which section 9 shall apply to an app lication made 
under section 11;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 10, for “printed copy” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Ins. by Act 3 of 2015, s. 5 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2015).  
3. Clause ( a) renumbered as clause ( aa) thereof by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -1-2015).  23 
 (k) providing for the form and contents of the application referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 
15 and the documents to accompany such application under  sub-section ( 2) of section 15;  
(l) providing for the authority to grant licences under sub-section ( 1) of section 18;  
(m) specifying the fees payable under sub -section ( 2) of section 8, sub -section ( 2) of section 9 and 
sub-sections ( 3) and ( 4) of section 15 for the grant of learner ’s licences, and for the grant and renewal 
of driving licences and licences for the purpose of regulating the schools or establishment for 
imparting instruct ions in driving mot or vehicles;  
(n) specifying the acts for the purposes of clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 19;  
(o) specifying the offences under this Act for the purposes of sub -section ( 2) of section 24;  
(p) to provide for all or any of the matters referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(q) any other matter which is, or has to be, prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
28. Power of Sta te Government to make rules .—(1) A State Government may make rules for t he 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter other than the m atters specified in  
section 27.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such r ules may provide for — 
(a) the  appointment, jurisdiction, control and functions of licensing authorities an d other 
prescribed authorities;  
(b) the conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appea ls and the refund of s uch fees:  
Provided that no fee so fixed s hall exceed twenty -five rupees;  
(c) the issue of duplicate licences to replace licences lost, destroyed or mutilated, the replacement 
of photographs which have become obsolete and the f ees to be charged therefor;  
(d) the badges and uniform to be worn by drivers of transport vehicles and the fees t o be paid in 
respect of badges;  
(e) the fee payable for the issue of a medical certificate unde r sub -section ( 3) of section 8;  
(f) the exemption of prescribed persons, or pr escribed classes of persons, from payment of all or 
any portion of the f ees payable under this Chapter;  
(g) the communication of particulars of licences granted by one licensing authority to other 
licensing authorities;  
(h) the duties, functions and conduc t of such persons to whom licences to drive  transport vehicles 
are issued;  
(i) the exemption of drivers of road -rollers from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter o r of 
the rules made thereunder;  
(j) the manner in which the State Register of Driving Licences shall be maintained under section 
26; 
(k) any other matter which i s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
LICENSING OF CONDUCTORS OF STAGE CARRIAGES  
29. Necessity for conductor ’s licence .—(1) No person shall act as a conductor of a stage carriage 
unless he holds an effective conductor ’s licence issued to him authorising him to act as such conductor; 
and no person shall employ or permit any person who is not so licensed to act as a  conductor of a s tage 
carriage.  24 
 (2) A State Government may prescribe the conditions subject to which sub -section ( 1) shall not apply 
to a driver of a stage carriage performing the functions of a conductor or to a person employed to act as a 
conductor for a period not excee ding one month.  
30. Grant of conductor ’s licence .—(1) Any person who possesses such minimum educational 
qualification as may be prescribed by the State Government and is not disqualified under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 31 and who is not for the time being  disqualified for holding or obtaining a conductor ’s licence 
may apply to the licensing authority having jurisdiction in the area in which he ordinarily resides or 
carries on business for the issue to him of a conductor ’s licence.  
(2) Every application und er sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall contain such in formation 
as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every application for a conductor ’s licence shall be accompanied by a medical certificate in such 
form as may be prescribed, signed by a registered medica l practitioner and shall also be accompanied by 
two clear copies of a rece nt photograph of the applicant.  
(4) A conductor ’s licence issued under this Chapter shall be in such form and contain such particulars 
as may be prescribed and shall be effective throughout t he State in which it is issued.  
(5) The fee for a conductor ’s licence and for each renewal thereof shall be one -half of that for a 
drivin g licence.  
31. Disqualifications for the grant of conductor ’s licence .—(1) No person under the age of 
eight een years shall hold, or be granted, a conductor ’s licence.  
(2) The licensing authority may refuse to issue a conductor ’s licence — 
(a) if the applicant does not possess the min imum educational qualification;  
(b) if the medical certificate produced by the a pplicant discloses that he is physically u nfit to act 
as a conductor; and  
(c) if any previous conductor ’s licence hel d by the applicant was revoked.  
32. Revocation of a conductor ’s licence on gr ounds of disease or disability .—A conductor ’s 
licence may at any time be revoked by any licensing authority if that authority has reasonable grounds to 
believe that the holder of the licence is suffering from any disease or disability which is likely to render 
him permanently unfit to hold such a licence and where t he authority revoking a conductor ’s licence is 
not the authority which issued the same, it shall intimate the fact of such revocation to the authorit y which 
issued that licence:  
Provided that before revoking any licence, the licensing authority shall give the person holding such 
licence a reasona ble opportunity of being heard.  
33. Orders refusing, etc ., conductor ’s licences and appeals therefrom .—(1) Where a licensing 
authority refuses to issue or renew, or revokes any conductor ’s licence, it shall do so by an order 
communicated to the applicant or the holder, as the case may be, giving the reasons in writing for such 
refusal or revocation.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 1) may, within thirty days of the 
service on him of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority which shall decide the appeal after giving 
such person and the authority which made the order an opportunity of being heard and the decision of the 
appellate authority shall be binding on the authority which made the order.  
34. Power of lic ensing authority to disqualify .—(1) If any licensing authority is of opinion that it is 
necessary to disqualify the holder of a conductor ’s licence for holding or obtaining such a licence on 
account of hi s previous conduct as a conductor, it may, for reasons to be recorded, make an order 
disqualifying that person for a specified period, not exceeding one year, for holding or obtaining a 
conductor ’s licence:  
Provided that before disqualifying the holder of a licence, the licensing authority shall give the person 
holding such licence a reasona ble opportunity of being heard.  25 
 (2) Upon the issue of any such order, the holder of the conductor ’s licence shall forthwith surrender 
the licence to the authority making  the order, if the licence has not already been surrendered, and the 
authority shall keep the licence until the disqualification h as expired or has been removed.  
(3) Where the authority disqualifying the holder of a conductor ’s licence under this section is not the 
authority which issued the licence, it shall intimate the fact of such disqualification to the a uthority which 
issued the same.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by an order made under sub -section ( 1) may, within thirty days of the 
service on him of the order, appeal to the prescribed authority which shall decide the appeal after giving 
such person and the authority which made the order an opportunity of being heard and the decision of the 
appellate authority shall be binding on the authority which made t he order.  
35. Power of Court to disqualify .—(1) Where any person holding a conductor ’s licence is convicted 
of an offence under this Act, the Court by which such person is convicted may, in addition to imposing 
any other punishment authorised by law, decla re the person so convicted to be disqualified for such 
period as the Court may specify for holding a conductor ’s licence.  
(2) The Court to which an appeal lies from any conviction of an offence under this Act may set aside 
or vary any order of disqualifica tion made by the Court below, and the Court to which appeals ordinarily 
lie from such Court, may set aside or vary any order of disqualification made by that Court, 
notwithstanding that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which such or der was made.  
36. Certain provisions of Chapter II to apply to conductor ’s licence .—The provisions of  
sub-section ( 2) of section 6, sections 14, 15 and 23, sub -section ( 1) of section 24 and section 25 shall, so 
far as may be, apply in relation to a conductor ’s licence, as they apply in  relation to a driving licence.  
37. Savings .—If any licence to act as a conductor of a stage carriage (by whatever name called) has 
been issued in any State and is effective immediately before the commencement of this A ct, it shall 
continue to be effective, notwithstanding such commencement, for the period for which it would have 
been effective, if this Act had not been passed, and every such licence shall be deemed to be  a licence 
issued under this Chapter as if this Ch apter had been in force on the date on which that licence w as 
granted.  
38. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may provide for — 
(a) the appointment, jurisdiction, control and functions of licensing authorities and other 
prescribed authorities under this Chapter;  
(b) the conditions subject to which drivers of stage carri ages performing the functions of a 
conductor and persons temporarily employed to act as conductors may be exempted from the 
provisions of  sub-section ( 1) of section 29;  
(c) the minimum educational qualifications of conductors; their duties and functions an d the 
conduct of persons to whom conductor ’s licences are issued;  
(d) the form of application for conductor ’s licences or for renewal of such licences and the 
particulars it may contain;  
(e) the form in which conductor ’s licences may be issued or renewed a nd the particu lars it may 
contain;  
(f) the issue of duplicate licences to replace licences lost, destroyed or mutilated, the replacement 
of photographs which have become obsolete and t he fees to be charged therefor;  
(g) the  conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeals an d the refund of such fees:  
Provided that no fee so fixed s hall exceed twenty -five rupees;  26 
 (h) the badges and uniform to be worn by co nductors of stage carriages and the fees to be paid in 
respect of such badges;  
(i) the grant of the certificates referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 30 by registered medical 
practitioners and  the form of such certificates;  
(j) the conditions subject to which, and the extent to which, a conductor ’s licence issued in 
another State s hall be effective in the State;  
(k) the communication of particulars of conductor ’s licences from one auth ority to other 
authorities; and  
(l) any other matter which i s to be,  or may be, prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES  
39. Necessity for registration .—No person shall drive any motor vehicle and no owner of a motor 
vehicle shall cause or permit the vehicle to be driven in any public place or in any other place unless the 
vehicle is registered in accordance with this Chapter and the certificate of regi stration of the vehicle has 
not been suspended or cancelled and the vehicle carries a registration mark disp layed in the prescribed 
manner:  
Provided that noth ing in this section shall apply to a motor vehicle in possession of a dealer subject to 
such conditions as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
40. Registration, where to be made .—Subject to the provisions of section 42, section 43 and section 
60, every owner of a motor vehicle shall cause the vehicle to be registered by a registering authority in 
whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business wher e the vehicle is normally kept.  
41. Registration, how to be made .—(1) An application by or on behalf of the owner of a motor 
vehicle for registration shall be in such form and shall be accompanied by such documents, particulars 
and information and shall be made within such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that w here a motor vehicle is jointly owned by more persons than one, the application shall 
be made by one of them on behalf of all the owners and such applicant shall be deemed to be the owner of 
the motor vehicl e for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) An application referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(3) The registering authority shall issue to the owner of a motor vehicle registered by it a certificate of 
registration in such for m and containing such particulars and information and in such manner as may be 
prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(4) In addition to the other particulars required to be included in the certificate of registration, it shall 
also specify the type of the motor vehicle, being a type as the Central Government may, having regard to 
the design, construction and use of the motor vehicle, by notification in  the Official Gazette, specify.  
(5) The registering authority shall enter the particulars of the certificat e referred to in sub -section ( 3) 
in a register to be maintained in such form and manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(6) The registering authority shall assign to the vehicle, for display thereon, a distinguishing mark (in 
this Act refer red to as the registration mark) consisting of one of the groups of such of those letters and 
followed by such letters and figures as are allotted to the State by the Central Government from time to 
time by notification in the Official Gazette, and display ed and shown on the motor vehicle in such form 
and in such manner as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(7) A certificate of registration issued under sub -section ( 3), whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, in respect of a motor ve hicle, other than a transport vehicle, shall, subject to 
the provisions contained in this Act, be valid only for a period of fifteen years from the date of issue of 
such cert ificate and shall be renewable.  27 
 (8) An application by or on behalf of the owner of  a motor vehicle, other than a transport vehicle, for 
the renewal of a certificate of registration shall be made within such period and in such form, containing 
such particulars and information as may be prescribed  by the Central Government.  
(9) An applica tion referred to in sub -section ( 8) shall be accompanied by such fee as may be 
prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(10) Subject to the provisions of section 56, the registering authority may, on receipt of an application 
under sub -section ( 8), renew the certificate of registration for a period of five years and intimate the fact 
to the original registering authority, if it is not the original registering authority.  
(11) If the owner fails to make an application under sub -section ( 1), or, as the case may b e, under  
sub-section ( 8) within the period prescribed, the registering authority may, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case, require the owner to pay, in lieu of any action that may be taken against him 
under section 177, such amount not exceeding one hundred rupees as may be prescribed under  
sub- section ( 13):  
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the owner where the owne r fails to pay 
the said amount.  
(12) Where the owner has paid the amount under sub -section ( 11), no action shall be taken  against 
him under section 177.  
(13) For the purposes of sub -section ( 11), the State Government may prescribe different amounts 
having regard to the period of delay on the part of the owner in making an application under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 8). 
(14) An application for the issue of a duplicate certificate of registration shall be made to the 1[last 
registering authority ] in such form, containing such particulars and information along with such fee as 
may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
42. Special provision for registration of motor vehicl es of diplomatic officers, etc .—(1) Where an 
application for registration of a motor vehicle is made under sub -section ( 1) of section 41 by or on behalf 
of any diplomatic officer or consular officer, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3) 
or sub -section ( 6) of that section, the registering authority shall register the vehicle in such manner and in 
accordance with such procedure as may be provided by rules made in this behalf by the Centr al 
Government under sub -section ( 3) and shall assign to the vehicle for display thereon a special registration 
mark in accordance with the provisions contained in those rules and shall issue a certificate (hereafter in 
this section referred to as the certi ficate of registration) that the vehicle has been registered under this 
section; and any vehicle so registered shall not, so long as it remains the property of any diplomatic 
officer or consular officer, require to be regis tered otherwise under this Act.  
(2) If any vehicle registered under this section ceases to be the property of any diplomatic officer or 
consular officer, the certificate of registration issued under this section shall also cease to be effective, and 
the provisions of sections 3 9 and 40 sh all thereupon apply.  
(3) The Central Government may make rules for the registration of motor vehicles belonging to 
diplomatic officers and consular officers regarding the procedure to be followed by the registering 
authority for registering such vehicles, the form in which the c ertificates of registration of such vehicles 
are to be issued, the manner in which such certificates of registration are to be sent to the owners of the 
vehicles and the special registration marks t o be assigned to such vehicles.  
(4) For the purposes of this section, “diplomatic officer ” or “consular officer ” means any person who 
is recognised as such by the Central Government and if any question arises as to whether a person is or is 
not such an officer, the decision of the Central G overnment thereon shall be final.  
43. Temporary registration .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 40 the owner of a 
motor vehicle may apply to any registering authority or other prescribed authority to have the vehicle 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 11, for “original registering authority” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  28 
 temporarily registered in the prescribed manner and for the issue in the prescribed manner of a temporary 
certificate of registration and  a temporary registration mark.  
(2) A registration made under this section shall be valid only for a period not exceeding one mon th, 
and shall  not be renewable:  
Provided that where a motor vehicle so registered is a chassis to which a body has not been attached 
and the same is detained in a workshop beyond the said period of one month for being fitted 1[with a body  
or any unforeseen circumstance s beyond the control of the owner] , the period may, on payment of such 
fees, if any, as may be prescribed, be extended by such further period or periods as the registering 
authority or other prescribed authority,  as the case may be, may allow.  
2[(3) In a c ase where the motor vehicle is held under hire -purchase agreement, lease or hypothecation, 
the registering autho rity or other prescribed authority shall issue a temporary certifi cate of registration of 
such vehicle, which shall incorporate legibly and prominently the full name and address of the person 
with whom such agreement has been entered into by the owner.]  
44. Production of vehic le at the time of registration .—The registering authority shall before 
proceeding to register a motor vehicle or renew the certificate of registration in respect of a motor vehicle, 
other than a transport vehicle, require the person applying for registration of the vehicle or, as the case 
may be, for renewing the certificate of registration to produce the vehicle either be fore itself or such 
authority as the State Government may by order appoint in order that the registering authority may satisfy 
itself that the particulars contained in the application are true and that the vehicle complies with the 
requirements of this Act  and of the rules made thereunder.  
45. Refusal of registration or renewal of t he certificate of registration .—The registering authority 
may, by order, refuse to register any motor vehicle, or renew the certificate of registration in respect of a 
motor vehi cle (other than a transport vehicle), if in either case, the registering authority has reason to 
believe that it is a stolen motor vehicle or the vehicle is mechanically defective or fails to comply with the 
requirements of this Act or of the rules made th ereunder, or if the applicant fails to furnish particulars of 
any previous registration of the vehicle or furnishes inaccurate particulars in the application for 
registration of the vehicle or, as the case may be, for renewal of the certificate or registra tion thereof and 
the registering authority shall furnish the applicant whose vehicle is refused registration, or whose 
application for renewal of the certificate of registration is refused, a copy of such order, together wit h the 
reasons for such refusal.  
46. Effectiv eness in India of registration .—Subject to the provisions of section 47, a motor vehicle 
registered in accordance with this Chapter in any State shall not require to be registered elsewhere in 
India and a certificate of registration issued or in force under this Act in respect of such vehicle shall  be 
effective throughout India.  
47. Assignment of new registration ma rk on removal to another State .—(1) When a motor 
vehicle registered in one State has been kept in another State, for a period excee ding twelve months, the 
owner of the vehicle shall, within such period and in such form containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, apply to the registering authority, within whose jurisdiction the 
vehicle then is, for the a ssignment of a new registration mark and shall present the certificate of 
registration  to that registering authority:  
Provided that an application under this sub -section shall be accompanied — 
(i) by the no objection certificat e obtained under section 48, o r 
(ii) in a case where no such cert ificate has been obtained, by — 
(a) the receipt obtained under su b-section ( 2) of section 48; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 12, for “with a body” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  29 
 (b) the  postal acknowledgement received by the owner of the vehicle if he has sent an 
application in this behalf by registered post acknowledgement due to the registering autho rity 
referred to in section 48,  
together with a declaration that he has not received an y communication from such authority refusing to 
grant such certificate or requiring him to comply with any direction subject to which s uch certificate may 
be granted:  
Provided further that, in a case where a motor vehicle is held under a hire -purchase, lea se or 
hypothecation agreement, an application under this sub -section shall be accompanied by a no objection 
certificate from the person with whom such agreement has been entered into, and the provisions of 
section 51, so far as may be, regarding obtaining of such certificate from the person with whom such 
agreement has been entered into, shall apply.  
(2) The registering authority, to which application is made under sub -section ( 1), shall after making 
such verification, as it thinks fit, of the returns, if a ny, received under section 62, assign the vehicle a 
registration mark as specified in sub -section ( 6) of section 41 to be displayed and shown thereafter on the 
vehicle and shall enter the mark upon the certificate of registration before returning it to the  applicant and 
shall, in communication with the registering authority by whom the vehicle was previously registered, 
arrange for the transfer of the registration of the vehicle from the records of that registerin g authority to its 
own records.  
(3) Where a motor vehicle is held under a hire -purchase or lease or hypothecation agreement, the 
registering authority shall, after assigning the vehicle a registration mark under sub -section ( 2), inform the 
person whose name has been specified in the certificate of r egistration as the person with whom the 
registered owner has entered into the hire -purchase or lease or hypothecation agreement (by sending to 
such person a notice by registered post acknowledgement due at the address of such person entered in the 
certific ate of registration the fact of assignment of the said registration mark).  
(4) A State Government may make rules under section 65 requiring the owner of a motor vehicle not 
regist ered within the State, which is brought into or is for the time being in the State, to furnish to the 
prescribed authority in the State such information with respect to the motor vehicle and its registrat ion as 
may be prescribed.  
(5) If the owner fails to make an application under sub -section ( 1) within the period prescribed, the 
registering authority may, having regard to the circumstances of the case, require the owner to pay, in lieu 
of any action that may be taken against him under section 177, such amount not exceeding one hundred 
rupees as may be pr escribed under sub -section ( 7): 
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the owner where the owne r fails to pay 
the said amount.  
(6) Where the owner has paid the amount under sub -section ( 5), no action shall be taken  against him 
under section 177.  
(7) For the purposes of sub -section ( 5), the State Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of delay on the part of the owner in making an app lication under sub -section ( 1). 
48. No objection certificate .—(1) The owner of a motor vehicle w hen applying for the assignment of 
a new registration mark under sub -section ( 1) of section 47, or where the transfer of a motor vehicle is to 
be effected in a State other than the State of its registration, the transferor of such vehicle when re porting 
the transfer under sub -section ( 1) of section 50, shall make an application in such form and in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government to the registering authority by which the vehicle 
was registered for the issue of a certificate (hereaf ter in this section referred to as the no objection 
certificate), to the effect that the registering authority has no objection for assigning a new registration 
mark to the vehicle or, as the case may be, for entering the particulars of the transfer of own ership in t he 
certificate of registration.  
(2) The registering authority shall, on receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), issue a receipt in 
such form as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  30 
 (3) On receipt of an application under sub-section ( 1), the registering authority may, after making 
such inquiry and requiring the applicant to comply with such directions as it deems fit and within thirty 
days of the receipt thereof, by order in writing, communicate to the applicant that it ha s granted or refused 
to gran t the no objection certificate:  
Provided that a registering authority shall not refuse to grant the no objection certificate unless it has 
recorded in writing the reasons for doing so and a copy of the same has been  communicated  to the 
applicant.  
(4) Where within a period of thirty days referred to in sub -section ( 3), the registering authority does 
not refuse to grant the no objection certificate or does not communicate the refusal to the applicant, the 
registering authority shal l be deemed to have grante d the no objection certificate.  
(5) Before granting or refusing to grant the no objection certificate, the registering authority shall 
obtain a report  in writing from the police that no case relating to the theft of the motor vehi cle concerned 
has been reported or is pending, verify whether all the amounts due to Government including road tax in 
respect of that motor vehicle have been paid and take into account such other factors as may be prescr ibed 
by the Central Government.  
1[(6) The owner of the vehicle shall also inform at the earliest, in writing, the registering 
authority about the theft of his vehicle toge ther with the name of the police station where the theft 
report was lodged, and the registering authority shall take int o account such re port while disposing of 
any application for no objection   certification, registration, transfer of ownership or issue   of duplicate 
registration certificate.]  
49. Change of residence or place of business .—(1) If the owner of a motor vehicle ceases to reside 
or have his place of business at the address recorded in the certificate of registration of the vehicle, he 
shall, within thirty days of any such change of address, intimate in such form accompanied by suc h 
documents as may be prescribed by the Central Government, his new address, to the registering authority 
by which the certificate of registration was issued, or, if the new address is within the jurisdiction of 
another registering authority, to that other  registering authority, and shall at the same time forward the 
certificate of registration to the registering authority or, as the case may be, to the other registering 
authority in order that the new address may be entered therein.  
(2) If the owner of a m otor vehicle fails to intimate his new address to the concerned registering 
authority within the period specified in sub -section ( 1), the registering authority may, having regard to the 
circumstances of the case, require the owner to pay, in lieu of any ac tion that may be taken against him 
under section 177 such amount not exceeding one hundred rupees as may be pr escribed under  
sub-section ( 4): 
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the owner where h e fails to pay the said 
amount.  
(3) Where a person has paid the amount under sub -section ( 2), no action shall be taken  against him 
under section 177.  
(4) For the purposes of sub -section ( 2), a State Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of delay in intimating his new a ddress.  
(5) On receipt of intimation under sub -section ( 1), the registering authority may, after making such 
verification as it may think fit, cause the new address to be entered in t he certificate of registration.  
(6) A registering aut hority other than the original registering authority making any such entry shall 
communicate the altered address to the original registering authority.  
(7) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply where the change of the address recorded in the certificate 
of registration is due to a temporary absence not intended to exceed six months in duration or where the 
motor vehicle is neither used nor removed from the address recorded in t he certificate of registration.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 13 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  31 
 50. Transfer of ownership .—(1) Where the ownersh ip of any motor vehicle registered under  this 
Chapter is transferred, — 
(a) the transferor shall, — 
(i) in the case of a vehicle registered within the same State, within fourteen days of the 
transfer, report the fact of transfer, in such form with such documents and in such manner, as may 
be prescribed by the Central Government to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction 
the tra nsfer is to be effected and shall simultaneously send a copy of the sai d report to the 
transferee; and  
(ii) in the ca se of a vehicle registered outside the State, within forty -five days of the transfer, 
forward to the registering authority referred to in sub -clause ( i)— 
(A) the no objection certificat e obtained under section 48; or  
(B) in a case where no such ce rtificate  has been obtained, — 
(I) the receipt obtained under su b-section ( 2) of section 48; or  
(II) the postal acknowledgement received by the transferred if he has sent an 
application in this behalf by registered post acknowledgement due to the registering 
autho rity referred to in section 48,  
together with a declaration that he has not received any communication from such authority 
refusing to grant such certificate or requiring him to comply with any direction subject to which 
such certificate may be gra nted;  
(b) the transferee shall, within thirty days of the transfer, report the transfer to the registering 
authority within whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of business where the vehicle is 
normally kept, as the case may be, and shall forward the cer tificate of registration to that registering 
authority together with the prescribed fee and a copy of the report received by him from the transferor 
in order that particulars of the transfer of ownership may be entered in the certificate of registration.  
(2) Where — 
(a) the person in whose name a motor veh icle stands registered dies, or  
(b) a motor vehicle has been purchased or acquired at a public auction conducted b y, or on behalf 
of, Government,  
the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicle or, as the case may be, who has purchased or 
acquired the motor vehicle, shall make an application for the purpose of transferring the ownership of the 
vehicle in his name, to the registering authority in whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of 
business where the vehicle is normally kept, as the case may be, in such manner, accompanied with such 
fee, and within such period as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(3) If the transferor or the transferee fails to report to the registering autho rity the fact of transfer 
within the period specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), as the case may be, or if the 
person who is required to make an application under sub -section ( 2) (hereafter in this section referred to 
as the other pers on) fails to make such application within the period prescribed, the registering authority 
may, having regard to the circumstances of the case, require the transferor or the transferee, or the other 
person, as the case may be, to pay, in lieu of any action  that may be taken against him under section 177 
such amount not exceeding one hundred rupees as may be pr escribed under sub -section ( 5): 
Provided that action under section 177 shall be taken against the transferor or the transferee or the 
other person, as  the case may be, where h e fails to pay the said amount.  
(4) Where a person has paid the amount under sub -section ( 3), no action shall be taken  against him 
under section 177.  
(5) For the purposes of sub -section ( 3), a State Government may prescribe different amounts having 
regard to the period of delay on the part of the transferor or the transferee in reporting the fact of transfer 
of ownership of the motor vehicle or of the other person in making the application under sub -section ( 2). 32 
 (6) On receip t of a report under sub -section ( 1), or an application under sub -section ( 2), the 
registering authority may cause the transfer of ownership to be entered in the certificate of registration.  
(7) A registering authority making any such entry shall communicat e the transfer of ownership to the 
transferor and to the original registering authority, if it is not the original registering authority.  
51. Special provisions regarding  motor vehicle subject to hire -purchase agreement, etc .—(1) 
Where an application for r egistration of a motor vehicle which is held under a hire -purchase, lease or 
hypothecation agreement (hereafter in this section referred to as the said agreement) is made, the 
registering authority shall make an entry in the certificate of registration reg arding the e xistence of the 
said agreement.  
(2) Where the ownership of any motor vehicle registered under this Chapter is transferred and the 
transferee enters into the said  agreement with any person, the 1[last registering authority ] shall, on receipt 
of an application in such form as the Central Government may prescribe from the parties to the said 
agreement, make an entry as to the existence of the said agreement in the certificate of registration 2[and 
an intimation in this behalf shall be sent to the original registering authority if the last registering 
authority is not the original registering authority].  
(3) Any entry made under sub -section ( 1) or sub-section  (2), may be cancelled by the 1[last registering 
authority ] on proof of the termination of the said agreement by the parties concerned on an application 
being made in such form as the Ce ntral Government may prescribe  2[and an intimation in this behalf 
shall be sent to the original registering authority if the last  registering authority is not the  original 
registering authority] . 
(4) No entry regarding the transfer of ownership of any motor vehicle which is held under the said 
agreement shall be made in the certificate of registration except with the written consent  of the person 
whose name has been specified in the certificate of registration as the person with whom the registered 
owner has e ntered into the said agreement.  
(5) Where the person whose name has been specified in the certificate of registration as the p erson 
with whom the registered owner has entered into the said agreement, satisfies the registering authority 
that he has taken possession of the vehicle  3[from the registered owner] owing to the default of the 
registered owner under the provisions of the said agreement and that the registered owner refuses to 
deliver the certificate of registration or has absconded, such authority may, after giving the registered 
owner an opportunity to make such representation as he may wish to make (by sending to him a n otice by 
registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in the certificate of registration) and 
notwithstanding that the certificate of registration is not produced before it, cancel the certificate and issue  
a fresh certificate of registration  in the name of the person with whom the registered owner has e ntered 
into the said agreement:  
Provided that a fresh certificate of registration shall not be issued in respect of a motor vehicle, unless 
such person pays the prescribed fee:  
Provided furthe r that a fresh certificate of registration issued in respect of a motor vehicle, other than 
a transport vehicle, shall be valid only for the remaining period for which the certificate cancelled under 
this sub -section would have been in force.  
(6) The regis tered owner shall, before applying to the appropriate authority, for the renewal of a 
permit under section 81 or for the issue of duplicate certifi cate of registration under sub -section ( 14) of 
section 41, or for the assignment of a new registration mark 4[under  section 47, or removal of the vehicle 
to another State, or at the time of conversion of the vehicle from one class to another, or for issue of no 
objection certificate under section 48, or for change of residence or place of business under section 4 9, or 
for the alteration of the vehicle under section 52, make an application]  to the person with whom the 
registered owner has entered into the said agreement (such person being hereafter in this section referred 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 14, for “original registering authority” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Added. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “under section 47, make an application” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  33 
 to as the financier) for the issue of a no  objection certificate (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
certifi cate).  
Explanation .—For the purpos es of this sub -section and sub -sections ( 8) and ( 9), “appropriate 
authority ” in relation to any permit means the authority which is authorised by this Act to renew such 
permit and, in relation to registration, means the authority which is authorised by this Act to issue 
duplicate certificate of registration or to assign a new regi stration mark.  
(7) Within seven days of the recei pt of an application under sub -section ( 6), the financier may issue, 
or refuse for reasons which shall be recorded in writing and communicated to the applicant, to issue, the 
certificate applied for and wher e the financier fails to issue the certificate and also fails to communicate 
the reasons for refusal to issue the certificate to the applicant within the said period of seven days, the 
certificate applied for shall be deemed to hav e been issued by the fina ncier.  
(8) The registered owner shall, while applying to the appropriate authority for the renewal of any 
permit under section 81, or for the issue of a duplicate certificate of registration under sub -section ( 14) of 
section 41, or while applying for assig nment of a new registration mark under section 47, submit with 
such application the certificate , if any , obtained under sub -section ( 7) or, where no such certificate has 
been obtained, the communication received from the financier under that sub -section, o r, as the case may 
be a declaration that he has not received any communication from the financier within the period of seven 
days specified in th at sub -section.  
(9) On receipt of an application for the renewal of any permit or for the issue of duplicate ce rtificate 
of registration or for assignment of a new registration mark in respect of a vehicle which is held under the 
said agreement , the appropriate authority may, subject to the other provisions of this Act, — 
(a) in a case where the financier has refused to issue the certificate applied for, after giving the 
applicant an oppor tunity of being heard, either — 
(i) renew or refuse to renew the permi t, or 
(ii) issue or refuse to issue the duplicate certificate of registrat ion, or  
(iii) assign or refuse to assign a new registration mark;  
(b) in any other case, — 
(i) renew the permit, or  
(ii) issue duplicate certificate of registration, or  
(iii) assign a new registration mark.  
(10) A registering authority making an entry in the certific ate of registration regarding — 
(a) hire -purchase, lease or hypothecation a greement of a motor vehicle, or  
(b) the cancellation under sub-section ( 3) of an entry, or  
(c) recording transfer of  ownership of motor vehicle, or  
(d) any al teration in a motor vehicle, or  
(e) suspension or cancellation of regi stration of a motor vehicle, or  
(f) change of address,  
shall communicate  1[by registered post acknowledgment due] to the financier that such entry has been 
made.  
2[(11) A registering authority registering the new vehicle, or issuing the duplicate certificate of 
registration or a no objection  certificate  or a temporary certificate of registration, or issuing or 
renewing, a fitness certi ficate  or substituting entries relati ng to  another motor vehicle in the 
permit, shall intimate the financier  of such transaction.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s.14 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s.14, ibid., for sub -section ( 11) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  34 
 (12) The registering authority where it is not the original registering  authority, when making 
entry under sub -section (1) or sub -section (2), or cancelling the said entry under sub -section (3) or 
issuing the fresh certificate of registration under sub -section (5) shall communicate the same to the 
original registering autho rity.]  
1[52. Alteration in motor vehicle .— (1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall so alter the vehicle that 
the particulars contained in the certificate of registration are at variance with those originally  specified by 
the manufacturer:  
Provided that where the owner of a motor vehicle makes modification of the engine, or any part 
thereof, of a vehicle for facilitating its operation by different type of fuel or source of energy including 
battery, compressed  natural gas, solar power, liqui d petroleum gas or any other fuel or source of energy, 
by fitment of a conversion kit, such modification shall be carried out subject to such c onditions as may be 
prescribed:  
Provided further that the Central Government may prescribe specifications, conditions for approval, 
retrofitment and other related ma tters for such conversion kits:  
Provided also that the Central Government may grant exemption for alteration of vehicles in a manner 
other than specified a bove, for any specific purpose.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, authorise, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the notification, and 
permit any perso n owning not less than ten trans port vehicles to alter any vehicle owned by him so as to 
replace the engine thereof with engine of the  same make and type, without the app roval of registering 
authority.  
(3) Where any alteration has been made in motor vehicle without the approval of registering authority 
or by reason of replacement of its engine without such approval under sub -section ( 2), the owner of the 
vehicle shall, w ithin fourteen days of the makin g of the alteration, report the alteration to the registering 
authority within whose jurisdiction he resides and shall forward the certificate of registration to that 
authority together with  the prescribed fee in order that particulars of registration ma y be entered therein.  
(4) A registering authority other than the original registering authority making any such entry shall 
communicate the details of the entry to the original registering aut hority.  
(5) Subject to the provisions made under sub -sections ( 1), (2), (3) and ( 4), no person holding a vehicle 
under a hire -purchase agreement shall make any alteration to the vehicle except with the written c onsent 
of the registered owner.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “alteration ” means a change in the structure of a 
vehicle which results in a change in its basic feature.]  
53. Suspension of registration .—(1) If any registering authority or other prescribed authority has 
reason to believe that any motor ve hicle within its jurisdiction — 
(a) is in such a condition that its use in a public place would constitute a danger to the public, or 
that it fails to comply wit h the requirements of this Act or o f the rules made thereunder, or  
(b) has been, or is being, used for hire or reward without a valid  permit for being used as such,  
the authority may, after giving the owner an opportunity of making any representation he may wish to 
make (by sending to the owner a notice by registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in 
the certificate of registration), for reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend the certificate o f registration 
of the vehicle — 
(i) in any case falling under clause ( a), until the defects are rec tified to its satisfaction; and  
(ii) in any case falling under clause ( b), for a pe riod not exceeding four months.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2000, s. 2, for section 52 (w.e.f. 11 -8-2000).  35 
 (2) An authority other than a registering authority shall, when making a suspension order under  
sub-section ( 1), intimate in writing the fact of such suspension and the reasons therefor to the registering 
authority within whose jurisdiction the vehicle is  at the time of the suspension.  
(3) Where the registeration of a motor vehicle has been suspended under sub -section ( 1), for a 
continuous period of not less than one month, the registering authority, within whose jurisdiction the 
vehicle was when the registr ation was suspended, shall, if it is not the original registering authority, 
inform th at authority of the suspension.  
(4) The owner of a motor vehicle shall, on the demand of a registering authority or other prescribed 
authority which has suspended the cer tificate of registration of the vehicle under this section, surrender 
the c ertificate of registration.  
(5) A certificate of registration surrendered under sub -section ( 4) shall be returned to the owner when 
the order suspending registration has  been rescin ded and not before.  
54. Cancellation of registrat ion suspended under section 53 .—Where the suspension of 
registration of a vehicle under section 53 has continued without interruption for a period of not less than 
six months, the registering authority withi n whose jurisdiction the vehicle was when the registration was 
suspended, may, if it is the original registering authority, cancel the registration, and if it is not the 
original registering authority, shall forward the certificate of registration to that authority whi ch may 
cancel the registration.  
55. Cancellation of registration .—(1) If a motor vehicle has been destroyed or has been rendered 
permanently incapable of use, the owner shall, within fourteen days or as soon as may be, report the fact 
to the registering authority within whose jurisdiction he has the residence or place of b usiness where the 
vehicle is normally kept, as the case may be, and shall forward to that authority the certificate of 
registration of the vehicle.  
(2) The registering authority shall, if it is the original registering authority, cancel the registration an d 
the certificate of registration, or, if it is not, shall forward the report and the certificate of registration to 
the original registering authority and that authority  shall cancel the registration.  
(3) Any registering authority may order the examinatio n of a motor vehicle within its jurisdiction by 
such authority as the State Government may b y order appoint and, if, upon such examination and after 
giving the owner an opportunity to make any representation he may wish to make (by sending to the 
owner a n otice by registered post acknowledgement due at his address entered in the certificate of 
registration), it is satisfied that the vehicle is in such a condition that it is incapable of being used or its 
use in a public place would constitute a danger to th e public and that it is beyond reasonable repai r, may 
cancel the registration.  
(4) If a registering authority is satisfied that a motor vehicle has been permanently removed out of 
India, the registering authority  shall cancel the registration.  
(5) If a reg istering authority is satisfied that the registration of a motor vehicle has been obtained on 
the basis of documents which were, or by representation of facts which was, false in any material 
particular, or the engine number or the chassis number embossed thereon are different from such number 
entered in the certificate of registration, the registering authority shall after giving the owner an 
opportunity to make such representation as he may wish to make (by sending to the owner a notice by 
registered post  acknowledgement due at his address entered in the certificate of registration), and for 
reasons to be recorded in w riting cancel the registration.  
(6) A registering authority cancelling the registration of a motor vehicle under section 54 or under this 
section shall communicate such fact in writing to the owner of the vehicle, and the owner of the vehicle 
shall forthwith surrender to that authority the certificate of r egistration of the vehicle.  
(7) A registering authority making an order of cancellation u nder section 54 or under this section 
shall, if it is the original registering authority, cancel the certificate of registration and the entry relating to 
the vehicle in its records, and, if it is not the original registering authority, forward the certifi cate of 36 
 registration to that authority, and that authority shall cancel the certificate of registration and the entry 
relating to th e motor vehicle in its records.  
(8) The expression “original registering authority ” in this section and in sections 41, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53 
and 54 means the registering authority in whose records the registration of the vehicle i s recorded.  
(9) In this section, “certificate of registration ” includes a certificate of registration renewed u nder the 
provisions of this Act.  
56. Certificate of  fitness of transport vehicles .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sections 59 and 60, 
a transport vehicle shall not be deemed to be validly registered for the purposes of section 39, unless it 
carries a cer tificate of fitness in such form containing such particulars and information as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, issued by the prescribed authority, or by an authori sed testing 
station mentioned in sub -section ( 2), to the effect that the vehicl e complies for the time being with all the 
requirements of this Act and the rules made thereund er: 
Provided that where the prescribed authority or the authori sed testing station refuses is issue such 
certificate, it shall supply the owner of the vehicle with its reaso ns in writing for such refusal.  
(2) The “authori sed testing station ” referred to in sub -section ( 1) means a vehicle service station or 
public or private garage which the State Government, having regard to the experience, training and ability 
of the operator of such station or garage and the testing equipment and the testing personnel therein, may 
specify in accordance with the rules made by the Central Government for regulation and contr ol of such 
stations or garages.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), a certificate of fitness shall remain effective for such 
period as may be prescribed by the Central Government having reg ard to the objects of this Act.  
(4) The prescribed authority may for reasons to be recorded in writing c ancel a certificate of fitness at 
any time, if satisfied that the vehicle to which it relates no longer complies with all the requirements of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder; and on such cancellation the certificate of registration of the 
vehicle an d any permit granted in respect of the vehicle under Chapter V shall be deemed to be suspended 
until a new certificat e of fitness has been obtained : 
1[Provided that no such cancellation shall be made by the prescribed authority unless such prescribed 
autho rity holds such technical qualification as may be prescribed or where the prescribed authority does 
not hold such technical qualification on the basis of the report of an officer having such qualifications.]  
(5) A certificate of fitness issued under this A ct shall, while it remains effect ive, be valid throughout 
India.  
57. Appeals .—2[(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the registering autho rity under section 
41, 42, 43, 45, 47, 48 , 49, 50, 52, 53, 55 or 56 may, within thirty days of the date on which he has 
received notice of such order, appeal against the orde r to the prescribed authority.]  
(2) The appellate authority shall give notice of the appeal to the original authority and after giving an 
opportunity to the original authority and the ap pellant to be heard in the appeal pass such orders as it 
thinks fit.  
58. Special provisions i n regard to transport vehicles .—(1) The Central Government may, having 
regard to the number, nature and size of the tyres attached to the wheels of a transport ve hicle, (other than 
a motorcab), and its make and model and other relevant considerations, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify, in relation to each make and model of a transport vehicle, the 3[maximum gross vehicle  
weight ] of such vehicle and the maximum safe axle weigh t of each axle of such vehicle.  
(2) A registering authority, when registering a transport vehicle, other than a motorcab, shall enter in 
the record of registration and shall also enter in the certificate of r egistration of the vehicle the f ollowing 
particulars, namely: — 
(a) the unladen weight of the vehicle;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 16 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s.17, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for “maximum safe laden weight” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  37 
 (b) the number, nature and size of the tyres attached t o each wheel;  
(c) the gross vehicle weight of the vehicle and the registered axle weights pertainin g to the several 
axles thereof; and  
(d) if the vehicle is used or adapted to be used for the carriage of passengers solely or in addition 
to goods, the number of passengers for whom accommodation is provided,  
and the owner of the vehicle shall have the sam e particulars exhibited in the pr escribed manner on the 
vehicle.  
(3) There shall not be entered in the certificate of registration of any such vehicle any gross vehicle 
weight or a registered axle weight of any of the axles different from that specified in  the notification 
under sub -section ( 1) in relation to the make and model of such vehicle and to the number, nature and size 
of the tyres attached to its whe els: 
Provided that where it appears to the Central Government that heavier weights than those speci fied in 
the notification under sub -section ( 1) may be permitted in a particular locality for vehicles of a particular 
type, the Central Government may, by order in the Official Gazette direct that the provisions of this  
sub-section shall apply with such m odifications as  may be specified in the order.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
(5) In order that the gross vehicle weight entered in the certificate of registration of a vehicle may be 
revised in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the registering authority may require the 
owner of transport vehicle in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed to produce the 
certificate of registration within such time as may be specifie d by the registering authority.  
59. Power to fix the age limit of moto r vehicle .—(1) The Central Government may, having regard 
to the public safety, convenience and objects of this Act, by notification in the Official  Gazette, specify 
the life of a motor vehicle reckoned from the date of its manufacture, after the expiry of which the motor 
vehicle shall not be deemed to comply with the requirements of this Act and the rules made thereunder:  
Provided that the Central Government may specify different ages for different classes or dif ferent 
types of motor vehicles.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, having 
regard to the purpose of a motor vehicle, such as, display or use for the purposes of a demonstration in 
any exhibition, use for the purposes of technical research or  taking part in a vintage car rally, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, exempt, by a general or special order, subject to such conditions as 
may be specified in such notification, any class or type of motor vehicle from the operation of  
sub-section (1) for the purpose to  be stated in the notification.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 56, no prescribed authority or authori sed testing 
station shall grant a certificate of fitness to a motor vehicle in contravention of the provisions of any 
notificatio n issued under sub -section ( 1). 
60. Registration of vehicles belon ging to the Central Government .—(1) Such authority as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, may register any motor vehicle 
which is the  property or for the time being under the exclusive control of the Central Government and is 
used for Government purposes relating to the defence of the country and unconnected with any 
commercial enterprise and any vehicle so registered shall not, so long  as it remains the property or under 
the exclusive control of the Central Government, require to be regis tered otherwise under this Act.  
(2) The authority registering a vehicle under sub -section ( 1) shall assign a registration mark in 
accordance with the p rovisions contained in the rules made in this behalf by the Central Government and 
shall issue a certificate in respect of that vehicle to the effect that such vehicle complies for the time being 
with all the requirements of this Act and the rules made the reunder and that the vehicle has been  
registered under this section.  
(3) A vehicle registered under this section shall carry the certificat e issued under sub -section ( 2). 
                                                           
1. Sub-section ( 4) omitted by Act 27 of 2000, s. 3 (w.e.f.  11-8-2000).  38 
 (4) If a vehicle registered under this section ceases to be the property or under the  exclusive control of 
the Central Government, the provisions of sections 3 9 and 40 shall thereupon apply.  
(5) The authority registering a vehicle under sub -section ( 1) shall furnish to any State Government all  
such information regarding the general nature,  overall dimensions and axle weights of the vehicle as the 
State Gove rnment may at any time require.  
61. Appl ication of Chapter to trailers .—(1) The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to the 
registration of trailers as they apply to the registrat ion of  any other motor vehicle.  
(2) The registration mark assigned to a trailer shall be displayed in such manner on the side of the 
drawing vehicle, as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(3) No person shall drive a motor vehicle to which a trailer is or trailers are attached unless the 
registration mark of the motor vehicle so driven is displayed on the trailer or on the last trailer in the train, 
as the case may be, in such manner as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
62. Information regardi ng stolen and recovered motor vehicles to be furnished by the police to  
the State Transport Authority .—The State Government may, if it thinks necessary or expedient so to do 
in the public interest, direct the submission by the Inspector General of Police ( by whatever designation 
called) and such other police officers as the State Government may specify in this behalf, of such returns 
containing the information regarding vehicles which have been stolen and stolen vehicles which have 
been recovered of which t he police are aware, to the State Transport Authority, and may prescribe the 
form in which and the period within which su ch returns shall be made.  
63. Maintenance of Sta te Registers of Motor Vehicles .—(1) Each State Government shall maintain 
in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government a register to be known as the State Register 
of Motor Vehicle, in respect of the motor vehicles in that State, containing the f ollowing particulars, 
namely: — 
(a) registration numbers;  
(b) years of manufacture;  
(c) classes and types;  
(d) names and addresses of registered owner s; and  
(e) such other particulars as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(2) Each State Government shall supply to the Central Government  1[if so desired by it] a printed 
copy of t he State Register of Motor Vehicles and shall also inform the Central Government without delay 
of all additions to and other amendments in such r egister made from time to time.  
(3) The State Register of Motor Vehicles shall be maintained in such manner as may be pres cribed by 
the State Government.  
64. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—The Central Government may make rules to 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  period within which and the form in which an application shall be made and the 
documents, particulars and information it shall accompany under  sub-section ( 1) of section 41;  
(b) the form in which the certificate of registration shall be made and the parti culars and 
information it shall contain and the manner in which it shall be issued under sub -section (3) of  
section 41;  
(c) the form and manner in which the particulars of the certificate of registration shall be entered 
in the records of the registering authority under  sub-section ( 5) of section 41;  
(d) the manner in which and the form in which the registration mark, the letters and figures and 
other particulars referred to in sub -section ( 6) of section 4 1 shall be displayed and shown;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 19 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  39 
 (e) the  period within which and the form in which the application shall be made and the 
particulars and information it shall contain under  sub-section ( 8) of section 41;  
(f) the form in which the application referred to in sub -section ( 14) of section 41 shall be made, 
the particulars and information it shall con tain and the fee to be charged;  
(g) the form in which the period within which the application referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 47 shall be made and th e particulars it shall contain;  
(h) the form in  which and the manner in which the application for “No Objection Certificate ” 
shall be made under sub -section ( 1) of section 48 and the form of receipt to be issued under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 48;  
(i) the matters that are to be complied with by an ap plicant before no objection certificate may be 
issued under section 48;  
(j) the form in which the intimation of change of address shall be made under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 49 and the documents to be submit ted along with the application;  
(k) the form i n which and the manner in which the intimation of transfer of ownership shall be 
made under sub -section ( 1) of section 50 or under sub -section ( 2) of section 50 and the document to 
be submit ted along with the application;  
(l) the form in which the applicat ion under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 51 shall 
be made;  
(m) the form in which the certificate of fitness shall be issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 56 
and the particulars an d information it shall contain;  
(n) the period for which th e certificate of fitness granted or renewed under  section 56 shall be 
effective;  
(o) the fees to be charged for the issue or renewal or alteration of certificates of registration, for 
making an entry regarding transfer of ownership on a certificate of registration, for making or 
cancelling an endorsement in respect of agreement of hire -purchase or lease or hypothecation on a 
certificate of registration, for certificates of fitness for registration marks, and for the examination or 
inspection of motor ve hicles, a nd the refund of such fees.  
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed by the Central Government.  
65. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provi sions of this Chapter other than the matters specified in  
section 6 4. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may provide for — 
(a) the  conduct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter (the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appeal s and the refund of such fees);  
(b) the appointment, functions and jurisdiction of registering an d other prescribed authorities;  
(c) the exemption of road -rollers, graders and other vehicles designed and used solely for the 
construction, repair and cleaning of roads from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter and the 
rules made thereunder and the condi tions governing such exemption;  
(d) the issue or renewal of certificates of registration and fitness and duplicates of such 
certificates to replace the certificates lost, destroyed or mu tilated;  
(e) the production of certificates of registration before the registering authority for the re vision of 
entries therein of particulars relati ng to the gross vehicle weight;  
(f) the temporary registration of motor vehicles, and the issue of temporary certifi cate of 
registration and marks;  40 
 (g) the manner in which the particulars referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 58 and other 
prescribed particulars shall be exhibited;  
(h) the exemption of prescribed persons or prescribed classes of persons from payment of all or 
any portion of the f ees payable under this Chapter;  
(i) the forms, other than those prescribed by the Central Government, to be used f or the purpose 
of this Chapter;  
(j) the communication between registering authorities of particulars of certificates of registration 
and by owners of vehicles registered outside the  State of particulars of such vehi cles and of their 
registration;  
(k) the amount or amounts under sub -section ( 13) of section 41 or sub-section ( 7) of section 47 or 
sub-section ( 4) of section 49 or  sub-section ( 5) of section 50;  
(l) the extension of the va lidity of certificates of fitness pending consideration of applications for 
their renewal;  
(m) the exemption from the provisions of this Chapter, and the conditions and fees for exemption, 
of motor vehicle s in the possession of dealers;  
(n) the form in whi ch and the period within which the return under section 62 shall be sent;  
(o) the manner in which the State Register of Motor Vehicles shall be maintained under  
section 63;  
(p) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
CONTROL OF TR ANSPORT VEHICLES  
66. Necessity for permits .—(1) No owner of a motor vehicle shall use or permit the use of the 
vehicle as a transport vehicle in any public place whether or not such vehicle is actually carrying any 
passengers or goods save in accordance with the conditions of a permit granted or countersigned by a 
Regional or State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority authorising him the use of the vehicle 
in that place in the manner in w hich the vehicle is being used:  
Provided that a stage car riage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the 
permit, authorise the use of the vehicl e as a contract carriage:  
Provided further that a stage carriage permit may, subject to any conditions that may be specified in 
the permit, au thorise the use of the vehicle as a goods carriage either when carrying passengers or not:  
Provided also that a goods carriage permit shall, subject to any conditions that may be specified in the 
permit, authorise the use of the vehicle for the carriage of  goods for or in connection with a trade  or 
business carried on by him.  
(2) The holder of a goods carriage permit may use the vehicle, for the drawing of any public or semi -
trailer not owned by him, subject to such c onditions as may be prescribed.  
1[Provided that the holder of a permit of any articulated vehicle may use the prime -mover of that 
articulated vehicle for any other semi -trailor:]  
(3) The provisions of su b-section ( 1) shall not apply — 
(a) to any transport vehicle owned by the Central Gover nment or a State Government and used 
for Government purposes unconnected with any commercial enterprise;  
(b) to any transport vehicle owned by a local authority or by a person acting under contract with a 
local authority and used solely for road cleansing,  road water ing or conservancy purposes;  
(c) to any transport vehicle used solely for police, fire  brigade or ambulance purposes;  
                                                           
1. Added by Act  54 of 1994, s. 20 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  41 
 (d) to any transport vehicle used solely for the conveyance of corpses and the mou rners 
accompanying the corpses;  
(e) to any transport vehicle used for towing a disabled vehicle or for removing goods from a 
disable d vehicle to a place of safety;  
(f) to any transport vehicle used for any other public purpose as may be prescribed by the S tate 
Government in this behalf;  
(g) to any transport vehicle used by a person who manufactures or deals in motor vehicles or 
builds bodies for attachment to chassis, solely for such purposes and in accorda nce with such 
conditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official  Gazette, specify  in this 
behalf;  
1*   *   *   *       * 
(i) to any goods vehicle, the gross vehicle weight of which d oes not exceed 3,000 kilograms;  
(j) subject to such conditions as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify, to any transport vehicle purchased in one State and proceeding to a place, situated in 
that State or in any other State, without c arrying any passenger or goods;  
(k) to any transport vehicle which has been temporarily registered under section 43 w hile 
proceeding empty to any place for the purpose of registration of the vehicle;  
2*   *   *   *       * 
(m) to any transport vehicle which, owing to flood, earthquake or any other natural calamity, 
obstruction on road, or unforeseen circumstances is requ ired to be diverted through any other route, 
whether within or outside the State, with a view to enabli ng it to reach its destination;  
(n) to any transport vehicle used for such purposes as the Central or State Gov ernment may, by 
order, specify;  
(o) to any  transport vehi cle which is subject to a hire -purchase, lease or hypothecation agreement 
and which owing to the default of the owner has been taken possession of by or on behalf of, the 
person with whom the owner has entered into such agreement, to enable such motor vehic le to reach 
its destination; or  
(p) to any transport vehicle while proceeding empty to any place for purpose of repair.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), sub -section ( 1) shall if the State Government by rule 
made under section 96 so prescribes, apply to any motor vehicle adapted to carry more than nine persons 
excluding the driver.  
67. Power to State Govern ment to control road transport .—(1) A State  Government, having 
regard to — 
(a) the advantages offered to the public, trade and industry by the development of motor 
transport,  
(b) the desirability of co -ordinating road and rail transport,  
(c) the desirability of preventing the deteri oration of the road system, and  
(d) the desirability of preventing uneconomic competition among hold ers of permits,  
may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, issue directions both to the State Transport 
Authority and  Regional Transport Authority — 
(i) regarding the fixi ng of fares and freights (including the maximum and minimum in respect 
thereof) for stage carriages, contract  carriages and goods carriages;  
                                                           
1. Clause ( h) omitted by Act 27 of 2000, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11 -8-2000).  
2. Clause ( l) omitted by Act 39 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -9-2001).  42 
 1*   *   *   *       * 
(ii) regarding the prohibition or restriction, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the 
directions, of the conveying of long distance goods traffic generally, or of specified class es of goods 
by goods carriages;  
(iii) regarding any other matter which may appear to the State Government necessary or 
expedient for giving effect to any agreement entered into with the Central Government or any other 
State Government or the Government of any other country relating to the regulation of motor 
transport generally, and in particular to its coordination with other means of transport and the 
conveying of long distance goods traffic:  
Provided that no such notification in respect of the matters referred to in clause ( ii) or clause ( iii) shall 
be issued unless a draft of the proposed directions is published in the Official Gazette specifying therein a 
date being not less than one month after such publication, on or after which the draft will be taken into 
consideration and any objection or suggestion which may be received has, in consultation with the State 
Transport Authority, been considered  after giving the representatives of the interests affected an 
opportunity of being heard.  
(2) Any direction under sub -section ( 1) regarding the fixing of fares and freights for stage carriages, 
contract carriages and goods carriages may provide that such fares or freights shall be inclusive of the tax 
payable by the passengers or the consignors of the goods, as the case may be, to the operators of the stage 
carriages, contract carriages or goods carriages under any law for the time being in force relating to tax on 
passengers and goods.  
68. Transport Authorities .—(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute for the State a State Transport Authority to exercise and discharge the powers and functions 
specified in sub -section ( 3), and shall in like manner constitute Regional Transport Authorities to exercise 
and discharge throughout such areas (in this Chapter referred to as regions) as may be specified in the 
notification, in respect of each Regional Transport Authority; the powers and functions conferred by or 
under this Chapter on such Authorities:  
Provided that in the Union territories, the Administrator may abstain from constituting an y Regional 
Transport Authority.  
(2) A State Transport Authority or a Regional Transport Authority shall consist of a Chairman who 
has had judicial experience or experience as an appellate or a revisional authority or as an adjudicating 
authority competent to pass any order or take any decision under any law and in the case of a Stat e 
Transport Authority, such other persons (whether officials or not), not being mor e than four and, in the 
case of a Regional Transport Authority, such other persons (whether officials or not), not being more than 
two, as the State Government may think fit  to appoint; but no person who has any financial interest 
whether as proprietor, employee or otherwise in any transport undertaking shall be appointed, or continue 
to be, a member of a State or Regional Transport Authority, and, if any person being a membe r of any 
such Authority acquires a financial interest in any transport undertaking, he shall within four weeks of so 
doing, give notice in writing to the State Government of the acquisition of such in terest and shall vacate 
office:  
Provided that nothing in  this sub -section shall prevent any of the members of the State Transport 
Authority or a Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, to preside over a meeting of such 
Authority during the absence of the Chairman, notwithstanding that such member does  not possess 
judicial experience or experience as an appellate or a revisional authority or as an adjudicating authority 
competent to pass any order or t ake any decision under any law:  
Provided further t hat the State Government may, — 
(i) where it considers  necessary or expedient so to do, constitute the State Transport Authority or 
a Regional Transport Authority for any region so as to consist of only one member who shall be an 
                                                           
1. The proviso omitted by Act 39 of 2001, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -9-2001).  43 
 official with judicial experience or experience as an appellate or a revisional authority or as an 
adjudicating authority competent to pass any order or t ake any decision under any law;  
(ii) by rules made in this behalf, provide for the transaction of business of such authorities in the 
absence of the Chairman or any other member and specify the circumstances under which, and the 
manner in which, such b usiness could be so transacted:  
Provided also that nothing in this sub -section shall be construed as debarring an official (other than an 
official connected directly with the management or operation of a transport undertaking) from being 
appointed or continuing as a member of any such authority merely by reason of the fact that the 
Government employing the official has, or acquires, any financial inter est in a transport undertaking.  
(3) The State Transport Authority and every Regional Transport Authority shall give effect to any 
directions issued under section 67 and the State Transport Authority shall, subject to such directions and 
save as otherwise provided by or under this Act, exercis e and discharge throughout the State the 
following powers and fun ctions, namely: — 
(a) to co -ordinate and regulate the activities and policies of the Regional Transport Aut horities, if 
any, of the State;  
(b) to perform the duties of a Regional Transport Aut hority where there is no such Authority and, 
if it thinks fit or if so required by a Regional Transport Authority, to perform those duties in respect 
of any route  common to two or more regions;  
(c) to settle all disputes and decide all matters on which dif ferences of opinion arise between 
Regional Transport Authorities ; and  
1[(ca) Government to formulate routes for plying stage carriages;]  
(d) to discharge such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(4) For the purpose of exercising and discharging the powers and functions specified in  
sub-section ( 3), a State Transport Authority may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, issue 
directions to any Regional Transport Authority, and the Regional  Transport Authority shall, in the 
discharge of its functions under this Act, give effect to an d be guided by such directions.  
(5) The State Transport Authority and any Regional Transport Authority, if authorised in this behalf 
by rules made under section 96, may delegate such of its powers and functions to such authority or person 
subject to such restrictions, limitations and conditions as may be prescribed by the said rules.  
69. General provision as to applications for permits .—(1) Every application for a permit shall be 
made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which it is proposed to use the vehicle or 
vehicles:  
Provided that if it is proposed to use the vehicle or vehicles in two or more regions lying within the 
same State, the applicat ion shall be made to the Regional Transport Authority of the region in which the 
major portion of the proposed route or area lies, and in case the portion of the proposed route or area in 
each of the regions is approximately equal, to the Regional Transpor t Authority of the region in which it 
is proposed t o keep the vehicle or vehicles:  
Provided further that if it is proposed to use the vehicle or vehicles in two or more regions lying in 
different States, the application shall be made to the Regional Transp ort Authority of the region in which 
the applicant resides or has h is principal place of business.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the State Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, direct that in the case of any vehicle or vehicles proposed to be used in two or 
more regions lying in different States, the application under that sub -section shall be made to the State 
Transport Authority of the region in which the applicant resides or has h is principal place of busin ess. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 22 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  44 
 70. Applica tion for stage carriage permit .—(1) An application for a permit in respect of a stage 
carriage (in this Chapter referred to as a stage carriage permit) or as a reserve stage carriage shall, as far 
as may be, contain the f ollowing particular s, namely: — 
(a) the route or routes or the area or areas to which the application relate s; 
(b) the type and seating  capacity of each such vehicle;  
(c) the minimum and maximum number of daily trips proposed to be provided and the time-table 
of the normal tr ips. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, section 72, section 80 and section 102, “trip” 
means a single journey from one point to another, and every return journey shall b e deemed to be a 
separate trip;  
(d) the  number of vehicles intended to be kept in reserve to maintain the service and to pro vide 
for special occasions;  
(e) the arrangements intended to be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of the vehicles, 
for the comfort and convenience of passengers  and for the stora ge and safe custody of luggage;  
(f) such othe r matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) An application referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by such documents as may be 
prescribed.  
71. Procedure of Regional Transport Authority in considering applicati on for stage carriage 
permit .— (1) A Regional Transport Authority shall, while considering an application for a stage carriage 
permit, have reg ard to the objects of this Act:  
1*   *   *   *          * 
(2) A Regional Transport Authority  shall refuse to grant a stage carriage permit if it appears from any 
time-table furnished that the provisions of this Act relating to the speed at which vehicles may be drive n 
are likely to be contravened:  
Provided that before such refusal an opportunity shall be given to the applicant to amend the time -
table so as to conform to the said provisions.  
(3) (a) The State Government shall, if so directed by the Central Government having regard to the 
number of vehicles, road conditions and other relevant matter s, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct a State Transport Authority and a Regional Transport Authority to limit the number of stage 
carriages generally or of any specified type, as may be fixed and specified in the notification, operating on 
city routes in towns with a populati on of not less than five lakhs.  
(b) Where the number of stage carriages are fixed under clause ( a), the Government of the State shall 
reserve in the State certain percentage of stage carriage permits for the scheduled caste s and the scheduled 
tribes in the same ratio as in the case of appointments made by direct recruitment t o public services in the 
State.  
(c) Where the number of stage carriages are fixed under clause ( a), the Regional Transport Authority 
shall reserve such number of permits for the scheduled castes and the scheduled tribes as may be fixed by 
the State Government under sub -clause ( b).  
(d) After reserving such number of permits as is referred to in clause ( c), the Regional Transport 
Authority shall in conside ring an application have regard to t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) financ ial stability of the applicant;  
(ii) satisfactory performance as a stage carriage operator including payment of tax if the applicant 
is or has been an operator  of stage carriage s ervice; and  
(iii) such other matters as may be pres cribed by the State Government:  
                                                           
1. Proviso omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 23 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  45 
 Provided that, other conditions being equal, preference shall be given to applicat ions for permits 
from — 
(i) State transport undertakings;  
(ii) co-operative  societies registered or deemed to have been registered under any enactment for 
the time being in force; 1*** 
(iii) ex-servicemen; 2[or] 
2[(iv) any other class or category of persons, as the State government may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing consider necessary;]  
3*   *   *   *        * 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section “company ” means any body corporate, and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals; and “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
72. Grant of stage carriage permits .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 71, a Regional 
Transport Authority may, on an application made to it under section 70, grant a stage carriage permit in 
accordance with the application or with such modifications as  it deems fit or refuse to grant such a permit:  
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any route or area no t specified in the 
application.  
(2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a stage carriage permit, may grant the 
permit for a stage carriage of a specified description and may, subject to any rules that may be made 
under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the following conditions, namely: — 
(i) that the vehicles shall be used only in a specified are a, or on a specified route or routes;  
(ii) that the operation of the stage carriage shall be commenced with effect from a specified date;  
(iii) the minimum and maximum number of daily trips to be provided in relation to any route or 
area generally or o n specified days and occasions;  
(iv) that copies of the time -table of the stage carriage approved by the Regional Transport 
Authority shall be exhibited on the vehicles and at specified stands and halts o n the route or within 
the area;  
(v) that the stage car riage shall be operated within such margins of deviation from the approved 
time-table as the Regional Transport Authority  may from time to time specify;  
(vi) that within municipal limits and such other areas and places as may be prescribed, passengers 
or goods shall not be taken up or set d own except at specified points;  
(vii) the maximum number of passengers and the maximum weight of luggage that may be 
carried on the stage carriage, either generally or on specified occasions or at specified times and 
seasons; 
(viii) the weight and nature of passengers ’ luggage that shall be carried free of charge, the total 
weight of luggage that may be carried in relation to each passenger, and the arrangements that shall 
be made for the carriage of luggage without causi ng inconvenience to passengers;  
(ix) the rate of charge that may be levied for passengers ’ luggage in excess of the free allowance;  
(x) that vehicles of a specified type fitted with body conforming to approve d specifications shall 
be used:  
Provided that the attachment of this condition to a permit shall not prevent the continued use, for 
a period of two years from the date of publication of the approved specifications, of any vehicle 
operating on that date;  
                                                           
1.  The word “or” omitted by Act 54 of 1994, s. 23 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Ins.by s.  23, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5) omitted by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  46 
 (xi) that specified standards of c omfort and cleanliness shall  be maintained in the vehicles;  
(xii) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried in the stage carriage in addition to or to 
the exclusion of passengers;  
(xiii) that fares shall be charged in accordanc e with the approve d fare table;  
(xiv) that a copy of, or extract from, the fare table approved by the Regional Transport Authority 
and particulars of any special fares or rates of fares so approved for particular occasions shall be 
exhibited on the stage carriage and  at spe cified stands and halts;  
(xv) that tickets bearing specified particulars shall be issued to passengers and shall show the 
fares actually charged and that records of tickets issued shall  be kept in a specified manner;  
(xvi) that mails shall be carried on th e vehicle subject to such conditions (including conditions as 
to the time in which mails are to be carried and the charges which may be levied) as may be specified;  
(xvii) the vehicles to be kept as reserve by the holder of the permit to maintain the opera tion and 
to provide for special occasions;  
(xviii) the conditions subject to which vehicle may be used as a contract carriage;  
(xix) that specified arrangements shall be made for the housing, mai ntenance and repair of 
vehicle;  
(xx) that  any specified bus station or shelter maintained by Government or a local authority shall 
be used and that any specified rent or fee shall be paid for such use;  
(xxi) that the conditions of the permit shall not be departed from, save with the approval of t he 
Regional Transport Authority;  
(xxii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving noti ce of not less than one 
month, — 
(a) vary the c onditions of the permit;  
(b) attach to  the permit further conditions:  
Provided that the conditions specified i n pursuance of clause ( i) shall not be varied so as to alter 
the distance covered by the original route by more than 24 kilometers, and any variation within such 
limits shall be made on ly after the Regional Transport Authority is satisfied that such variat ion will 
serve the convenience of the public and that it is not expedient to grant a separate permit in respect of 
the original route as so va ried or any part thereof;  
(xxiii) that the holder of a permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport Authority su ch periodical 
returns, statistics and other information as the State Government m ay from time to time prescribe;  
(xxiv) any other conditions w hich may be prescribed.  
73. Applicatio n for contract carriage permit .—An application for a permit in respect of a contract 
carriage (in this Chapter referred to as a contract carriage permit) shall contain the f ollowing particulars, 
namely: — 
(a) the type and s eating capacity of the vehicle;  
(b) the area fo r which the permit is  required;  
(c) any other parti culars which may be prescribed.  
74. Grant of contract carriage permi t.—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), a Regional 
Transport Authority may, on an application made to it under section 73, grant a contract carri age permit 
in accordance with the application or with such modifications as it deems fit or refuse  to grant such a 
permit:  
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any area not specified in the application.  47 
 (2) The Regional Transport Authority, if it decides to grant a contract carriage permit, may, subject to 
any rules that may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the following 
conditions, namely: — 
(i) that the vehicles shall be used  only in a specified area or on a specified route or routes;  
(ii) that except in accordance with specified conditions, no contract of hiring, other than an 
extension or modification of a subsisting contract, may be entered i nto outside the specified area;  
(iii) the maximum number of passengers and the maximum weight of luggage that may be carried 
on the vehicles, either generally or on specified occasions or at specified times and seasons;  
 (iv) the conditions subject to which goods may be carried in any co ntract carriage in addition to, 
or to the exclusion of, passengers;  
(v) that, in the case of motor cabs, specified fares or rates of fares shall be charged and a copy of 
the fare table sha ll be exhibited on the vehicle;  
(vi) that, in the case of vehicles o ther than motor cabs, specified rates of hiring not exceeding 
specified maximum shall be charged;  
(vii) that, in the case of motor cabs, a special weight of passengers ’ luggage shall be carried free 
of charge, and that the charge, if any, for any luggage i n excess thereof shall be at a specified rate;  
(viii) that, in the case of motor cabs, a taximeter shall be fitted and maintained in prope r working 
order, if prescribed;  
(ix) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving noti ce of not less than one month, —  
(a) vary the conditions of the permit;  
(b) attach to  the permit further conditions;  
(x) that the conditions of permit shall not be departed from save with the approval of th e Regional 
Transport Authority;  
(xi) that  specified standards of comfort and cleanliness shall  be maintained in the vehicles;  
(xii) that, except in the circumstances of exceptional nature, the plying of the vehicle or carrying 
of the p assengers shall not be refused;  
(xiii) any other cond itions wh ich may be prescribed.  
(3) (a) The State Government shall, if so directed by the Central Government, having regard to the 
number of vehicles, road conditions and other relevant matters, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct a State Transport Auth ority and a Regional Transport Authority to limit the number of contract 
carriages generally or of any specified type, as may be fixed and specified in the notification, operating on 
city routes in towns with a populati on of not less than five lakhs.  
(b) Where the number of contract carriages are fixed under clause ( a), the Regional Transport 
Authority shall, in considering an application for the grant of permit in respect of any such contract 
carriage, have regard to t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) financial stability of the applicant;  
(ii) satisfactory performance as a contract carriage operator including payment of tax if the 
applicant is or has been an oper ator of contract carriages; and  
(iii) such other matters as may be pres cribed by the State Gove rnment:  
Provided that, other conditions being equal, preference shall be given to applications for permits 
from — 
(i) the India Tourism Development Cor poration;  
(ii) State To urism Development Corporations;  
(iii) State Tourism Departments;  48 
 (iv) State  transport undertakings;  
(v) co-operative societies registered or deemed to have been registered under any enactme nt for 
the time being in force;  
(vi) ex-servicemen.  
75. Sc heme for renting of motor cabs .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in t he 
Official Gazette, make a scheme for the purpose of regulating the business of renting of 1[motor cabs or 
motor cycles to persons desiring to drive either by themselves or through drivers, motor cabs or motor 
cycles] for their own use and for m atters con nected therewith.  
(2) A scheme made under sub -section ( 1) may provide for all or any of t he following matters,  
namely: — 
(a) licensing of operators under the scheme including grant, renewal and revocation of such 
licences;  
(b) form  of application and form of licences and the parti culars to be contained therein;  
(c) fee to be paid with the  application for such licences;  
(d) the authorities to which  the application shall be made;  
(e) condition subject to which such licences may be gra nted, renewed or revoked;  
(f) appeals against orders of refusal to grant or renew such licences and appeals against  orders 
revoking such licences;  
(g) conditions subject to which motor cabs may be rented;  
(h) maintenance of records and inspection of such r ecords;  
(i) such other matters as may be necessary to carry ou t the purposes of this section.  
76. Application for private service vehicle permit .—(1) A Regional Transport Authority may, on 
an application made to it, grant a private service vehicle permit in accordance with the application or with 
such modification as it deems fit or refuse to grant such permit:  
Provided that no such permit shall be gr anted in respect of any area or route no t specified in the 
application.  
(2) An application for a permit to use a motor vehicle as a private service vehicle shall contain the 
following particulars, namely: — 
(a) type and s eating capacity of the vehicle;  
(b) the area or the route or routes to  which the application relates;  
(c) the manner in which it is claimed that the purpose of carrying persons otherwise than for hire 
or reward or in connection with the trade or business carried on by the applicant will be s erved by the 
vehic le; and  
(d) any other parti culars which may be prescribed.  
(3) The Regional Transport Authority if it decides to grant the permit may, subject to any rules that 
may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or more of the follo wing conditions, n amely: —  
(i) that the vehicle be used only in a specified area or on a specified route or routes;  
(ii) the maximum number of persons and the maximum weight of luggage that may be carried;  
(iii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, a fter giving notice  of not less than one month — 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 24, for “motor cabs to persons desiring to drive the cabs” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  49 
 (b) attach to the  permit further conditions;  
(iv) that the conditions of permit shall not be departed from, save with the approval of th e 
Regional Transport Authority;  
(v) that specified standards of comforts and cleanliness shal l be maintained in the vehicle;  
(vi) that the holder of the permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport Authority such periodical 
returns, statistics and other information as the State Governmen t may, from time to time, specify; and  
(vii) such other c onditions as may be prescribed.  
77. Applica tion for goods carriage permit .—An application for a permit to use a motor vehicle for 
the carriage of goods for hire or reward or for the carriage of goods  for or in connection with a trade or 
business carried on by the applicant (in this Chapter referred to as a goods carriage permit) shall, as far as 
may be, contain the f ollowing particulars, namely: — 
(a) the area or the route or routes to  which the applic ation relates;  
(b) the ty pe and capacity of the vehicle;  
(c) the nature of the  goods it is proposed to carry;  
(d) the arrangements intended to be ma de for the housing, maintenance  and repair of the vehicle 
and for the storage  and safe custody of the goods;  
(e) such particulars as the Regional Transport Authority may require with respect to any business 
as a carrier of goods for hire or reward carried on by the applicant at any time before the making of 
the application, and of the rates charged by the applic ant; 
(f) particulars of any agreement, or arrangement, affecting in any material respect the provision 
within the region of the Regional Transport Authority of facilities for the transport of goods for hire 
or reward, entered into by the applicant with any  other person by whom such facilities are provided, 
whethe r within or without the region;  
(g) any other parti culars which may be prescribed.  
78. Consideration of applica tion for goods carriage permit .—A Regional Transport Authority 
shall, in considering an  application for a goods carriage permit, have regard to t he following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) the nature of the goods to be carried with special reference to their dangerous or hazardous 
nature to human life;  
(b) the nature of the chemicals or explosives to  be carried with special referen ce to the safety to 
human life.  
79. Grant of goods carriage permit .—(1) A Regional Transport Authority may, on an application 
made to it under section 77, grant a goods carriage permit to be valid throughout the State or in 
accordance with the application or with such modifications as it deems fit or refuse to grant such a permit:  
Provided that no such permit shall be granted in respect of any area or route not sp ecified in the 
application.  
(2) The Regional Transport Authorit y, if it decides to grant a goods carriage permit, may grant the 
permit and may, subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, attach to the permit any one or 
more of the following conditions, namely: — 
(i) that  the vehicle shall be used only in a specified area or on a specified route or routes;  
(ii) that the gross vehicle weight of any vehicle used shall not exceed a  specified maximum;  
(iii) that goods of a specifi ed nature shall not be carried;  
(iv) that goods  shall  be carried at specified rates;  50 
 (v) that specified arrangement shall be made for the housing, maintenance and repair of the 
vehicle and the storage and saf e custody of the goods carried;  
(vi) that  the holder of the permit shall furnish to the Regional Transport Authority such periodical 
returns, statistics and other information as the State Government may , from time to time, prescribe;  
(vii) that the Regional Transport Authority may, after giving n otice of not less than one month, — 
(a) vary the conditions of the permit;  
(b) attach to  the permit further conditions;  
(viii) that the conditions of the permit shall not be departed from, save with the approval of th e 
Regional Transport Authority;  
(ix) any  other cond itions which may be prescribed.  
(3) The conditions referred to in sub -section ( 2) may include conditions relating to the packaging and 
carriage of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life.  
80. Procedure in app lying for and granting p ermits .—(1) An application for a permit of an y kind 
may be made at any time.  
(2) A 1[Regional Transport Authority , State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) of section 66]  shall not ordinarily refuse to grant an application for permit of any 
kind m ade at any time under this Act:  
Provided that the 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any prescribed 
authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 6 6] may summarily refuse the application if the grant of 
any permit in accordance with the application would have the effect of increasing the number of stage 
carriages as fixed and specified in a notification in the Official Gazette under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) 
of section 71 or of contract carriages as fixed and specified in a notification in the Official Gazette under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 74: 
Provided further that where a 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any 
prescribed authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 66 ] refuses an application for the grant of a 
permit of any kind under this Act, it shall give to the applicant in writing its reasons for the refusal of the 
same and an opportunity of b eing heard in the matter.  
(3) An application to vary the conditions of any permit, other than a temporary permit, by the 
inclusion of a n ew route or routes or a new area or by altering the route or routes or area covered by it, or 
in the case of a stage ca rriage permit by increasing the number of trips above the specified maximum or 
by the variation, extension or curtailment of the route or routes or the area specified in the permit shall be 
treated as an application  for the grant of a new permit:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary so to treat an application made by the holder of stage carriage 
permit who provides the only service on any route to increase the frequency of the service so provided 
without any increase in the number of vehicles:  
Provid ed further that, — 
(i) in the case of variation, the termini shall not be altered and the distance covered by the 
variation shall not  exceed twenty -four kilometres;  
(ii) in the case of extension, the distance covered by extension shall not exceed twenty -four 
kilometres from the termini,  
and any such variation or extension within such limits shall be made only after the transport authority is 
satisfied that such variation will serve the convenience of the public and that it is not expedient to grant a 
separate permit in respect of the original route as so varied o r extended or any part thereof.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 25, for “Regional Transport Authority” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  51 
 (4) A 1[Regional Transport Authority, State Transport Authority or any prescribed authority referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) of section 66 ] may, before such date as may be specified by it in this behalf, replace 
any permit granted by it before the said date by a fresh permit conforming to the provisions of section 72 
or section 74 or section 76 or section 79, as the case may be, and the fresh permit shall be valid for the 
same route or routes or the same area for which  the replaced permit was valid:  
Provided that no condition other than a condition which was already attached to the replaced permit 
or which could have been attached thereto under the law in force when that perm it was granted shall be 
attached to the fresh permit except with the consent in writing of the holde r of the permit.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 81, a permit issued under the provisions of  
sub-section ( 4) shall be effective without renewal for the remainder of the period during which the 
replaced permit would have been so effective.  
81. D uration and renewal of permits .—(1) A permit other than a temporary permit issued under 
section 87 or a special permit issued under sub -section ( 8) of section 88 shall be effective 2[from the date 
of issuance or renewal thereof]  for a period of five years:  
Provided that where the permit is countersigned under sub -section ( 1) of section 88, such 
countersignature shall remain effective without renewal f or such period so as to synchronise with the 
validity of the primary permit.  
(2) A permit may be renewed on an application made not less than fifteen days  before the date of its 
expiry.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Regiona l Transport Authority or the 
State Transp ort Authority, as the case may be, may entertain an application for the renewal of a permit 
after the last date specified in that sub -section if it is satisfied that the applicant was  prevented by good 
and sufficient cause from making an applica tion within the time specified.  
(4) The Regional Transport Authority or the State Transport Authority, as the case may be, may reject 
an application for the renewal of a permit on one or more of t he following grounds,  namely: — 
(a) the financial condition of the applicant as evidenced by insolvency, or decrees for payment of 
debts remaining unsatisfied for a period of thirty days, prior to the date of co nsideration of the 
application;  
(b) the applicant had been punished  twice or more for any of the following offences within twelve 
months reckoned from fifteen days prior to the date of consideration of the application committed as a 
result of the operation of a stage carriage serv ice by the applicant, namely: — 
(i) plying any vehicle — 
(1) without paym ent of tax due on such vehicle;  
(2) without payment of tax during the grace period allowed for payment of such tax and 
then s top the plying of such vehicle;  
(3) on any unauthorised route;  
(ii) making unauthorised trips:  
Provided that in computing the number of punishments for the purpose of clause ( b), any punishment 
stayed by the order of an appellate authority s hall not be taken into account:  
Provided further that no application under this sub -section shall be rejected unless an opportunity of 
being h eard is given to the applicant.  
(5) Where a permit has been renewed under this section after the expiry of the period thereof, such 
renewal shall have effect from the date of such expiry irrespective of whether or not a temp orary permit 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 25, for “Regional Transport Authority” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for “without renewal” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  52 
 has been granted under clause ( d) of section 87, and where a temporary permit has been granted, the fee 
paid in respect of such temp orary permit shall be refunded.  
82. Transfer of permit .—(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), a permit shall  not be transferable 
from one person to another except with the permission of the transport authority which granted the permit 
and shall not, without such permission, operate to confer on any person to whom a vehicle covered by the 
permit is transferred an y right to use that vehicle in the m anner authorised by the permit.  
(2) Where the holder of a permit dies, the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicle covered 
by the permit may, for a period of three months, use the permit as if it had been gran ted to himself:  
Provided that such person has, within thirty days of the death of the holder, informed the transport 
authority which granted the permit of the death of the holder and of his own intention to use the permit:  
Provided further that no permit s hall be so used after the date on which it would have ceased to be 
effective without renewal in th e hands of the deceased holder.  
(3) The transport authority may, on application made to it within three months of the death of the 
holder of a permit, transfe r the permit to the person succeeding to the possession of the vehicles cover ed 
by the permit:  
Provided that the transport authority may entertain an application made after the expiry of the said 
period of three months if it is satisfied that the applicant  was prevented by good and sufficient cause from 
making an application within  the time specified.  
83. Replacement of vehicles .—The holder of a permit may, with the permission of the authority by 
which the permit was granted, replace any vehicle covered by the permit by any other vehicle of the same 
nature. 
84. General condi tions attaching to all permits .—The following shall be conditions of every 
permit — 
(a) that the vehicle to which the permit relates carries valid certificate of fitness issued under 
section 56 and is at all times so maintained as to comply with the requirements of this Act  and the 
rules made thereunder;  
(b) that the vehicle to which the permit relates is not driven at a speed exceeding the speed 
permitted under this Act;  
(c) that  any prohibition or restriction imposed and any fares or freight fixed by notification made 
under section 67 are observed in connection with the vehic le to which the permit relates;  
(d) that the vehicle to which the permit relates is not driven in contrave ntion of the provisio ns of 
section 5 or section 113;  
(e) that the provisions of this Act limiting the hours of work of drivers are observed in connection 
with any vehicle or vehicl es to which the permit relates;  
(f) that the provisions of Chapters X, XI an d XII so far as they apply to the holder of the permit 
are observed; and  
(g) that the name and address of the operator shall be painted or otherwise firmly affixed to every 
vehicle to which the permit relates on the exterior of the body of that vehicle on both sides thereof in 
a colour or colours vividly contrasting to the colour of the vehicle centered as high as practicable 
below t he window line in bold letters.  
85. General form of permits .—Every permit issued under this Act shall be complete in itself an d 
shall contain all the necessary particulars of the permit and t he conditions attached thereto.  
86. Cancella tion and suspension of permits .—(1) The transport authority which granted a permit 
may cancel the permit or may suspend it for  such period as it thinks fit — 
(a) on the breach of any condition specified in section 84 or of any condition contained in the 
permit, or  53 
 (b) if the holder of the permit uses or causes or allows a vehicle to be used in any manner n ot 
authorised by the per mit, or  
(c) if the holder of the permit ceases to own the ve hicle covered by the permit, or  
(d) if the holder of the permit has obtained the permit by  fraud or misrepresentation, or  
(e) if the holder of the goods carriage permit, fails without reasonable c ause, to use the vehicle for 
the purposes for w hich the permit was granted, or  
(f) if the holder of the permit acquires the citi zenship of any foreign country:  
Provided that no permit shall be suspended or cancelled unless an opportunity has been given to the 
holder of the per mit to furnish his explanation.  
(2) The transport authority may exercise the powers conferred on it under sub -section ( 1) in relation 
to a permit granted by any authority or person to whom power in this behalf has been delegated under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 68 as if the said permit was a permit gran ted by the transport authority.  
(3) Where a transport authority cancels or suspends a permit, it shall give to the holder in writing its 
reasons for the action taken.  
(4) The powers exercisable under sub -section ( 1) (other than the power to cancel a permit) by the 
transport authority which granted the permit may be exercised by any authority or person to whom such 
powers have been delegated under  sub-section ( 5) of section 68.  
(5) Whe re a permit is liable to be cancelled or suspended under clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause ( e) 
of sub -section ( 1) and the transport authority is of opinion that having regard to the circumstances of the 
case, it would not be necessary or expedient so to c ancel or suspend the permit if the holder of the permit 
agrees to pay a certain sum of money, then, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the 
transport authority may, instead of cancelling or suspending the permit, as the case may be, reco ver from 
the holder of the permi t the sum of money agreed upon.  
(6) The powers exercisable by the  transport authority under sub -section ( 5) may, where an appeal has 
been preferred under section 89, be exercised a lso by the appellate authority.  
(7) In relat ion to a permit referred to in sub -section ( 9) of section 88, the powers exercisable under 
sub-section ( 1) (other than the power to cancel a permit) by the transport authority which granted the 
permit, may be exercised by any transport authority and any authority or persons to whom power in this 
behalf has been delegated under sub -section ( 5) of section 68, as if the said permit was a permit granted 
by any  such authority or persons.  
87. Temporary permits .—(1) A Regional Transport Authority and the State T ransport Authority 
may without following th e procedure laid down in section 80, grant permits, to be effective for a limited 
period which shall, not in any case exceed four months, to authorise the use of a transport vehicle 
temporarily — 
(a) for the convey ance of passengers on special occasions such as to and from fairs and religious 
gatherings, or  
(b) for the purp oses of a seasonal business, or  
(c) to meet a particular temporary need, or  
(d) pending decision on an application for the renewal of a permit,  
and may attach to any such permit such  condition as it may think fit:  
Provided that a Regional Transport Authority or, as the case may be, State Transport Authority may, 
in the case of goods carriages, under the circumstances of an exceptional nature, and  for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, grant a permit for a period exceeding four mont hs, but not exceeding one year.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a temporary permit may be granted 
thereunder in respe ct of any route or area w here— 
(i) no permit could be issued under section 72 or section 74 or section 76 or section 79 in respect 
of that route or area by reason of an order of a court or other competent authority restraining the issue 54 
 of the same, for a period not exceeding the period for which the issue of the pe rmit has been so 
restrained; or  
(ii) as a result of the suspension by a court or other competent authority of the permit of any 
vehicle in respect of that route or area, there is no transport vehicle of the same class wi th a valid 
permit in respect of that route or area, or there is no adequate number of such vehicles in respect of 
that route or area, for a period not exceeding the period of such suspensi on. 
Provided that the number of transport vehicles in respect of whi ch temporary permits are so granted 
shall not exceed the number of vehicles in respect of which the issue of the permits have been restrained 
or, as the case may be, the permit has been su spended.  
88. Validation of permits for use o utside region in which granted .—(1) Except as may be 
otherwise prescribed, a permit granted by the Regional Transport Authority of any one region shall not be 
valid in any other region, unless the permit has been countersigned by the Regional Transport Authority 
of that other ri gion, and a permit granted in any one State shall not be valid in any other State unless 
countersigned by the State Transport Authority of that other State or by the Regional  Transport Authority 
concerned:  
Provided that a goods carriage permit, granted by the Regional Transport Authority of any one region, 
for any area in any other region or regions within the same State shall be valid in that area withou t the 
countersignature of the Regional Transport Authority of the other region or of each of the other r egions 
concerned:  
Provided further that where both the starting point and the terminal point of a route are situate within 
the same State, but part of such route lies in any other State and the length of such part does not exceed 
sixteen kilometres, the pe rmit shall be valid in the other State in respect of that part of the route which is 
in that other State notwithstanding that such permit has not been countersigned by the State Transport 
Authority or the Regional Transport  Authority of that other State:  
Provided also that — 
(a) where a motor vehicle covered by a permit granted in one State is to be used for the purposes 
of defence in any other State, such vehicle shall display a certificate, in such form, and issued by such 
Authority, as the Central Governm ent may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, to the 
effect that the vehicle shall be used for the period specified therein exclusively f or the purposes of 
defence; and  
(b) any  such permit shall be valid in that other State notwithstanding that such permit has not 
been countersigned by the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority of that  other 
State.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a permit granted or countersigned by a 
State Transport Authority shall be valid in the whole State or in such regions within the State as may be 
specified in the permit.  
(3) A Regional Transport Authority when countersigning the permit may attach to the p ermit any 
condition which it might have imposed if it had granted the permit and may likewise vary any condition 
attached to the permit by the authority by which the permit was granted . 
(4) The provisions of this Chapter relating to the grant, revocation a nd suspension of permits shall 
apply to the grant, revocation and suspension o f countersignatures of permits:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary to follow the procedure laid down in section 80 for the grant of 
countersignatures of permits, where the p ermits granted in any one State are required to be countersigned 
by the State Transport Authority of another State or by the Regional Transport Authority concerned as a 
result of any agreement arrived at between the States after complying with the requirem ents of  
sub-section ( 5). 55 
 (5) Every proposal to enter into an agreement between the States to fix the number of permits which 
is proposed to be granted or countersigned in respect of each route or area, shall be published by each of 
the State Governments c oncerned in the Official Gazette and in any one or more of the newspapers in 
regional language circulating in the area or route proposed to be covered by the agreement together with a 
notice of the date before which representations in connection therewith may be submitted, and the date 
not being less  than thirty days from the date of publication in the Official Gazette, on which, and the 
authority by which, and the time and place at which, the proposal and any representation received in 
connectio n therewith  will be considered.  
(6) Every agreement arrived at between the States shall, in so far as it relates to the grant of 
countersignature of permits, be published by each of the State Governments concerned in the Official 
Gazette and in any one or more of the  newspapers in the regional language circulating in the area or route 
covered by the agreement and the State Transport Authority of the State and the Regional Transport 
Authority con cerned shall give effect to it.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), a Regional Transport Authority of one 
region may issue a temporary permit under section 87 to be valid in another region or State with the 
concurrence, given generally or for the particular occasion, of the Regional Transport Authority of that 
other region or of the State Transport Authority of that o ther State, as the case may be.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), but subject to any rules that may be made 
under this Act by the Central Government, the Regional Trans port Authority of any one region or, as the 
case may be, the State Transport Authority, may, for the convenience of the public, 1[grant a special 
permit to any public service vehicle including any vehicle covered]  by a permit issued under section 72 
(inclu ding a reserve stage carriage) or under section 74 or under sub -section ( 9) of this section for 
carrying a passenger or passengers for hire or reward under a contract, express or implied, for the use of 
the vehicle as a whole without stopping to pick up or  set down along the line of route passengers not 
included in the contract, and in every case where such special permit is granted, the Regional Transport 
Authority shall assign to the vehicle, for display thereon, a special distinguishing mark in the form and 
manner specified by the Central Government and such special permit shall be valid in any other region or 
State without the countersignature of the Regional Transport Authority of the other region or of the State 
Transport Authority of the o ther State, as the case may be.  
(9) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) but subject to any rules that may be made 
by the Central Government under sub -section ( 14), any State Transport Authority may, for the purpose of 
promoting tourism, grant permits  in respect of tourist vehicles valid for the whole of India, or in such 
contiguous States not being less than three in number including the State in which the permit is issued as 
may be specified in such permit in accordance with the choice indicated in t he application and the 
provisions of sections 73, 74, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86  2[clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 87 and 
section 89] shall, as far as may be, app ly in relation to such permits.  
3*   *   *   *          * 
(11) The following shall be  conditions of every permit granted u nder sub -section ( 9), namely: — 
(i) every motor vehicle in respect of which such permit is granted shall conform to such 
description, requirement regarding the seating capacity, standards of comforts, amenities and other  
matters, as the Central Governm ent may specify in this behalf;  
(ii) every such motor vehicle shall be driven by a person having such qualifications and satisfying 
such conditions as may be specified  by the Central Government; and  
(iii) such other conditio ns as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(12) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), but, subject to the rules that may be made 
by the Central Government under sub -section ( 14), the appropriate authority may, for the purpose of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 27 , for “grant a special permit in relation to a vehicle covered” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 27, ibid, for “and 89” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Sub -section ( 10) omitted by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  56 
 encouraging long distance inter -State road transport, grant in a State, national permits in respect of goods 
carriages and the provisions of sections 69, 77, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85, 86 1[clause ( d) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 87 and section 89] shall,  as far as may be, apply to or in relation to  the grant of 
national permits.  
2*   *   *   *          * 
(14) ( a) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the provisions of this section.  
(b) In particular, and without prejudice to the generali ty of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) the authorisation fee payable for the issue of a permit referred to in sub -sections ( 9) and ( 12); 
(ii) the fixation of the laden weight o f the motor vehicle;  
(iii) the distinguishing particulars or marks to be carried or exhibited in or on the motor vehicle;  
(iv) the colour or colours in which the motor vehicle is to be painted;  
(v) such other matters as the appropriate authority shall consider in gran ting a national permit.  
Explanation .—In this section, — 
(a) “appropriate authority ”, in relation to a national permit, means the authority which is 
authorised under this Act to  grant a goods carriage permit;  
(b) “authorisation fee ” means the annual fee, not exceeding one thousand rupees, which may be 
charged by the appropriate authority of a State to enable a motor vehicle, covered by the permit 
referred to in sub -sections ( 9) and ( 12) to be used in other States subject to the payme nt of taxes or 
fees, if any, levied by the States concerned;  
(c) “national permit ” means a permit granted by the appropriate authority to goods carriages to 
operate throughout the territory of India or in such contiguous States, not being less than four in  
number, including the State in which the permit is issued as may be specified in such permit in 
accordance with the choic e indicated in the application.  
89. Appeals .—(1) Any person — 
(a) aggrieved  by the refusal of the State or a Regional Transport Authority to grant a permit, or by 
any condition attached  to a permit granted to him, or  
(b) aggrieved by the revocation or suspension of the permit or by any variatio n of the conditions 
thereof, or  
(c) aggrieved by the refusal to transfer the permit under sect ion 82, or  
(d) aggrieved by the refusal of the State or a Regional Transport Authority to countersign a 
permit, or by any condition attach ed to such countersignature, or  
(e) aggrieved by the refusal  of renewal of a permit, or  
(f) aggrieved by the refusal to grant permission under section 83, or  
(g) aggrieved by any other order which may be prescribed, may, within the prescribed time and in 
the prescribed manner, appeal to the State Transport Appella te Tribunal constituted under  
sub-section ( 2), who shall, after giving such person and the original authority an opportunity of being 
heard, give a decisio n thereon which shall be final.  
3[(2) The State Government shall constitute such number of Transport  Appellate Tribunals as 
it thinks fit and each such Tribunal shall consist of a judicial officer who is not below the rank of a 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 27, for “and 89” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Sub-section ( 13) omitted by s. 27, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for  s ub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  57 
 District Judge or who is qualified to be a Judge of the High Court and it shall exercise jurisdiction 
within such area as may be notified by that Government.]  
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub - section ( 2), every appeal pending 
at the commencement of this Act, shall continue to be proceeded with a nd disposed of as i f this Act had 
not been passed.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that when any order is made by the 
State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority in pursuance of a direction issued by the 
Inter -State Transport Commission under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 63A of the Motor  
Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939 ), as it stood immediately before the commencement of this Act, and any 
person feels aggrieved by such order on the ground that it  is not in consonance with such direction, he 
may appeal under sub -section ( 1) to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal against such order but not 
against the direction so issued.  
90. Revision .—The State Transport Appellate Tribunal may, on an application  made to it, call for the 
record of any case in which an order has been made by a State Transport Authority or Regional Transport 
Authority against which no appeal lies, and if it appears to the State Transport Appellate Tribunal that the 
order made by the  State Transport Authority or Regional Transport Authority is improper or illegal, the 
State Transport Appellate Tribunal may pass such order in relation to the case as it deems fit and e very 
such order shall be final:  
Provided that the State Transport App ellate Tribunal shall not entertain any application from a person 
aggrieved by an order of a State Transport Authority or Regional Transport Authority, unless the 
application is made within thirty d ays from the date of the order:  
Provided further that the State Transport Appellate Tribunal may entertain the application after the 
expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by good and 
sufficient cause from making the application in time:  
Provided also that th e State Transport Appellate Tribunal shall not pass an order under this section 
prejudicial to any person without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
91. Restricti on of hours of work of drivers .—1[(1) The hours of work of any person engaged for 
operating a transport vehicle shall be such as provided in the Motor Transport Workers Act, 1961 (27 of 
1961).]  
(2) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, grant such exemptions from the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) as it thinks fit, to meet cases of emergency or of delays by reason of 
circumstanc es which could not be foreseen.  
(3) A State Government or, if authorised in this behalf by the State Government by rules made under 
section 96, the State or a Regional Transpor t Authority may require persons employing any person whose 
work is subject to any of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) to fix beforehand the hours of work of such 
persons so as to conform to those provisions, and may provide for the r ecording of the hours so fixed.  
(4) No person shall work or shall cause or allow any other person to work outside the hours fixed or 
recorded for the work of such  persons under sub -section ( 3). 
(5) A State Government may prescribe the circumstances under which and the period du ring which 
the driver of a vehicle although not engaged in work is required to remain on or near the vehicle may be 
deemed to be an interval for rest within the meaning of sub -section ( 1).  
92. Voidance of cont racts restrictive of liability .—Any contract for the conveyance of a passenger 
in a stage carriage or contract carriage, in respect of which a permit has been issued under this Chapter, 
shall, so far as it purports to negative or restrict the liability of any person in respect of any cla im made 
against that person in respect of the death of, or bodily injury to, the passenger while being carried in, 
entering or alighting from the vehicle, or purports to impose any conditions with respect to the 
enforcement of any such liability, be void.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 29, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  58 
 93. Agent or canvasser to obtain licence .—(1) No person shall engage himself — 
(i) as an agent or a canvasser, in the sale of tickets for travel by public service vehicles or in 
otherwise soliciti ng custom for such vehicles, or  
(ii) as an agent in the busin ess of collecting, forwarding or distributing goods carried by goods 
carriages,  
unless he has obtained a licence from such authority and subject to such conditions as may be pres cribed 
by the State Government.  
(2) The conditions referred to in sub -section  (1) may include all or any of t he following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) the period for which a lic ence may be granted or renewed;  
(b) the fee payable for the i ssue or renewal of the licence;  
(c) the deposit of security — 
(i) of a sum not exceeding rupees fifty thousand in the case of an agent in the business of 
collecting, forwarding or distributing go ods carried by goods carriages;  
(ii) of a sum not exceeding rupees five thousand in the case of any other agent or canvasser, 
and the circumstances under which  the security may be forfeited;  
(d) the provisions by the agent of  insurance of goods in transit;  
(e) the authority by which and the circumstances under which the licen ce may be suspended or 
revoked;  
(f) such other conditions as may be prescribed by the State Government.  
(3) It shall be a condition of every licence that no agent or canvasser to whom the licence is granted 
shall advertise in any newspaper, book, list, classified directory or other publication unless there is 
contained in such advertisement appearing in such newspaper, book, list, classified directory or other 
publication the licence number, the date of expiry of licence and the particulars of the autho rity which 
granted the licence.  
94. Bar on ju risdiction of Civ il Courts .—No Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
question relating to the grant of a permit under this Act, and no injunction in respect of any action taken 
or to be taken by the duly constituted authorities under this Act with regard to the grant of a permit, shall 
be entertained by any Civil Court.  
95. Power of State Government to make rules as to stage carriages and contract carriag es.—(1) 
A State Government may make rules to regulate, in respect of stage carriages and contract carriages and 
the conduct of passengers in such vehicles.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the forego ing provision, such rules may — 
(a) authorise the remo val from such vehicle of any person contravening the rules by the driver or 
conductor of the vehicle, or, on the request of the driver or conductor, or any pa ssenger, by any police 
officer;  
(b) require a passenger who is reasonably suspected by the driver or conductor of contraventing 
the rules to give his name and address to a police officer or to the  driver or conductor on demand;  
(c) require a passenger to declare, if so demanded by the driver or conductor, the journey he 
intends to take or has taken in the vehicle and to pay the fare for the whole of such journey and to 
accept any ticket issued therefor;  
(d) require, on demand being  made for the purpose by the driver or conductor or other person 
authorised by the owners of the vehicle, production during the journey and surrender at the end of the 
journey by the holder there of of any ticket issued to him;  
(e) require a passenger, if s o requested by the driver or conductor, to leave the vehicle on the 
completion of the journey the fare for which he has paid;  59 
 (f) require the surrender by the holder thereof on the expiry of the period for which it is is sued of 
a ticket issued to him;  
(g) require a passenger to abstain from doing anything which is likely to obstruct or interfere with 
the working of the vehicle or to cause damage to any part of the vehicle or its equipment or to cause 
injury or dis comfort to any other passenger;  
(h) require a passenger not to smoke in any vehicle on which a notice pr ohibiting smoking is 
exhibited;  
(i) require the maintenance of complaint books in stage carriages and prescribe the conditions 
under which passengers can record any complaints in the same.  
96. Pow er of State Government to make rules fo r the purposes of this Chapter .—(1) A State 
Government may make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, rules under  this section may be made 
with respect to all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) the period of appointment and the terms of appointment of and the conduct of business by 
Regional and State Transport Authorities and the r eports to be furnished by  them;  
(ii) the conduct of business by any such authority in the absence of any member (including the 
Chairman) thereof and the nature of business which, the circumstances under which and the manner 
in which, business could be so conducted;  
(iii) the condu ct and hearing of appeals that may be preferred under this Chapter, the fees to be 
paid in respect of such appea ls and the refund of such fees;  
(iv) the forms to be used for the purposes of this Chapter, including the forms of permits;  
(v) the issue of cop ies of permits in place of permits lost, destroyed or multilated;  
(vi) the documents, plates and marks to be carried by transport vehicles, the manner in which they 
are to be carried and the languages in which any such  documents are to be expressed;  
(vii) the fees to be paid in respect of applications for permit s, duplicate permits and plates;  
(vii) the exemption of prescribed persons or prescribed classes of persons from payment of all or 
any or any portion of the f ees payable under this Chapter;  
(ix) the  custody, production and cancellation on revocation or expiration of permits, and the 
return of per mits which have been cancelled;  
(x) the conditions subject to which, and the extent to which, a permit granted in another State 
shall be valid in the State w ithout countersignature;  
(xi) the conditions subject to which, and the extent to which, a permit granted in one region shall 
be valid in another region within the State without countersignature;  
(xii) the conditions to be attached to permits for the purpose of giving effect to any agreement 
such as is referred to in clause ( iii) of sub-section ( 1) of section 67;  
(xiii) the authorities to whom, the time within which and the manne r in which appeals may be 
made;  
(xiv) the construction and fittings of, an d the equipment to be carried by, stage and contract 
carriage, whether g enerally or in specified areas;  
(xv) the determination of the number of passengers a stage or contract carriage is adapted to carry 
and t he number which may be carried;  
(xvi) the condi tions subject to which goods may be carried on stage and contract carriages partly 
or wholly in lieu of passengers;  
(xvii) the safe custody and disposal of property left i n a stage or contract carriage;  60 
 (xviii) regulating the painting or marking of transpo rt vehicles and the display of advertising 
matter thereon, and in particular prohibiting the painting or marking of transport vehicles in such 
colour or manner as to induce any person to believe that the vehicle is used for the transport of mails;  
(xix) the conveyance in stage or contract carriages of corpses or persons suffering from any 
infectious or contagious disease or goods likely to cause discomfort or injury to passengers and the 
inspection and disinfection of such carri age; if used for such purpose s; 
(xx) the provision of taxi meters on motor cabs requiring approval or standard types of taxi meters 
to be used and examining t esting and sealing taxi meters;  
(xxi) prohibiting the picking up or setting down of passengers by stage or contract carriages a t 
specified places or in specified areas or at places other than duly notified stands or halting places and 
requiring the driver of a stage carriage to stop and remain stationary for a reasonable time when so 
required by a passenger desiring to board or alight from the vehicle at a notified  halting place;  
(xxii) the requirements which shall be complied with in the construction or use of any duly 
notified stand or halting place, including the provision of adequate equipment and facilities for the 
convenien ce of all users thereof; the fees, if any, which may be charged for the use of such facilities, 
the records which shall be maintained at such stands or places, the staff to be employed thereat, and 
the duties and conduct of such staff, and generally for ma intaining such stands and places in a 
serviceable and clean condition;  
(xxiii) the regulation of motor cab ranks;  
(xxiv) requiring the owners of transport vehicles to notify any change of address or to report the 
failure of or damage to any vehicle used fo r the conveyance of passengers for hi re or reward;  
(xxv) authorising specified persons to enter at all reasonable times and inspect all premises used 
by permit holders for the purposes of their business;  
(xxvi) requiring the person in charge of a stage car riage to carry any person tendering t he legal or 
customary fare;  
(xxvii ) the conditions under which and the types of containers or vehicles in which animals or 
birds may be carried and the seasons during which animals or birds may or may not be carried;  
(xxviii) the licensing of and the regulation of the conduct of agents or canvassers who engage in 
the sale of tickets for travel by public service vehicles or otherwise solicit custom for such vehicles;  
(xxix) the licensing of agents engaged in the business of collecting for forwarding and distributing 
goods carried by goods carriages;  
(xxx) the inspection of transport vehicles and their contents and of the permits relating to them;  
(xxxi) the carriage of persons other than  the driver in goods carriages;  
(xxxii) the records to be maintained and the returns to be furnished by the ow ners of transport 
vehicles; and  
(xxxiii ) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO STATE TRANSPORT UNDERTAKINGS  
97. Definition .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “road transport service ” 
means a service of motor vehicles carrying passengers or goods or b oth by road for hire or reward.  
98. Chapter to ove rride Chapter V and other laws .—The provisions of this Chapter and the rules 
and orders made thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained 
in Chapter V or in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having ef fect by virtue of 
any such law.  61 
 99. Prep aration and publication of proposal regarding road transport service of  a State 
transport undertaking. —1[(1)] Where any State Government is of opinion that for the purpose of 
providing an efficient, adequate, economical and properly co -ordinated road transport service, it is 
necessary in the public interest that road transport services in general or any particular class of such 
service in relation to any area or route or portion thereof should be run and operated by the State transport 
undertaking, whe ther to the exclusion, complete or partial, of other persons or otherwise, the State 
Government may formulate a proposal regarding a scheme giving particulars of the nature of the services 
proposed to be rendered, the area or route proposed to be covered a nd other relevant particulars respecting 
thereto and shall publish such proposal in the Official Gazette of the State formulating such proposal and 
in not less than one newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area or route proposed to be 
cove red by such scheme and also in such other manner as the State Government formulating such 
proposal deem fit.  
2[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), when a proposal is published under that 
sub-section, then from the date of publication  of such proposal, no permit shall be granted to any person, 
except a temporary permit during the pendency of the proposal and such temporary permit shall be valid 
only for a period of one year from the date of its issue of till the date of final publicati on of the scheme 
under section 100, whichever is earlier.]  
100. Objection to the proposal .—(1) On the publication of any proposal regarding a scheme in the 
Official Gazette and in not less than one newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area  or 
route which is to be covered by such proposal any person may, within thirty days from the date of its 
publication in the Official Gazette, file objections to it before the State Government.  
(2) The State Government may, after considering the objections  and after giving an opportunity to the 
objector or his representatives and the representatives of the State transport undertaking to be heard in the 
matter, if they so desire, a pprove or modify such proposal.  
(3) The scheme relating to the proposal as app roved or modified under sub -section ( 2) shall then be 
published in the Official Gazette by the State Government making such scheme and in not less than one 
newspaper in the regional language circulating in the area or route covered by such scheme and the same 
shall thereupon become final on the date of its publication in the Official Gazette and shall be called the 
approved scheme and the area or route to which it relates shall be called the n otified area or notified 
route:  
Provided that no such scheme whi ch relates to any inter -State route shall be deemed to be an 
approved scheme unless it has the previous appr oval of the Central Government.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where a scheme is not published as an 
approved scheme under sub-section ( 3) in the Official Gazette within a period of one year from the date 
of publication of the proposal regarding the scheme in the Official Gazette under sub -section ( 1), the 
proposal shall be deemed to have lapsed.  
Explanation .—In computing the period of one year referred to in this sub -section, any period or 
periods duri ng which the publication of the approved scheme under sub -section ( 3) was held up on 
account of any stay or injunction by the order of any court shall be excluded.  
101. Operation  of additional services by a State transport under taking in certain 
circumstances .— Notwithstanding anything contained in section 87, a State transport undertaking may, 
in the public interest operate additional services for the conveyance of the passengers  on special occasions 
such as to and from fairs and religious gatherings:  
Provided that the State transport undertaking shall inform about the operation of such additional 
services to the concerned Tra nsport Authority without delay.  
  
                                                           
1. Section 99 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act of 54 of 1994, s. 30 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 30,  ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  62 
 102. Cancella tion or modification of scheme .—(1) The State Government may, at any time, if it 
considers necessary, in the public interest so to do, modify any  approved scheme after giving — 
(i) the S tate transport undertaking; and  
(ii) any other person who, in the opinion of th e State Government, is likely to be affecte d by the 
proposed modification,  
an opportunity of being heard in respec t of the proposed modification.  
(2) The State Government shall publish any modification proposed under sub -section ( 1) in the 
Official Gazette  and in one of the newspapers in the regional languages circulating in the area in which it 
is proposed to be covered by such modification, together with the date, not being less than thirty days 
from such publication in the Official Gazette, and the time and place at which any representation received 
in this behalf will be  heard by the State Government.  
103. Issue of permits t o State transport undertakings .—(1) Where, in pursuance of an approved 
scheme, any State transport undertaking applies in such manner as may be prescribed by the State 
Government in this behalf for a stage carriage permit or a goods carriage permit or a contract carriage 
permit in respect of a notified area or notified route, the State Transport Authority in any case where the 
said area or route lies in more than one region and the Regional Transport Authority in any other case 
shall issue such permit to the State transport undertaking, notwithstanding anything to the c ontrary 
contained in Chapter V.  
(2) For the purpose of giving e ffect to the approved scheme in respect of a notified area or notified 
route, the State Transport Authority or, as the case may be, the Regional Transport Autho rity concerned 
may, by order, — 
(a) refuse to entertain any application for the grant or renewal of any other permit or reject any 
such application as m ay be pending;  
(b) cancel any existing permit;  
(c) modify the terms of  any existing permit so as to — 
(i) render the permit ineff ective beyond a specified date;  
(ii) reduce the number of vehicles author ised t o be used under the permit;  
(iii) curtail the area or route covered by the permit in so far as such permit relates to the 
notified area or notified route.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no appeal shall lie against any action taken, or 
order passed, by the State Transport Authority or any Regional Transport Authority under sub -section ( 1) 
or sub -section ( 2). 
104. Restriction on grant of permits in respect of a notified area or notified route .—Where a 
schem e has been publ ished under sub -section ( 3) of section 100 in respect of any notified area or notified 
route, the State Transport Authority or the Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be, shall not 
grant any permit except in accordance wit h the provisions of the scheme:  
Provided that where no application for a permit has been made by the State transport undertaking in 
respect of any notified area or notified route in pursuance of an approved scheme, the State Transport 
Authority or the Regional Transport Authority , as the case may be, may grant temporary permits to any 
person in respect of such notified area or notified route subject to the condition that such permit shall 
cease to be effective on the issue of a permit to the State transport undertaking in respect of that area or 
route.  
105. Principles and method of determining co mpensation and payment thereof .—(1) Where, in 
exercise of the powers conferred by clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 103, any existing 
permit is cancelled or the terms thereof are modified, there shall be paid by the State transport 
undertaking to the holder of the permit, compensation, the amount of which shall be determined in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5), as the case may be.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no compensation shall be payable on 
account of the cancellation of any existing permit or any modification of the terms thereof, when a permit 63 
 for an alternative route or area in lieu thereof has been  offered by the State Transport Authority or the 
Regional Transport Authority, as the case may be and accept ed by the holder of the permit.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that no compensation shall be payable on account 
of the refusal  to renew a permit under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 103.  
 (4) Where, in exercise of the powers conferred by clause ( b) or sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 103, any existing permit is cancelled or the terms thereof are 
modified so as to prevent the holder of the permit from using any vehicle authorised to be used thereunder 
for the full period from which the permit, would otherwise have been effective, the compensation payable  
to the holder of the p ermit for each vehicle affected by such cancellation or modification shall be 
computed as follows: — 
(a) for every complete month or part of a month exceeding 
fifteen days of the unexpired period of  the permit                                               
Two hundred rupees;                                                                                                          
(b) for part of a month not exceeding fifteen days of the 
unexpired period of  the permit                                              
One hundred rupees:  
Provided that the amount of compensation shall, in no case, be  less than four hundred rupees.  
(5) Where, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 103, the terms of an existing permit are modified so as to curtail the area or route of any vehicle 
authorised to be used thereunder, the compensation payable to the holder of the permit on account of such 
curtailment shall be an amount computed in accordance with t he followin g formula, namely: — 
  Y     A 
R 
 
Explanation .—In this formula, — 
(i) “Y” means the length or area by which the route or area covered by the permit is curtailed;  
(ii) “A” means the amount computed in a ccordance with sub -section ( 4); 
(iii) “R” means the total length of the route or the to tal area covered by the permit.  
(6) The amount of compensation payable under this section shall be paid by the State transport 
undertaking to the person or persons entitled thereto within one month from the dat e on which the 
cancellation or modification o f the permit becomes effective:  
Provided that where the State transport undertaking fails to make the payment within the said period 
of one month, it shall pay interest at the rate of seven per cent. per annum f rom the date on which it falls 
due. 
106. Disposa l of article found in vehicles .—Where any article found in any transport vehicle 
operated by the State transport undertaking is not claimed by its owner within the prescribed period, the 
State transport undertaking may sell the article in the prescribed manner and the sale proceeds there of, 
after deducting the costs incidental to sale, shall be paid to the owner on demand.  
107. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may make rules for 
the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of thi s Chapter.  
(2) In par ticular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form in which any proposal regarding a scheme may  be published under section 99;  
(b) the manner in whic h objections may be filed under s ub-section ( 1) of section 100;  
(c) the manner in which objections may be considered and disposed of under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 100;  
(d) the form in which any approved scheme may be published under sub -section ( 3) of  
section 100;  64 
 (e) the manner in which application under sub -section (1) of section 103 may be made;  
(f) the period within which the owner may claim any article found left in any transport vehicle 
under section 106 and the manner of  sale of such article;  
(g) the manner of servic e of orders under this Chapter;  
(h) any other matter which ha s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
108. Certain powers of State Government exercis able by the Central Government .—The powers 
conferred on the State Government under this Chapter shall, in relation to a corporation or company 
owned or controlled by the Central Government or by the Central Government and one or more State 
Governments, be exercisable only by the Central Government in relation to an inter -State route or area.  
CHAPTER VII  
CONSTRUCTION, EQUIPMENT AN D MAINTENANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES  
109. General provision regarding constructi on and maintenance of vehicles .—(1) Every motor 
vehicle shall be so constructed and so maintained as to be at all times under the effective con trol of the 
person dr iving the vehicle.  
(2) Every motor vehicle shall be so constructed as to have right hand steering control unless it is 
equipped with a mechanical or electrical signalling  device of a prescribed nature.  
1[(3) If the Central Government is of the opinion that it is neces sary or expedient so to do 
in the public interest, it may by order published in the Official Gazette, notify that any article or 
process used by a manufacturer shall conform to such standard as may be specified in that or der.]  
110. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may make rules 
regulating the construction, equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles and trailers with respect to all 
or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the width, height, length and overhang of veh icles and of the loads carried;  
2[(b) the size,  nature, maximum retail price and condition of tyres, including embossing thereon 
of date and year of manufacture and the maximum load carrying capacity;]  
(c) brakes a nd steering gear;  
(d) the use of safety glasses including prohibition of th e use of tinted safety glasses;  
(e) signalling appliances, lamps a nd reflectors;  
(f) speed governors;  
(g) the emission of smoke, visible vapo ur, sparks, ashes, grit or oil;  
(h) the reduction of noise em itted by or caused by vehicles;  
(i) the embossment of chassis number and engine numb er and the date of manufacture;  
(j) safety belts, handle bars of motor cycles, auto -dippers and other equipments essential for 
safety of drivers, pass engers and other road users;  
(k) standards of the components used in the veh icle as inbuilt safety devices;  
(l) provision for transportation of goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life;  
(m) standards for emission of air pollutants;  
3[(n) insta llation of catalytic convertors in the class of vehicles to be prescribed;  
(o) the placement of audio -visual or radio or tape recorder type of device in public vehicles;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 31 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for claus e (b) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 32, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  65 
 (p) warranty after sal e of vehicle and norms therefor: ] 
Provided that any rules relatin g to the matters dealing with the protection of environment, so far as 
may be, shall be made after consultation with the Ministry of the Government of India dealing with 
environment.  
(2) Rules may be made under sub -section ( 1) governing the matters mention ed therein, including the 
manner of ensuring the compliance with such matters and the maintenance of motor vehicles in respect of 
such matters, either generally in respect of motor vehicles or trailers or in respect of motor vehicles or 
trailers of a parti cular class or in particular circumstances.  
(3) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in this section, — 
(a) the Central Government may exempt any class of motor vehicles from the provisions of this 
Chapter;  
(b) a State Government may exempt any motor vehicle or any class or description of motor 
vehicles from the rules made under sub -section ( 1) subject to such conditions as may be prescr ibed by 
the Central Government.  
111. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) A State Government may make rules 
regulating the construction, equipment and maintenance of motor vehicles and trailers with respect to all 
matters other than the matters specified in sub-section ( 1) of section 110.  
(2) Without prejudice to the general ity of the foregoing power, rules may be made under this section 
governing all or any of the following matters either generally in respect of motor vehicles or trailers or in 
respect of motor vehicles or trailers of a particular class or description or in particular circumstances, 
namely: — 
(a) seating arrangements in public service vehicles and the protection of passenger s against the 
weather;  
(b) prohibiting or restricting the use of audible signals at cert ain times or in certain places;  
(c) prohibiting th e carrying of appliances likel y to cause annoyance or danger;  
(d) the periodical testing and inspection of vehicles by  prescribed authorities  1[and fees to be 
charged for such test ]; 
(e) the  particulars other than registration marks to be exhibited by vehicles and the manner in  
which they shall be exhibited;  
(f) the use of tr ailers with motor vehicles; and  
2*   *   *   *       * 
CHAPTER VIII  
CONTROL OF TRAFFIC  
112. Limits of speed .—(1) No person shall drive a motor vehicle or cause or allow a motor vehicle to 
be driven in any public place at a speed exceeding the maximum speed or below the minimum speed 
fixed for the vehicle under this Act or by or under any other l aw for the time being in force:  
Provided that such maximum speed shall in no case exceed the maximum fixed for any motor vehicle 
or class or description of motor vehicles by the Central Government by notifi cation in the Official 
Gazette.  
(2) The State Government or any authority a uthorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if 
satisfied that it is necessary to restrict the speed of motor vehicles in the interest of public safety or 
convenience or because of the nature of any road or bridge, by notification in the Official Gazette, and by 
causing appropriate traffic signs to be placed or erected under section 116 at suitable places, fix such 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 33 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Clause ( g) omitted by s. 33, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  66 
 maximum speed limits or minimum speed limits as it thinks fit for motor vehicles or any specified class 
or description of motor vehicle s or for motor vehicles to which a trailer is attached, either generally or in a 
particular area or on a part icular road or roads:  
Provided that no such notification is necessary if any restriction under this section is to remain in 
force for not more than  one month.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall apply to any vehicle registered under section 60 while it is being used 
in the execution of military manoeuvres within the area and during the period specified in the notification 
under sub -section ( 1) of secti on 2 of the Manoeuvres, Field Firing and Artillery P ractice Act, 1938  
(5 of 1938).  
113. Limits of  weight and limitations on use .—(1) The State Government may prescribe the 
conditions for the issue of permits for 1[transport vehicles] by the State or Regional Transport Authorities 
and may prohibit or restrict the use of such  vehicles in any area or route.  
(2) Except as may be otherwise prescribed, no person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any 
public place any motor vehicle which is n ot fitted with pneumatic tyres.  
(3) No person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any public place  any motor vehicle or 
trailer — 
(a) the unladen weight of which exceeds the unladen weight specified in the certificate of 
registration of the vehicle, or  
(b) the laden weight of which exceeds the gross vehicle weight specified in t he certificate of 
registration.  
(4) Where the driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle or trailer driven in contravention of  
sub-section ( 2) or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) is not the owner, a Court may presume that the offence was 
committed with the knowledge of or under the orders of the owner o f the motor vehicle or trailer.  
114. Power to have vehicle weighed .—(1) 2[Any officer of the Motor Vehicles Department 
authorized  in this behalf by the State Government shall, if he has reason to believe that a goods vehicle or 
trailor is being used in contravention of section 113] require the driver to convey the vehicle to a 
weighing device, if any, within a distance of ten kilome tres from any point on the forward route or within 
a distance of twenty kilometres from the destination of the vehicle for weighment; and if on such 
weighment the vehicle is found to contravene in any respect the provisions of section 113 regarding 
weight,  he may, by order in writing, direct the driver to off -load the excess weight at his own risk and not 
to remove the vehicle or trailer from that place until the laden weight has been reduced or the vehicle or 
trailer has otherwise been dealt with so that i t complies with section 113 and on receipt of such notice, the 
driver sha ll comply with such directions.  
(2) Where the person authorised under sub -section ( 1) makes the said order in writing, he shall also 
endorse the relevant details of the overloading on  the goods carriage permit and also intimate the fact of 
such endorsement to the auth ority which issued that permit.  
115. Power t o restrict the use of vehicles .—The State Government or any authority authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government, if satisfied that it is necessary in the interest of public safety or 
convenience, or because of the nature of any road or bridge, may by notification in the Official Gazette, 
prohibit or restrict, subject to such exceptions and conditions as may be specified  in notification, the 
driving of motor vehicles or of any specified class or description of motor vehicles or the use of trailers 
either generally in a specified area or on a specified road and when any such prohibition or restriction is 
imposed, shall cau se appropriate traffic signs to be placed or erected under section 116 at suitable places:  
Provided that where any prohibition or restriction under this section is to remain in force for not more 
than one month, notification thereof in the Official Gazette  shall not be necessary, but such local publicity 
as the circumstances may permit, shall be given of s uch prohibition or restriction.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 34, for “heavy goods vehicles or heavy passenger motor vehicles” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for certain words  and figures  (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  67 
 116. Power to erect traffic signs .—(1) (a) The State Government or any authority authorised in this 
behalf by the State Go vernment may cause or permit traffic signs to be placed or erected in any public 
place for the purpose of bringing to public notice any speed limits fixed under sub -section ( 2) of  
section 112 or any prohibitions or restrictions imposed under section 115 o r generally for the purpose of 
regulating motor vehicle traffic.  
(b) A State Government or any authority authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette or by the erection at suitable places of the appropriate  traffic sign 
referred to in Part A of the Schedule, designate certain roads as main roads for the purposes of the driving 
regulations made by the Central Government.  
(2) Traffic signs placed or erected under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose for which provision is made 
in the Schedule shall be of the size, colour and type and shall have the meanings set forth in the Schedule, 
but the State Government or any authority empowered in this behalf by the State Government may make 
or authorise the addition to any sign set forth in the said Schedule, of transcriptions of the words, letters or 
figures thereon in such script as the State Government may think fit, provided that the transcriptions shall 
be of similar size and colour to th e words, letters or fig ures set forth in the Schedule.  
(3) Except as provided by sub -section ( 1), no traffic sign shall, after the commencement of this Act, 
be placed or erected on or near any road; but all traffic signs placed or erected prior to the comm encement 
of this Act by any competent authority shall for the purpose of this Act be deemed to be traffic signs 
placed or erected under the  provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(4) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, empower any poli ce officer not 
below the rank of a Superintendent of Police to remove or cause to be removed any sign or advertisement 
which is so placed in his opinion as to obscure any traffic sign from view or any sign or advertisement 
which is in his opinion so simila r in appearance to a traffic sign as to be misleading or which in his 
opinion is likely to distract the attention or concentration of the driver.  
(5) No person shall wilfully remove, alter, deface, or in any way tamper with, any traffic signs placed  
or ere cted under this section.  
(6) If any person accidentally causes such damage to a traffic sign as renders it useless for the purpose 
for which it is placed or erected under this section, he shall report the circumstances of the occurrence to a 
police officer  or at a police station as soon as possible, and in any case within twent y-four hours of the 
occurrence.  
(7) For the purpose of bringing the signs set forth in 1[the First Schedule ] in conformity with any 
International Convention relating to motor traffic to which the Central Government is for the time being a 
party, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make any addition or 
alteration to any such sign and on the iss ue of any such notification,  1[the First Schedule ] shall be deemed  
to be amended accordingly.  
117. Parki ng places and halting stations .—The State Government or any authority authorised in 
this behalf by the State Government may, in consultation with the local authority having jurisdiction in 
the area conc erned, determine places at which motor vehicles may stand either indefinitely or for a 
specified period of time, and may determine the places at which public service vehicles may stop for a 
longer time than is necessary for the taking up and setting down o f passengers.  
118. Driving regulations .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make regulations for  the driving of motor vehicles.  
119. Duty to obey traffic signs .—(1) Every driver of a motor vehicle shall drive the vehicle in 
conformity with any indication given by mandatory traffic sign and in conformity with the driving 
regulations made by the Central Government, and shall comply with all directions given to him by any 
police officer for the time being engaged in the regulation of traffic in any public place.  
(2) In this section “mandatory traffic sign ” means a traffic sign included in Part A of the Schedule, or 
any traffic sign of similar form (that is to say, consi sting of or including a circular disc diplaying a device, 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 36, for “the Schedule” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  68 
 word or figure and having a red ground o r border) placed or erected for the purpose of regulating motor 
vehicle traffic under sub-section ( 1) of section 116.  
120. V ehicles with left hand control .—No person shall drive or cause or allow to be driven in any 
public place any motor vehicle with a left -hand steering control unless it is equipped with a mechanical or 
electrical signalling device of a prescrib ed nature and in working order.  
121. Signals and  signalling devices .—The driver of a motor vehicle shall make such signals and on 
such occasions as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government:  
Provided that the signal of an intention to turn to  the right or left or to stop — 
(a) in the case of a motor ve hicle with a right -hand steering control, may be given by a 
mechanical or electrical device of a prescribed nat ure affixed to the vehicle; and  
(b) in the case of a motor vehicle with a left hand steering control, shall be given by a mechanical 
or electrica l device of a prescribed  nature affixed to the vehicle:  
Provided further that the State Government may, having regard to the width and condition of the 
roads in any area or route, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt subject to such conditions a s 
may be specified therein any motor vehicle or class or description of motor vehicles from the operation of 
this section for the purpose of plying in that area or route.  
122. Leaving  vehicle in dangerous position .—No person in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or 
allow the vehicle or any trailer to be abandoned or to remain at rest on any public place in such a position 
or in such a condition or in such circumstances as to cause or likely to cause danger, obstruction or undue 
inconvenience to other u sers of the pub lic place or to the passengers.  
123. Riding on running boar d, etc .—(1) No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall 
carry any person or permit any person to be carried on the running board or otherwise than within the 
body of the vehicle.  
(2) No person shall travel on the running board or on the top or on  the bonnet of a motor vehicle.  
124. Prohibition against tra velling without pass or ticket .—No person shall enter or remain in any 
stage carriage for the purposes of travelling therein unless he has with him a proper pass or ticket:  
Provided that where arrangements for the supply of tickets are made in the stage carriage by which a 
person has to travel, a person may enter such stage carriage but as soon as may be after his entry therein, 
be shall make the payment of his fare to the conductor or the driver who performs the functions of a 
conductor and obtain from such conductor or driver, as the case may be, a ticket for his journey.  
Explanation .—In this section, — 
(a) “pass” means a duty, privilege or courtesy pass entitling the person to whom it is given to 
travel in a stage carriage gratuitously and includes a pass issued on payment for travel in a stage 
carriage for th e period specified therein;  
(b) “ticket ” includes a single tic ket, a retu rn ticket or a season ticket.  
125. Obstruction of driver .—No person driving a motor vehicle shall allow any person to stand or 
sit or to place anything in such a manner or position as to hamper the driver in his control of the vehicle.  
126. Stationary vehicles .—No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall cause or allow the 
vehicle to remain stationary in any public place, unless there is in the driver ’s seat a person duly licensed 
to drive the vehicle or unless the mechanism has b een stopped and a brake or brakes applied or such other 
measures taken as to ensure that the vehicle cannot accidentally be put in motio n in the absence of the 
driver.  
127. Removal of motor vehicles abandoned or lef t unattended on a public place .—1[(1) Whe re 
any motor vehicle is abandoned, or left unattended, on a publ ic place for ten hours or more or is parked in 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 37, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  69 
 a place where parking is legally prohibited, its removal by a towing service or its immobilisations by any 
means including wheel clamping may be authorised by a police officer in uniform having jurisdiction.]  
(2) Where an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burnt or partially dismantled vehicle is creating a 
traffic hazard, because of its position in relation to the 1[public place] , or its physical appearance is 
causing the impediment to the traffic, its immediate removal from the  1[public place]  by a towing service 
may be authorised by a poli ce officer having jurisdiction.  
(3) Where a vehicle is authorised to be removed under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) by a police 
officer, the owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing costs, besides any other penalty.  
128. Safety measures for drivers and pillion riders .—(1) No driver of a two -wheeled motor cycle 
shall carry more than one person in addition to himself on the motor cycle and no such person shall be 
carried otherwise than sitting on a proper seat securely fixed to the motor cycle behind the driver ’s seat 
with appropriate safety measures.  
(2) In addition to the safety measures mentioned in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, 
prescribe other safety measures for the drivers of two -wheeled motor cycles and pillion riders thereon.  
129. Wearing of protective headgear .—Every person driving or riding (otherwise  than in a side car, 
on a motor cycle of any class or description) shall, while in a public place, wear 2[protective headgear 
conforming to the standards of Bureau of Indian Standards] : 
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a pers on who is a Sikh, if he is, while 
driving or riding on the motor cycle, in a public place, wearing a turban:  
Provided further that the State Government may, by such rules, provide for such exceptions as it may 
think fit.  
Explanation .—”Protective headgear ” means a helmet which, — 
(a) by virtue of its shape, material and construction, could reasonably be expected to afford to the 
person driving or riding on a motor cycle a degree of protection from injury i n the event of an 
accident; and  
(b) is securely faste ned to the head of the wearer by means of straps or other faste nings provided 
on the headgear.  
130. Duty to produce licence a nd certificate of registration .—(1) The driver of a motor vehicle in 
any public place shall, on demand by any police officer in uni form, produce his licence for examination:  
Provided that the driver may, if his licence has been submitted to, or has been seized by, any officer 
or authority under this or any other Act, produce in lieu of the licence a receipt or other acknowledgment 
issued by such officer or authority in respect thereof and thereafter produce the licence within such 
period, in such manner as the Central Government may prescribe to the po lice officer making the demand.  
3[(2) The conductor, if any, of a motor vehicle on  any public place shall on demand by any officer of 
the Motor Vehicles Department authorised in this behalf, produce the licence for examination.]  
4[(3) The owner of a motor vehicle (other than a vehicle registered under section 60), or in his 
absence the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle, shall, on demand by a registering authority or 
any other officer of the Motor Vehicles Department duly authorised in this behalf, produce the certificate 
of insurance of the vehicle and, where the vehicle is  a transport vehicle, also the certificate of fitness 
referred to in section 56 and the permit; and if any or all of the certificates or the permit are not in his 
possession, he shall, within fifteen days from the date of demand, submit photo copies of the  same, duly 
attested in person or send the same by registered post to the officer wh o demanded it.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 37, for “highway” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
4. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  70 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of  this sub -section, "certificate  of insurance" means the certificate 
issued under sub -section ( 3) of section 147.]  
 (4) If the  licence referred to in sub -section ( 2) or the certificates or permit referred to in  
sub-section ( 3), as the case may be, are not at the time in the possession of the person to whom demand is 
made, it shall be a sufficient compliance with this section if such person produces the licence or 
certificates or permit within such period in such manner as the Central Government may prescribe, to the 
police officer or authority making the demand:  
Provided that, except to such extent and with such modifications as may be prescribed, the provisions 
of this sub -section shall not apply to any person required to produce the certificate of registration or the 
certificate of fitness of a transport vehicle.  
131. Duty of the driver to take certain precautions at un guarded railway level crossing .—Every 
driver of a motor vehicle at the approach of any unguarded railway level crossing shall cause the vehicle 
to stop and the driver of the vehicle shall cause the conductor or cleaner or attendant or any other person 
in the vehic le to walk up to the level crossing and ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from either 
side and then pilot the motor vehicle across such level crossing, and where no conductor or cleaner or 
attendant or any other person is available in the vehi cle, the driver of the vehicle shall get down from the 
vehicle himself to ensure that no train or trolley is approaching from either side before the railway track is 
crossed.  
132. Duty of d river to stop in certain cases .—(1) The driver of a motor vehicle shall cause the 
vehicle to stop and remain stationary so long a s 1[may for such reasonable time as may be necessary, but 
not exceeding twenty -four hours] — 
2[(a) when required to do so by any police officer not below the rank of a Sub -Inspector 
in  uniform,  in the event of the vehicle being involved in the occurrence of an accident to a  person, 
animal or vehicle or of damage to property, or]  
(b) when required to do so by any person in charge of an animal if such person apprehends that 
the animal is, or bein g alarmed by the vehicl e will become, unmanageable, or  
3*   *   *   *         * 
and he shall give his name and address and the name and address of the owner of the vehicle to any 
person affected by any such accident or damage who demands it provided such person also furnishes his 
name and address.  
(2) The driver of a motor vehicle shall,  on demand by a person giving his own name and address and 
alleging that the driver has committed an offence punishable under section 184 give his n ame and address 
to that person.  
(3) In this section the expression “animal ” means any horse, cattle, elephan t, camel, ass, mule, sheep 
or goat.  
133. Duty of owner of mot or vehicle to give information .—The owner of a motor vehicle, the 
driver or conductor of which is accused of any offence under this Act shall, on the demand of any police 
officer authorised in th is behalf by the State Government, give all information regarding the name and 
address of, and the licence held by, the driver or conductor which is in his possession or could by 
reasonable d iligence be ascertained by him.  
134. Duty of driver in case of a ccident and injury to a person .—When any person is injured or any 
property of a third party is damaged, as a result of an accident in which a motor vehicle is involved, the 
driver of the vehicle or other person i n charge of the vehicle shall — 
(a) unless it  is not practicable to do so on account of mob fury or any other reason beyond his 
control, take all reasonable steps to secure medical at tention for the injured person, 4[by conveying 
him to the nearest medical practitioner or hospital, and it shall be th e duty of every registered medical 
practitioner or the doctor on the duty in the hospital immediately to attend to the injured person and 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 40, for “may reasonably be necessary” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Clause ( c) omitted by s. 40, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
4. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for “and if necessary, convey him to the nearest hospital” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  71 
 render medical aid or treatment without waiting for any procedural formalities] , unless the injured 
person or his guar dian, in case he  is a minor, desires otherwise;  
(b) give on demand by a police officer any information required by him, or, if no police officer is 
present, report the circumstances of the occurrence, including the circumstances, if any, for not taking 
reasonable steps to secure medical attention as required under clause ( a), at the nearest police station 
as soon as possible, and in any case within twent y-four hours of the occurrence.  
1[(c) give the following information in writing to the insurer, who ha s issued the certificates of 
insurance, about the occu rrence of the accident, namely: — 
(i) insurance policy number and period of its validity;  
(ii) date, time and place of accident;  
(iii) particulars of the persons injured or killed in the accident;  
(iv) name of the driver and the particulars of his driving licence.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section the expression “driver ” includes the owner of the 
vehicle.]  
135. Schemes to be framed for the investigation of accident ca ses and wayside amenities, etc .—
(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make one o r more schemes to 
provide for — 
(a) an in depth study on causes and analy sis of motor vehicle accidents;  
(b) wayside amenities on highways;  
(c) traffic aid post s on highways; and  
(d) truck parkin g complexes along highways.  
(2) Every scheme made under this section by any State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made , before the State Legislature.  
136. Inspection o f vehicle involved in accident .—When any accident occurs in which a motor 
vehicle is involved, any person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, on production if 
so required of his authority, inspect the vehicle and for that purpose may enter at any reasonable time any 
premises where the vehicle may be, and may remo ve the vehicle for examination:  
Provided that the place to which the vehicle is so removed shall be intimated to the owner of the 
vehicle and the vehicle shall be retu rned 2[after  completion of the formalitie s to the owner, driver or the 
person in charge of the vehicle within twenty -four hours].  
137. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—The Central Government may make rules to 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  occasions on which signals shall be made by drivers of motor vehicles and such signals 
under section 12 1; 
(b) the manner in which the licences and certificates may be produced to the po lice officer under 
section 130.  
138. Power of State Government to make  rules .—(1) The State Government may make rules for 
the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter other than the ma tters specified in 
section 137.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may provide for— 
(a) the removal and the safe custody of vehicles including their loads which have broken down or 
which have been left standing o r have been abandoned on roads;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 41 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for “without unnecessary delay” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  72 
 (b) the installati on and use of weighing devices;  
(c) the maintenance and management of way side amenities complexes;  
(d) the exemption from all or any of the provisions of this Chapter of fire brigade vehicles, 
ambulances and other special classes or descriptions of vehicle, subject to such c onditions as may be 
prescribed;  
(e) the maintenance an d management of parking places and stands and the fees, if any, whic h may 
be charged for their use;  
(f) prohibiting the driving downhill of a motor vehicle with the gear disengaged either gen erally 
or in a specified place;  
(g) prohibiting the taking hold o f or mountin g of a motor vehicle in motion;  
(h) prohibiting the use of foot -paths or pavements by motor vehicles;  
(i) generally, the prevention of danger, injury or annoyance to the public or any person, or of 
danger or injury to property or  of abstruction  to traffic; and  
(j) any other matter which is to be, or m ay be, prescribed.  
CHAPTER IX  
MOTOR VEHICLES TEMPOR ARILY LEAVING OR VISITING INDIA  
139. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for all or any of th e following purposes, namely: — 
(a) the grant and authentication of travelling passes, certificates or authorisations to persons 
temporarily taking motor vehicles out of India to any place outside India or to persons temporarily 
proceeding out of India to any place outside India and desiring to drive a motor vehicle d uring their 
absence from India;  
(b) prescribing the conditions subject to which motor vehicles brought temporarily into India 
from outside India by person s intending to make a temporary stay in India may be p ossessed and used 
in India; and  
(c) prescribing the conditions subject to which persons entering India from any place outside 
India for a temporary stay in India may  drive motor vehicles in India.  
(2) For the purpose of facilitating and regulating the services of motor vehicles operating between 
India and any other country under any reciprocal arrangement and carrying passengers or goods or both 
by road for hire or reward, the Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, make 
rules with respect to all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conditions subject to which motor vehicles carrying on such services may be brought into 
India from outside India a nd possessed and used  in India;  
(b) the conditions subject to which motor vehicles may be taken from any place in In dia to any 
place outside India;  
(c) the conditions subject to which persons employed as drivers and conductors of such motor 
vehicles may enter or leave India;  
(d) the grant and authentication of travelling passes, certificates or authorisations to persons 
employed as drivers and con ductors of such motor vehicles;  
(e) the particulars (other than registration marks) to be exhibited by such motor vehicles and the 
manner in which such p articulars are to be exhibited;  
(f) the use of tra ilers with such motor vehicles;  
(g) the exemption of such motor vehicles and their drivers and conductors from all or any of the 
provisions of this Act [other than those referred to in s ub-section ( 4)] or the rules made thereunder;  73 
 (h) the identification of the drivers and con ductors of such motor vehicles;  
(i) the replacement of the travelling passes, certificates or authorisations, permits, licences or any 
other prescribed documents los t or defaced, on payment of su ch fee as may be prescribed;  
(j) the exemption from the provisions of such laws as relate to customs, police or health with a 
view to facilitate such road transport service s; 
(k) any other matter which i s to be, or may be, pre scribed.  
(3) No rule made under this section shall operate to confer on any person any immunity in any State 
from the payment of any tax levied in that State on  motor vehicles or their users.  
(4) Nothing in this Act or in any rule made thereunder by a State Government relating to: — 
(a) the registration and ident ification of motor vehicles, or  
(b) the requirements as to construction, maintenance and equipment of motor vehicles, or  
(c) the licensing and the qualifications of drivers and conductors o f motor vehicles,  
shall apply —  
(i) to any motor vehicle to which or to any driver of a motor vehicle to whom any rules made 
under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) or under sub -section ( 2) apply; or  
(ii) to any conductor of a motor vehicle to whom any rules made under sub -section ( 2) apply.  
CHAPTER X  
LIABILITY WITHOUT FAULT IN CERTAIN  CASES  
140. Liability to pay compensation in certain case s on the principle of no fault .—(1) Where death 
or permanent disablem ent of any person has resulted from an accident arising out of the use of a motor 
vehicle or motor vehicles, the owner of the vehicle shall, or, as the case may be, the owners of the 
vehicles shall, jointly and severally, be liable to pay compensation in r espect of such death or disablement 
in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) The amount of compensation which  shall be payable under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the death 
of any  person shall be a fixed sum of 1[fifty thousand rupees ] and the amount of compensation payable 
under that sub -section in respect of the permanent disablement of any person shall be a fixed  sum of 
2[twenty -five thousand rupees] . 
(3) In any claim for compensation under sub -section ( 1), the claimant shall not be requi red to plead 
and establish that the death or permanent disablement in respect of which the claim has been made was 
due to any wrongful act, neglect or default of the owner or owners of the vehicle or vehicles co ncerned or 
of any other person.  
(4) A claim f or compensation under sub -section ( 1) shall not be defeated by reason of any wrongful 
act, neglect or default of the person in respect of whose death or permanent disablement the claim has 
been made nor shall the quantum of compensation recoverable in resp ect of such death or permanent 
disablement be reduced on the basis of the share of such person in the responsibility for such dea th or 
permanent disablement.  
3[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) regarding death or bodily injury to any 
person, for which the owner of the vehicle is liable to give compensation for relief, he is also liable to pay 
compensation under any other law for the time being in force:  
Provided that the amount of such compensation to be given under any other law s hall be reduced from 
the amount of compensation payable under this section or under section 163A.]  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 43, for “twenty -five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 43, ibid., for “twelve thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Ins. by s. 43, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  74 
 141. Provisions as to other right to claim compensation for death or permanent disablement .—
(1) The right to claim compensation under section 140 in respect of death or permanent disablement of 
any person shall be in addition to 1[any other right, except the right to claim under the scheme referred to 
in section 163A (such other right hereafter] in  this section referred to as the right on the principle of fault) 
to claim compensation in respect thereof under any other provision of this Act or of any other l aw for the 
time being in force.   
(2) A claim for compensation under section 140 in respect of death or permanent disablement of any 
person shall be disposed of as expeditiously as possible and where compensation is claimed in respect of 
such death or permanent disablement under section 140 and also in pursuance of any right on the 
principle of faul t, the claim for compensation under section 140 shall be disposed of a s aforesaid in the 
first place.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where in respect of the death or permanent 
disablement of any person, the person liable to pay compensation under section 140 is also liable to pay 
compensation in accordance with the right on the principle of fault, the person so liable shall pay the  
first-mentioned compensation and — 
(a) if the amount of the first -mentioned compensation is less th an the amount of the  
second -mentioned compensation, he shall be liable to pay (in addition to the first -mentioned 
compensation) only so much of the second -mentioned compensation as is equal to the amount by 
which it exceeds th e first -mentioned compensatio n; 
(b) if the amount of the first -mentioned compensation is equal to or more than the amount of the 
second -mentioned compensation, he shall not be liable to pay the second -mentioned compensation.  
142. Permanent disablement .—For the purposes of this Chapter, permanent disablement of a person 
shall be deemed to have resulted from an accident of the nature referred to in sub -section ( 1) of  
section 140 if such person has suffered by reason of the accident, any  injury or injuries involving — 
(a) permanent  privation of the sight of either eye or the hearing of either ear, or priva tion of any 
member or joint; or  
(b) destruction or permanent impairing of the po wers of any member or joint; or  
(c) permanent dis figuration of the head or face.  
143. Applicability of Chapter to certain claims under Act 8 o f 1923 .—The provisions of this 
Chapter shall also apply in relation to any claim for compensation in respect of death or permanent 
disablement of any person under the Workmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923 resulting from  an accident of 
the nature referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 140 and for this purpose, the said provisions shall, with 
necessary modifications, be d eemed to form part of that Act.  
144. Overriding effect .—The provisions of this Chapter shall have ef fect notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other provision of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER XI  
INSURANCE OF MOTOR VEHICLES AGAINST THIRD PARTY RISKS  
145. Def initions .—In this Chapter, — 
(a) “authorised insurer ” means an insurer for the time being carrying on general insurance 
busines s in India under the General Insurance Business (National isation) Act, 1972, (57 of 1972 ) and 
any Government insurance fund authorised to do general ins urance business under that Act ; 
(b) “certificate of insurance ” means a certificate issued by an authorised insurer in pursuance of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 147 and includes a cover note complying with such requirements as may be 
prescribed, and where more than one certificate has bee n issued in connection with a policy, or where 
a copy of a certificate has been issued, all those certificates or  that copy, as the case may be;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 44, for “any other right (hereafter” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  75 
 (c) “liability ”, wherever used in relation to the death of or bodily injury to any person, includes 
liability i n res pect thereof under section 140;  
(d) “policy of insurance ” includes “certificate of insurance ”; 
(e) “property ” includes goods carried in the motor vehicle, roads, bridges, culverts, causeways, 
trees, posts and mile - stones;  
(f) “reciprocating country ” means any such country as may on the basis of reciprocity be notified 
by the Central Government in the Official Gazette to be a reciprocating country fo r the purposes of 
this Chapter;  
(g) “third party ” includes the Government.  
146. Necessity for insu rance  against third party risk .—(1) No person shall use, except as a 
passenger, or cause or allow any other person to use, a motor vehicle in a public place, unless there is in 
force in relation to the use of the vehicle by that person or that other person, as the case may be, a policy 
of insurance complying with th e requirements of this Chapter:  
1[Provided  that in the case of a vehicle carrying, or meant to carry, dangerous or hazardous goods, 
there shall also be a policy of insurance under the Public Liability  Insurance Act, 1991 (6 of 1991).]  
Explanation .—A person driving a motor vehicle merely as a paid employee, while there is in force in 
relation to the use of the vehicle no such policy as is required by this sub -section, shall not be deemed to 
act in contr avention of the sub -section unless he knows or has reason to believe that there is no such  
policy in force.  
(2) Sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to any vehicle owned by the Central Government or a State 
Government and used for Government purposes unconnecte d with any commercial enterprise.  
(3) The appropriate Government may, by order, exempt from the operation of sub -section ( 1) any 
vehicle owned by any of the f ollowing authorities, namely: — 
(a) the Central Government or a State Government, if the vehicle is  used for Government 
purposes connected with any commercial enterprise;  
 (b) any local aut hority;  
(c) any State transport undertaking:  
Provided that no such order shall be made in relation to any such authority unless a fund has been 
established and is maintained by that authority in accordance with the rules made in that behalf under this 
Act for meeting any liability arising out of the use of any vehicle of that authority which that authority or 
any person in its employm ent may incur to third parties.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “appropriate Government ” means the Central 
Government or a State Govern ment, as the case may be, and — 
(i) in relation to any corporation or company owned by the Central Government or any State 
Government, means the Central Gover nment or that State Government;  
(ii) in relation to any corporation or company owned by the Central Government and one or more 
State Governments , means the Central Government;  
(iii) in relation to any other State transport undertakin g or any local authority, means that 
Government which has control over that undertaking  or authority.  
147. Requirements of po licies and limits of liability .—(1) In order to comply with the requirements 
of this Chapter, a policy of ins urance must be a policy which — 
(a) is issued by a person wh o is an authorised insurer; and  
                                                           
1.Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 45 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  76 
 (b) insures the person or classes of persons specified in the policy to the extent  specified in  
sub-section ( 2)— 
(i) against any liability which may be incurred by him in respect of  the death of or bodily 
1[injury to any person , including owner of the goods or his authorized representative carried in the 
vehicle]  or damage to any property of a third party caused by or arising out of the use of  the 
vehicle in a public place;  
(ii) against the death of or bodily injury to any passenger of a public service vehicle caused 
by or arising out of the use of the veh icle in a public place:  
Provided that a  policy shall not be required — 
(i) to cover liability in respect of the death, arising out of and in the course of his employment, of 
the employee of a person insured by the policy or in respect of bodily injury sustained by such an 
employee arising out of and in the course of his employment other than a liability arising under the 
Workmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923) , in respect of the death of, or bodily  injury to, any 
such employee — 
(a) engaged in driving  the vehicle, or  
(b) if it is a public service vehicle engaged as a conductor of the vehicle or in exami ning 
tickets on the vehic le, or  
(c) if it is a goods carriage, b eing carried in the vehicle, or  
(ii) to c over any contractual liability.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the death of or bodily injury  to 
any person or damage to any property of a th ird party shall be deemed to have been caused by or to have 
arisen out of, the use of a vehicle in a public place notwithstanding that the person who is dead or injured 
or the property which is damaged was not in a public place at the time of the accident,  if the act or 
omission which led to the accid ent occurred in a public place.  
(2) Subject to the proviso to sub -section ( 1), a policy of insurance referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall 
cover any liability incurred in respect of any accident, up to the following limits, namely: — 
(a) save as provided in clause ( b), the amount of liability incurred;  
(b) in respect of damage to any property of a third party, a limit of rupees six thousand:  
Provided that any policy of insurance issued with any limited liabil ity and in force, immediately 
before the commencement of this Act, shall continue to be effective for a period of four months after such 
commencement or till the date of expiry of su ch policy whichever is earlier.  
(3) A policy shall be of no effect for the  purposes of this Chapter unless and until there is issued by 
the insurer in favour of the person by whom the policy is effected a certificate of insurance in the 
prescribed form and containing the prescribed particulars of any condition subject to which t he policy is 
issued and of any other prescribed matters; and different forms, particulars and matters may be prescribed 
in different cases.  
(4) Where a cover note issued by the insurer under the provisions of this Chapter or the rules made 
thereunder is no t followed by a policy of insurance within the prescribed time, the insurer shall, within 
seven days of the expiry of the period of the validity of the cover note, notify the fact to the registering 
authority in whose records the vehicle to which the cover  note relates has been registered or to such other 
authority as the State Government may prescribe.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, an insurer issuing a 
policy of insurance under this section shall be liable to indemnify the person or classes of persons 
specified in the policy in respect of any liability which the policy purports to cover in the case of that 
person or those classes of persons.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 46, for “injury to any person” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  77 
 148. Validity of policies of insurance iss ued in reciprocating coun tries .—Where, in pursuance of 
an arrangement between India and any reciprocating country, any motor vehicle registered in the 
reciprocating country operates on any route or within any area common to the two countries and there is 
in force in relation to th e use of the vehicle in the reciprocating country, a policy of insurance complying 
with the requirements of the law of insurance in force in that country, then, notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 147 but subject to any rules which may be made un der section 164, such policy of 
insurance shall be effective throughout the route or area in respect of which, the arrangement has been 
made, as if the policy of insurance had complied with th e requirements of this Chapter.  
149. Duty of insurers to satisfy  judgments and awards against persons insured i n respect of 
third party risks .—(1) If, after a certificate of insurance has been issued under sub -section ( 3) of  
section 147 in favour of the person by whom a policy has been effected, judgment or award in r espect of 
any such liability as is required to be covered by a policy under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of  
section 147 (being a liability covered by the terms of the policy ) 1[or under the provisions of section 
163A]  is obtained against any person insured by the policy, then, notwithstanding that the insurer may be 
entitled to avoid or cancel or may have avoided or cancelled the policy, the insurer shall, subject to the 
provisions of this section, pay to the person en titled to the benefit of the decree any sum not exceeding the 
sum assured payable thereunder, as if he were the judgment debtor, in respect of the liability, together 
with any amount payable in respect of costs and any sum payable in respect of interest on  that sum by 
virtue of any enactment rel ating to interest on judgments.  
(2) No sum shall be payable by an insurer under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any judgment or award 
unless, before the commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment or award is  given the insurer 
had notice through the Court or, as the case may be, the Claims Tribunal of the bringing of the 
proceedings, or in respect of such judgment or award so long as execution is stayed thereon pending an 
appeal; and an insurer to whom notice of the bringing of any such proceedings is so given shall be entitled 
to be made a party thereto and to defend the action on any of t he following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that there has been a breach of a specified condition of the policy, being one of the fo llowing 
conditions,  namely: — 
(i) a condition exc luding the use of the vehicle — 
(a) for hire or reward, where the vehicle is on the date of the contract of insurance a 
vehicle not covered by a permi t to ply for hire or reward, or  
(b) for organised racing and speed testing, or 
(c) for a purpose not allowed by the permit under which the vehicle is used, where the 
vehicle is a transport vehicle, or  
(d) without side -car being attached where t he vehicle is a motor cycle; or  
(ii) a condition ex cluding driving by a named person or persons or by any person who is not 
duly licensed, or by any person who has been disqualified for holding or obtaining a driving 
licence during the  period of disqualification; or  
(iii) a condition excluding liability fo r injury caused or contributed to by conditions of war, 
civil w ar, riot or civil commotion; or  
(b) that the policy is void on the ground that it was obtained by the non -disclosure of a material 
fact or by a representation of fact which was fal se in some ma terial particular.  
(3) Where any such judgment as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) is obtained from a Court in a 
reciprocating country and in the case of a foreign judgment is, by virtue of the provisions of section 13 of 
the Code of C ivil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) conclusive as to any matter adjudicated upon by it, the 
insurer (being an insurer registered under the  Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938 ) and whether or not he is 
registered under the corresponding law of the reciprocating cou ntry) shall be liable to the person entitled 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 47 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  78 
 to the benefit of the decree in the manner and to the extent specified in sub -section ( 1), as if the judgment 
were given by a Court in India:  
Provided that no sum shall be payable by the insurer in respect of any such judgment unless, before 
the commencement of the proceedings in which the judgment is given, the insurer had notice through the 
Court concerned of the bringing of the proceedings and the insurer to whom notice is so given is entitled 
under the corr esponding law of the reciprocating country, to be made a party to the proceedings and to 
defend the action on grounds similar to thos e specified in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Where a certificate of insur ance has been issued under sub -section ( 3) of section 147 t o the person 
by whom a policy has been effected, so much of the policy as purports to restrict the insurance of the 
persons insured thereby by reference to any conditions other than those in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) 
shall, as respects such liabilities  as are required to be covered by a policy under clause ( b) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 147, be of no effect:  
Provided that any sum paid by the insurer in or towards the discharge of any liability of any person 
which is covered by the policy by virtue o nly of this sub -section shall be recoverable by the i nsurer from 
that person.  
(5) If the amount which an insurer becomes liable under this section to pay in respect of a liability 
incurred by a person insured by a policy exceeds the amount for which the in surer would apart from the 
provisions of this section be liable under the policy in respect of that liability, the insurer shall be entitled 
to recov er the excess from that person.  
(6) In this section the expressions “material fact ” and “material particula r” means, respectively a fact 
or particular of such a nature as to influence the judgment of a prudent insurer in determining whether he 
will take the risk and, if so at what premium and on what conditions and the expression “liability covered 
by the terms  of the policy ” means a liability which is covered by the policy or which would be so covered 
but for the fact that the insurer is entitled to avoid or cancel or has a voided or cancelled the policy.  
(7) No insurer to whom the notice referred to in sub-section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) has been given 
shall be entitled to avoid his liability to any person entitled to the benefit of any such judgment or award 
as is referred to in sub -section ( 1) or in such judgment as is referred to in sub -section ( 3) otherwise than in 
the manner provided for in sub -section ( 2) or in the corresponding law of the reciprocati ng country, as the 
case may be.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, “Claims Tribunal ” means a Claims Tribunal 
constituted under section 165 an d “award ” means an award made by that Tribunal under sec tion 168.  
150. Rights of third parties against insurer s on insolvency of the insured .—(1) Where under any 
contract of insurance effected in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, a person is insured 
against liabilities which he may  incur to third parties, then — 
(a) in the event of the person becoming insolvent or making a composition or arr angement with 
his creditors, or  
(b) where the insured person is a company, in the event of a winding up order being made or a 
resolution for a voluntary winding up being passed with respect to the company or of a receiver or 
manager of the company ’s business or undertaking being duly appointed, or of possession being taken 
by or on behalf of the holders of a ny debentures secured by a floating charge of any property 
compris ed in or subject to the charge,  
if, either before or after that event, any such liability is incurred by the insured person, his rights against 
the insurer under the contract in respect of t he liability shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary in 
any provision of law, be transferred to and vest in the third party to whom the liability was so incurred.  
(2) Where an order for the administration of the estate of a deceased debtor is made according to the 
law of insolvency, then, if any debt provable in insolvency is owing by the deceased in respect of a 
liability to a third party against which he was insured under a contract of insurance in accordance with the 
provisions of this Chapter, t he deceased debtor ’s rights against the insurer in respect of that liability shall, 79 
 notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any provision of law, be transferred to and vest in the person 
to whom the debt is owing.  
(3) Any condition in a policy issued f or the purposes of this Chapter purporting either directly or 
indirectly to avoid the policy or to alter the rights of the parties thereunder upon the happening to the 
insured person of any of the events specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section  (1) or upon the 
making of an order for the administration of the estate of a deceased debtor according to the law of 
insolvency shall be of no effect.  
(4) Upon a transfer under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the insurer shall be under the same 
liabil ity to the third party as he would have be en to the insured person, but — 
(a) if the liability of the insurer to the insured person exceeds the liability of the insured person to 
the third party, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights of the insure d person against the insure r 
in respect of the excess, and  
(b) if the liability of the insurer to the insured person is less than the liability of the insured person 
to the third party, nothing in this Chapter shall affect the rights of the third party against the insured 
person in respect of the balance.  
151. Duty to give information as to insurance .—(1) No person against whom a claim is made in 
respect of any liability referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 147 shall on demand by or on 
behalf of the person making the claim refuse to state whether or n ot he was insured in respect of that 
liability by any policy issued under the provisions of this Chapter, or would have been so insured if the 
insurer had not avoided or cancelled the policy, nor shall he refuse, if he was or would have been so 
insured, to  give such particulars with respect to that policy as were specified in the certificate of insurance 
issued in respect th ereof.  
(2) In the event of any person becoming insolvent or making a composition or arrangement with his 
creditors or in the event of a n order being made for the administration of the estate of a deceased person 
according to the law of insolvency, or in the event of a winding up order being made or a resolution for a 
voluntary winding up being passed with respect to any company or of a re ceiver or manager of the 
company ’s business or undertaking being duly appointed or of possession being taken by or on behalf of 
the holders of any debentures secured by a floating charge on any property comprised in or subject to the 
charge, it shall be th e duty of the insolvent debtor, personal representative of the deceased debtor or 
company, as the case may be, or the official assignee or receiver in insolvency, trustee, liquidator, 
receiver or manager, or person in possession of the property to give at the request of any person claiming 
that the insolvent debtor, deceased debtor or company is under such liability to him as is covered by the 
provisions of this Chapter, such information as may reasonably be required by him for the purpose of 
ascertaining w hether any rights have been transferred to and vested in him by section 150, and for the 
purpose of enforcing such rights, if any; and any such contract of insurance as purports whether directly 
or indirectly to avoid the contract or to alter the rights of  the parties thereunder upon the giving of such 
information in the events aforesaid, or otherwise to prohibit or prevent the giving thereof in the said  
events, shall be of no effect.  
(3) If, from the information given to any person in pursuance of sub -section ( 2) or otherwise, he has 
reasonable ground for supporting that there have or may have been transferred to him under this Chapter 
rights against any particular insurer, that insurer shall be subject to the same duty as is imposed by the 
said sub -section  on the persons therein mentioned.  
(4) The duty to give the information imposed by this section shall include a duty to allow all contracts 
of insurance, receipts for premiums, and other relevant documents in the possession or power of the 
person on whom t he duty is so imposed to be inspected and copies thereof to be taken.  
152. Settlement betwee n insurers and insured persons .—(1) No settlement made by an insurer in 
respect of any claim which might be made by a third party in respect of any liability of the  nature referred 
to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 147 shall be valid unless such third part y is a party to the 
settlement.  80 
 (2) Where a person who is insured under a policy issued for the purposes of this Chapter has become 
insolvent, or where , if such insured person is a company, a winding up order has been made or a 
resolution  for a voluntary winding up has been passed with respect to the company, no agreement made 
between the insurer and the insured person after the liability has been incurr ed to a third party and after 
the commencement of the insolvency or winding up, as the case may be, nor any waiver, assignment or 
other disposition made by or payment made to the insured person after the commencement aforesaid shall 
be effective to defeat the rights transferred to the third party under this Chapter, but those rights shall be 
the same as if no such agreement, waiver, assignment or dispos ition or payment has been made.  
153. Saving in respec t of sections 150, 151 and 152 .—(1) For the purposes of sections 150, 151 and 
152 a reference to “liabilities to third parties ” in relation to a person insured under any policy of insurance 
shall not include a reference to any liability of that person in the capacity of insurer under some other 
policy of insurance.  
(2) The provisions of sections 150, 151 and 152 shall not apply where a company is wound up 
voluntarily merely for the purposes of reconstruction or of an ama lgamation with another company.  
154. Insolvency of insured persons not to affect liabil ity of insu red or claims by third parties .—
Where a certificate of insurance has been issued to the person by whom a policy has been effected, the 
happening in relation to any person insured by the policy of any such event as is mentioned in  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 150 shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Chapter, not affect any liability of that person of the nature referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 147; but nothing in this section shall affect any r ights against the insurer conferred under the 
provisions of sections 150, 151 and 152 on the person to w hom the liability was incurred.  
155. Effect of dea th on certain causes of action .—Notwithstanding anything contained in  
section 306 of the Indian Su ccession Act, 1925 (39 of 1925 ), the death of a person in whose favour a 
certificate of insurance had been issued, if it occurs after the happening of an event which has given rise 
to a claim under the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be a bar to the survival of any cause of action 
arising out of the said event against his  estate or against the insurer.  
156. Effe ct of certificate of insurance .—When an insurer has issued a certificate of insurance in 
respect of a contract of insurance between the insure r and the insured person, then — 
(a) if and so long as the policy described in the certificate has not been issued by the insurer to the 
insured, the insurer shall, as between himself and any other person except the insured, be deemed to 
have issued to the insured to the insured person a policy of insurance conforming in all respects with 
the description and particulars stated in such certificate; and  
(b) if the insurer has issued to the insured the policy described in the certificate, but the actual 
terms o f the policy are less favourable to persons claiming under or by virtue of the policy against the 
insurer either directly or through the insured than the particulars of the policy as stated in the 
certificate, the policy shall, as between the insurer and a ny other person except the insured, be 
deemed to be in terms conforming in all respects with the particulars  stated in the said certificate  
157. Transf er of certificate of insurance .—(1) Where a person in whose favour the certificate of 
insurance has been issued in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter transfers to another person the 
ownership of the motor vehicle in respect of which such insurance was taken together with the policy of 
insurance relating thereto, the certificate of insurance and th e policy described in the certificate shall be 
deemed to have been transferred in favour of the person to whom the motor vehicle is transferred with 
effect  from the date of its transfer.  
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that such deemed transfer shall 
include transfer of rights and liabilities of the said certificate of insurance and policy of insurance.]  
(2) The transferee shall apply within fourteen days from the date of transfer in the prescribed form to 
the insurer for making necessary changes in regard to the fact of transfer in the certificate of insurance 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 48 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  81 
 and the policy described in the certificate in his favour and the insurer shall make the necessary changes 
in the certificate and the policy of insurance in regar d to the transfer of insurance.  
158. Production of certain certificates, licen ce and permit in certain cases .—(1) Any person 
driving a motor vehicle in any public place shall, on being so required by a police officer in uniform 
authorised in this behalf by the State Government, produce — 
(a) the certificate of insurance;  
 (b) the certificate of registration;  
(c) the driving licence; and  
(d) in the case of a transport vehicle, also the certificate of fitness referred to in section 56 and the 
permit, rela ting to the use of the vehicle.  
(2) If, where owing to the presence of a motor vehicle in a public place an accident occurs involving 
death or b odily injury to another person, the driver of the vehicle does not at the time produce the 
certificates, driving licence  and permit referred to in sub -section ( 1) to a police officer, he shall produce 
the said certificates, licence and permit at the police  station at which he makes the report required by 
section 134.  
(3) No person shall be liable to conviction under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) by reason only of 
the failure to produce the certificate of insurance if, within seven days from the date on  which its 
production was required under sub -section ( 1), or as the case may be, from the date of occurrence of the 
accident, he produces the certificate at such police station as may have been specified by him to the police 
officer who required its produc tion or, as the case may be, to the police officer at the site of the accident 
or to the officer in charge of the police station at which he reported the accident:  
Provided that except to such extent and with such modifications as may be prescribed, the pr ovisions 
of this sub -section shall not apply to the  driver of a transport vehicle.  
(4) The owner of a motor vehicle shall give such information as he may be required by or on behalf of 
a police officer empowered in this behalf by the State Government to gi ve for the purpose of determining 
whether the vehicle was or was not b eing driven in contravention of section 146 and on any occasion 
when the driver was required under this section to produc e his certificate of insurance.  
(5) In this section, the expressi on “produce his certificate of insurance ” means produce for 
examination the relevant certificate of insurance or such other evidence as may be prescribed that the 
vehicle was not being driven i n contravention of section 146.  
1[(6) As soon as any information regarding any accident involving death or bodily injury to any 
person is recorded or report under this section is completed by a police officer, the officer incharge of the 
police station shall forward a copy of the same within thirty days from  the date of recording of 
information or, as the case may be, on completion of such report to the Claims Tribunal having 
jurisdiction and a copy thereof to the concerned insurer, and where a copy is made available to the owner, 
he shall also within thirty days of receipt of such report, forward the same to such Claims Tribunal and 
Insurer.]  
159. Production of certificate of Insurance on applicatio n for authority to use vehicle .—A State 
Government may make rules requiring the owner of any motor vehicle when applying whether by 
payment of a tax or otherwise for authority to use the vehicle in a public place to produce such evidence 
as may be prescribed by those ru les to the effect that either — 
(a) on the date when the authority to use the vehicle comes into op eration there will be in force 
the necessary policy of insurance in relation to the use of the vehicle by the applicant or by other 
persons on his o rder or with his permission, or  
(b) the vehicle is a vehicle to whic h section 146 does not apply.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 49, for sub -section ( 6) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  82 
 160. Duty to furnish particulars o f vehicle involved in accident .—A registering authority or the 
officer in charge of a police station shall, if so required by a person who alleges that he is entitled to claim 
compensation in respect of an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle, or if so required by an 
insurer against whom a claim has been made in respect of any motor vehicle, furnish to that person or to 
that insurer, as the case may be, on payment of the prescribed fee any information at the disposal of the 
said authority or the said authority or the said police officer relating to the identification marks and other 
particulars of the vehicle and the name and address of the person who was using the vehicle at the time of 
the accident or was injured by it and the property, if any damaged in such form and within such time as 
the Ce ntral Government may prescribe.  
161. Special provisions as to compensation in case  of hit and run motor accident .—(1) For the 
purposes of this section , section 162 and section 1 63— 
(a) “grievous hurt ” shall have the same meaning as in the Indian P enal Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) “hit and run motor accident ” means an accident arising out of the use of a motor vehicle or 
motor vehicles the identity whereof cannot be ascertained in spite  of reas onable efforts for the 
purpose;  
(c) “scheme ” means the scheme  framed under section 163.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the General Insurance Business (Nationa lisation) Act, 
1972 (57 of 1972 ) or any other law for the time being in force or any instrument having the force of law, 
the General Insurance Corporation of India formed under section 9 of the said Act and the insurance 
companies for the time being carrying on general insurance business in India shall provid e for paying in 
accordan ce with the provisions of this Act and the scheme, compensation in respect of the death of, or 
grievous hurt to, persons resulting fr om hit and run motor accidents.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the scheme, there shall be paid as compensati on— 
(a) in respect of the death of any person resulting from a hit and run motor accident, a fixed sum 
of 1[twenty -five thousand  rupees ]; 
(b) in respect of grievous hurt to any person resulting from a hit and run motor accident, a fi xed 
sum of 2[twelve thousand and five hundred rupees ]. 
(4) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 166 shall apply for the purpose of making 
applications for compensation under this section as they apply for the purpose of making applications for 
compensation r eferred to in that sub -section.  
162. Refund in certain cases of compe nsation paid under section 161 .—(1) The payment of 
compensation in respect of the death of, or grievous hurt to, any person under section 161 shall be subject 
to the condition that if any c ompensation (hereafter in this sub -section referred to as the other 
compensation) or other amount in lieu of or by way of satisfaction of a claim for compensation is awarded 
or paid in respect of such death or grievous hurt under any other provision of thi s Act or any other law or 
otherwise so much of the other compensation or other amount aforesaid as is equal to the compensation 
paid under section 161 sh all be refunded to the insurer.  
(2) Before awarding compensation in respect of an accident involving th e death of, or bodily injury 
to, any person arising out of the use of a motor vehicle or motor vehicles under any provision of this Act 
(other than section 161) or any other law, the tribunal, court or other authority awarding such 
compensation shall verif y as to whether in respect of such death or bodily injury compensation has 
already been paid under section 161 or an application for payment of compensation is pending under that 
section, and such tribunal, co urt or other authority shall, — 
(a) if compensat ion has already been paid under section 161, direct the person liable to pay the 
compensation awarded by it to refund to the insurer, so much thereof as is required to be refunded in 
accordance with the  provisions of sub -section ( 1); 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 50, for “eight thousand and five hundred rupees” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 50, ibid., for “two thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  83 
 (b) if an application for payment of compensation is pending under section 161 forward the 
particulars as to the compensatio n awarded by it to the insurer.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, an application for compensation under section 
161 shall be deemed to be  pending — 
(i) if such application has been rejected, till the date of the re jection of the application, and  
(ii) in any other case, till the date of payment of compensation in pursuance of the application.  
163. Scheme for payment of compensation in case of hit and run motor accidents .—(1) The 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make a scheme specifying, the manner 
in which the scheme shall be administered by the General Insurance Corporation, the form, manner and 
the time within  which applications for compensation may be made, the officers or authorities to whom 
such applications may be made, the procedure to be followed by such officers or authorities for 
considering and passing orders on such applications, and all other matters  connected with, or incidental 
to, the administration of the scheme a nd the payment of compensation.  
(2) A scheme made under sub -section ( 1) may provide that — 
(a) a contravention of any provision thereof shall be punishable with imprisonment for such term 
as may be specified but in no case exceeding three months, or with fine which may extend to such 
amount as may be specified but in no case exceeding fi ve hundred rupees or with both;  
(b) the powers, functions or duties conferred or imposed on any officer o r authority by such 
scheme may be delegated with the prior approval in writing of the Central Government, by such 
officer or authority to any other officer or authority;  
(c) any provision of such scheme may operate with retrospective effect from a date not  earlier 
than the date of establishment of the Solatium Fund under the Motor  Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939 ), 
as it stood immediately befor e the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that no such retrospective effect shall be given so as to prejudicially affec t the interests 
of any person who may  be governed by such provision.  
1[163A. Special provisions as to payment of compensation on structured formula basis .— 
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force or 
instrument having the force of law, the owner of the motor vehicle of the authorised insurer shall be liable 
to pay in the case of death or permanent disable ment due to accident arising out of the use of motor 
vehicle, compensation, as indicated in the Second Schedule, to the legal heirs or the victim, as the case 
may be.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “permanent disability ” shall have the same 
meaning and extent as in the Workmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923).  
(2) In any claim for compensation under sub -section ( 1), the claimant shall not be required to plead or 
establish that the death or permanent disablement in respect of which th e claim has been made was due to 
any wrongful act or neglect or default of the owner of the vehicle or vehicles concerned or of any other 
person.  
(3) The Central Government may, keeping in view the cost of living by notification in the Official 
Gazette, from time to time amend the Second Schedule.  
163B . Option to file claim in certain cases .— Where a person is entitled to claim compensation 
under section 140 and section 163A, he shall file the claim under either of the said sections and not under 
both.]  
164. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may make rules 
for the purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of this Chapter, other than the ma tters specified in 
section 159.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 51 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  84 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing powe r, such rules may provide for — 
(a) the forms to be used fo r the purposes of this Chapter;  
(b) the making of applications for and the issu e of certificates of insurance;  
(c) the issue of duplicates to replace certificates of insuranc e lost, destroyed or mutilated;  
(d) the custody, production, cancellation and surrende r of certificates of insurance;  
(e) the records to be maintained by insurers of policies of insur ance issued under this Chapter;  
(f) the identification by certificates or otherwi se of persons or vehicles exempted from the 
provisions of this Chapter;  
(g) the furnishing of information respecting policie s of insurance by insurers;  
(h) adopting the provisions of this Chapter to vehicles brought into India by persons making only 
a temp orary stay therein or to vehicles registered in a reciprocating country and operating on any 
route or within any area in India by applying those provisions  with prescribed modifications;  
(i) the form in which and the time limit within which the particulars  referred to in se ction 160 
may be furnished; and  
(j) any other matter which i s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
CHAPTER XII  
CLAIMS  TRIBUNALS  
165. Claims Tribunals .—(1) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Motor Accidents Claims Tribunals (hereafter in this Chapter referred to as Claims 
Tribunal) for such area as may be specified in the notification for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims 
for compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of, o r bodily injury to, persons arising out of 
the use of motor vehicles, or damages to any property of a t hird party so arising, or both.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression “claims for 
compensation in respect of accidents involving the death of or bodily injury to persons arising out of the 
use of motor vehicles ” includes claims for compensation under section 140  1[and section 163A].  
(2) A Claims Tribunal shall consist of such number of members as the State Government may think 
fit to appoint and where it consists of two or more members, one of them shall be app ointed as the 
Chairman thereof.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a member of a Claims Tribunal unless he — 
(a) is, or has be en, a  Judge of a High Court, or  
(b) is, or has been, a District Judge, or  
(c) is qualified for appointm ent as a Judge of a High Court  1[or as a District Judge] . 
(4) Where two or more Claims Tribunals are constituted for any area, the State Government, may  by 
general or special order, regulate the distr ibution of business among them.  
166. Application for compensation .—(1) An application for compensation arising out of an accident 
of the nature specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 165 may be made — 
(a) by the person w ho has sustained the injury; or  
(b) by the owner of the property; or  
(c) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any of the legal repr esentatives of the 
deceased; or  
                                                           
1. Added by Act 54 of 1994, s. 52 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  85 
 (d) by any agent duly authorised by the person injured or all o r any of the legal representatives of 
the de ceased, as the case may be:  
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have not joined in any such 
application for compensation, the application shall be made on behalf of or for the benefi t of all the legal 
representatives of the deceased and the legal representatives who have not so joined, shall be impleaded 
as respondents to the application.  
1[(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made, at the option of the claimant, either to the 
Claims Tribunal having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident occurred or to the Claims 
Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the claimant resides or carries on business or within 
the local limits of whose jurisdict ion the defendant resides, and shall be in such form and contain such 
particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where no claim for compensation under section 140 is made in such application, the 
application shall contain a separate statement to that effect immediately before the signature of the 
applicant.]  
 2*   *   *   *             * 
3[(4) The Claims Tribunal shall treat any report of accidents forwarded to it under sub -section ( 6) of 
section 158 as an application for compensation under this Act.]  
167. Option regarding claims for  compensation in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Workmen ’s Com pensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923 ), where the death of, or bodily injury to, 
any person gives rise to a claim for compensation under this Ac t and also under the Workmen ’s 
Compensation Act, 1923, the person entitled to compensation may without prejudice to the provisions of 
Chapter X claim such compensation under either of  those Acts but not under both.  
168. Award of the Claims Tribunal .—(1) On  receipt of an application for compensation made 
under section 166, the Claims Tribunal shall, after giving notice of the application to the insurer and after 
giving the parties (including the insurer) an opportunity of being heard, hold an inquiry into th e claim or, 
as the case may be, each of the claims and, subject to the provisions of section 162 may make an award 
determining the amount of compensation which appears to it to be just and specifying the person or 
persons to whom compensation shall be paid  and in making the award the Claims Tribunal shall specify 
the amount which shall be paid by the insurer or owner or driver of the vehicle involved in the accident or 
by all or any of them,  as the case may be:  
Provided that where such application makes a c laim for compensation under section 140 in respect of 
the death or permanent disablement of any person, such claim and any other claim (whether made in such 
application or otherwise) for compensati on in respect of such death or permanent disablement shall be 
disposed of in accordance wi th the provisions of Chapter X.  
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall arrange to deliver copies of the award to the parties concerned 
expeditiously and in any case within a period of fifteen days from the date of the award.  
(3) When an award is made under this section, the person who is required to pay any amount in terms 
of such award shall, within thirty days of the date of announcing the award by the Claims Tribunal, 
deposit the entire amount awarded in such manner as the Claims Tr ibunal may direct.  
169. Procedure and powers of Claims Tribunals .—(1) In holding any inquiry under section 168, 
the Claims Tribunal may, subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, follow such summ ary 
procedure as it thinks fit.  
(2) The Claims Tribunal shall have all the powers of a Civil Court for the purpose of taking evidence 
on oath and of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and of compelling the discovery and production of 
documents and material objects and for such other pur poses as may be prescribed; and the Claims 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 53, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Sub -section ( 3) omit ted by s. 53, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Subs. by s. 53, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  86 
 Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the 
Code o f Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ). 
(3) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the Claims Tribunal may, for the purpose of 
adjudicating upon any claim for compensation, choose one or more persons possessing special knowledge 
of any matter relevant to the inquiry to as sist it in holding the inquiry.  
170. Imple ading insurer in certain case s.—Where in the course of any inquiry, the Clai ms Tribunal 
is satisfied that — 
(a) there is collusion between the person making the claim and the person aga inst whom the claim 
is made, or  
(b) the person against whom the claim is made has failed to contest the claim,  
it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, direct that the insurer who may be liable in respect of such 
claim, shall be impleaded as a party to the proceeding and the insurer so i mpleaded shall thereupon have, 
without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 149, the right to contest the 
claim on all or any of the grounds that are available to the person against whom the claim has been made.  
171. Award of  inter est where any claim is allowed .—Where any Claims Tribunal allows a claim 
for compensation made under this Act, such Tribunal may direct that in addition to the amount of 
compensation simple interest shall also be paid at such rate and from such date not earlier than the date of 
making the claim as  it may specify in this behalf.  
172. Award of compe nsatory costs in certain cases .—(1) Any Claims Tribunal adjudicating upon 
any claim for compensation under this Act, may in any case where it is satisfied fo r reasons to be 
recorded by it in writing that — 
(a) the policy of insurance is void on the ground that it was obtained by representation of fact 
which was false  in any material particular, or  
(b) any party or insurer has put forward a false or vexatious claim or defence,  
such Tribunal may make an order for the payment, by the party who is guilty of mis -representation or by 
whom such claim or defence has been put forward of special costs by way of compensation to the insurer 
or, as the case may be, to the party against whom such claim o r defence has been put forward.  
(2) No Claims Tribunal shall pass an order for special costs under sub -section ( 1) for any amount  
exceeding one thousand rupees.  
(3) No person or insurer against whom an order has been made und er this section shall, by reason 
thereof be exempted from any criminal liability in respect of such mis -representation, claim or defence as 
is referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Any amount awarded by way of compensation under this section in respect of an y mis -
representation, claim or defence, shall be taken into account in any subsequent suit for damages for 
compensation in respect of such mis -representation, claim or defence.  
173. Appeals .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), any person aggrieved by an award of 
a Claims Tribunal may, within ninety days from the date of the award, prefer an appeal to the High Court:  
Provided that no appeal by the person who is required to pay any amount in terms of such award shall 
be entertained by the Hi gh Court unless he has deposited with it twenty -five thousand rupees or fifty per 
cent. of the amount so awarded, whichever is less, in the man ner directed by the High Court:  
Provided further that the High Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of  the said period of 
ninety days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from  preferring the 
appeal in time.  
(2) No appeal shall lie against any award of a Claims Tribunal if the amount in dispute in the appeal 
is less than ten thousand rupees.  
174. Recovery of money from ins urer as arrear of land revenue .—Where any amount is due from 
any person under an award, the Claims Tribunal may, on an application made to it by the person entitled 87 
 to the amount, issue a certificate for the amount to the Collector and the Collector shall proceed to recover 
the same in the same manne r as an arrear of land revenue.  
175. Bar o n jurisdiction of Civil Courts .—Where any Claims Tribunal has been constituted for any 
area, no Civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any question relating to any claim for 
compensation which may be adjudicated upon by the Claims Tribunal for that area, and no injunction in 
respect of any action taken or to be taken by or before the Claims Tribunal in respe ct of the claim for 
compensation shall  be granted by the Civil Court.  
176. Power of State Government to make rules .—A State Government may make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into effect the provisions of sections 165 to 174, and in particular, such rul es may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of application for claims for compensation and the particulars it may contain, and the 
fees, if any, to be paid in re spect of such applications;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by a Claims Tribunal in holding an inquiry under this Chapter;  
(c) the powers vested in a Civil Court which may be exercised by a Claims Tribunal;  
(d) the form and the manner in which and the fees (if any) on payment of which an appeal may be 
preferred aga inst an award of a Claims Tribunal; and  
(e) any other matter which i s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
CHAPTER XIII  
OFFENCES,  PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
177. General provis ion for punishment of offences .—Whoever contravenes any provision of this 
Act or of any rule, regulation or notification made thereunder shall, if no penalty is provided for the 
offence be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees, and for any 
second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees.  
178. Penalty for travelling without pass or ticket and for dereliction of duty on the part of 
conductor and refusal  to ply contract carriage, etc .—(1) Whoever travels in a stage carriage without 
having a proper pass or ticket with him or being in or having alighted from a stage carriage fails or refuses 
to present for examination or to deliver up his pass or ticket immediately on a requisition being made 
therefor, shall be punisha ble with fine which may  extend to five hundred rupees.  
Explanation .—In this section, “pass” and “ticket ” have the meanings respectively a ssigned to them in 
section 124.  
(2) If the conductor of a stage carriage, or the driver of a stage carriage performing the functions of a 
conductor in such stage carriage, whose duty is — 
(a) to supply a ticket to a person travelling in a stage carriage on payment of fare by such person, 
either wilfully or negligently, — 
(i) fails or refuses to accept the f are when tendered,  or 
(ii) fails or  refuses to supply a ticket, or  
(iii) supplies an invalid ticket, or  
(iv) supplies  a ticket of a lesser value, or  
(b) to check any pass or ticket, either wilfully or neglige ntly fails or refuses to do so,  
he shall be punishable with fine w hich may  extend to five hundred rupees.  
(3) If the holder of a permit or the driver of a contract carriage refuses, in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder, to ply the contract carriage or to carry the pass engers, he 
shall, — 
(a) in the case of two -wheeled or three -wheeled motor vehicles, be punishable with fine which 
may extend to fifty rupees; and  88 
 (b) in any other case, be punishable with fine which ma y extend to two hundred rupees.  
179. Disobedience of orders, obstruct ion and refusal of information .—(1) Whoever wilfully 
disobeys any direction lawfully given by any person or authority empowered under this Act to give such 
direction, or obstructs any person or authority in the discharge of any functions which such person or 
authority is required or empowered under this Act to discharge, shall, if no other penalty is provided for 
the offence be punishable with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees.  
(2) Whoever, being required by or under this Act to supply any informatio n, wilfully withholds such 
information or gives information which he knows to be false or which he does not believe to be true, 
shall, if no other penalty is provided for the offence, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month , or with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
180. Allowing unauthorised persons to dri ve vehicles .—Whenever, being the owner or person in 
charge of a motor vehicle, causes, or permits, any other person who does not satisfy the prov isions of 
section 3 or section 4 to drive the vehicle shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
181. Driving vehicles in contraven tion of section 3  or section 4 .—Whoever, drives a motor vehicle 
in contravention of section 3 or section 4 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
182. Offences r elating t o licences .—(1) Whoever, being disqualified under this Act for holding or 
obtaining a driving licence drives a motor vehicle in a public place or in any other place, or applies for or 
obtains a driving licence or, not being entitled to have a driv ing licence issued to him free of endorsement, 
applies for or obtains a driving licence without disclosing the endorsement made on a driving licence 
previously held by him shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three 
months, o r with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees or with both, and any driving incence so 
obtaine d by him shall be of no effect.  
(2) Whoever, being disqualified under this Act for holding or obtaining a conductor ’s licence, acts as 
a conductor of a stag e carriage in a public place or applies for or obtains a conductor ’s licence or, not 
being entitled to have a conductor ’s licence issued to him free of endorsement, applies for or obtains a 
conductor ’s licence without disclosing the endorsements made on a conductor ’s licence previously held 
by him, shall be punishable with improsonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine 
which may extend to one hundred rupees, or with both, and any conductor ’s licence so obtained by him 
shall be of no effect.  
1[182A. Punishment for offences relating to construction and maintenance of vehicles .—Any 
person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 109, shall be punishable with a fine 
of five thousand rupees for any subsequent offence.]  
183. D riving at excessive speed, etc .—(1) Whoever, drives a motor vehicle in contravention of the 
speed limits referred to in section 112 shall be punishable with fine which may extend to four hundred 
rupees, or, if having been previously convicted of an offence under this sub -section is again convicted of 
an offence under this sub - section, with fine which may  extend to one thousand rupees.  
(2) Whoever, causes any person who is employed by him or is subject to his control in driving to 
drive a motor vehic le in contravention of the speed limits referred to in section 112 shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to three hundred rupees, or, if having been previously convicted of an offence 
under this sub -section, is again convicted of an offence under this sub -section, with fine which may  
extend to five hundred rupees.  
(3) No person shall be convicted of an offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) solely on the 
evidence of one witness to the effect that in the opinion of the witness such person was driv ing at a speed 
which was unlawful, unless that opinion is shown to be based on an estimate obtained by the  use of some 
mechanical device.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 54 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  89 
 (4) The publication of a time table under which, or the giving of any direction that, any journey or 
part of a journey  is to be completed within a specified time shall, if in the opinion of the Court it is not 
practicable in the circumstances of the case for that journey or part of a journey to be completed in the 
specified time without contravening the speed limits refer red to in section 112 be prima facie  evidence 
that the person who published the time table or gave the direction has committed an offence pu nishable 
under sub - section ( 2). 
184. Driving dangerou sly.—Whoever, drives a motor vehicle at a speed or in a manner  which is 
dangerous to the public, having regard to all the circumstances of case including the nature, condition and 
use of the place where the vehicle is driven and the amount of traffic which actually is at the time or 
which might reasonably be expected  to be in the place, shall be punishable for the first offence with 
imprisonment fo r a term which may extend to six  months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, and for any second or subsequent offence if committed within three years of th e commission of a 
previous similar offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to two  thousand rupees, or with both.  
185. Driving by a drunken person or by a perso n under the influence of drugs .—Whoever , while 
driving, or attempti ng to drive, a motor vehicle, — 
1[(a) has, in his blood, alcohol exceeding 30 mg. per 100 ml. of blood detected in a test by a 
breath analyser, or]   
(b) is under the influence of a drug to such an extent as to be incapable of exercising p roper 
control over the vehicle.  
shall be punishable for the first offence with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or 
with fine which may extend to two t housand rupees, or with both; and for a second or subsequent offence, 
if committed within three years of the commission of the previous similar offence, with impr isonment for 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to three  thousa nd rupees, or with 
both.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the drug or drugs specified by the Central 
Government in this behalf, by notification in the Official Gazette, shall be deemed to render a person 
incapable of exercising prope r control  over a motor vehicle.  
186. Driving when mentall y or phycically unfit to drive .—Whoever drives a motor vehicle in any 
public place when he is to his knowledge suffering from any disease or disability calculated to cause his 
driving of the vehicle to be a source of danger to the public, shall be punishable for the first offence with 
fine which may extend to two hundred rupees and for a second or subsequent offence with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees.  
187. Punishment for  offences relating to ac cident .—Whoever fails to comply with the provisions 
of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 132 or section 133 or section 134 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five 
hundr ed rupees, or with both or, if having been previously convicted of an offence under this section, he 
is again convicted of an offence under this section, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
188. Punishment for abetmen t of certain offences .—Whoever abets the commission of an offence 
under section 184, section 185 or section 186 shall be punishable with the punis hment provided for the 
offence.  
189. Racing and trails of speed .—Whoever without the written consent of the State Government 
permits or takes part in a race or trial of speed of any kind between motor vehicles in any public place 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
190. Usi ng vehicle in unsafe condition .—(1) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven 
in any public place a motor vehicle or trailer while the vehicle or trailer has any defec t, which such person 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 55, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  90 
 knows of or could have discovered by the exercise of ordinary care and which is calculated to render the 
driving of the vehicle a source of danger to persons and vehicles using such place, shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend  to two hundred and fifty rupees or, if as a result of such defect an accident is 
caused causing bodily injury or damage to property, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months or with fine which may extend to one thous and rupees, or wit h both.  
(2) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any public place a motor vehicle, 
which violates the standards prescribed in relation to road safety, control of noise and air - pollution, shall 
be punishable for the first offence with  a fine of one thousand rupees and for any second or subsequent 
offence with  a fine of two thousand rupees.  
(3) Any person who drives or causes or allows to be driven, in any public place a motor vehicle which 
violates the provisions of this Act or the rul es made thereunder relating to the carriage of goods which are 
of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life, shall be punishable for the first offence which may 
extend to three thousand rupees, or with  imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year , or with 
both, and for any second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or 
with imprisonment for a term which may exten d to three years, or with both.  
191. Sale of vehicle in or alteration of vehicle to c ondition contravening this Act .—Whoever 
being an importer of or dealer in motor vehicles, sells or delivers or offers to sell or deliver a motor 
vehicle or traller in such condition that the use thereof in a public place would be in contravention of 
Chapter VII or any rule made thereunder or alters the motor vehicle or trailer so as to render its condition 
such that its use in a public place would be in contravention of Chapter VII or any rule made thereunder 
shall be punishable with fine which may  extend to five hu ndred rupees:  
Provided that no person shall be convicted under this section if he proves that he had reasonable cause 
to believe that the vehicle would not be used in a public place until it had been put into a condition in 
whic h it might lawfully be so us ed. 
1[192. Using vehicle without registration .—(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows 
a motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of section 39 shall be punishable for the first 
offence with a fine which may extend to five  thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand 
rupees for a second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year or with fine 
which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with b oth: 
Provided  that the court may, for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser punishment.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of a motor vehicle in an emergency for the 
conveyance of persons suffering from sickness or injuries or for the tra nsport of food or materials to 
relieve distress or of medical supplies for a like purpose:  
Provided  that the person using the vehicle reports about the same to the Regional Transport Authority 
within seven days from the date of such use.  
(3) The court to w hich an appeal lies from any conviction in respect of an offence of the nature 
specified in sub -section ( 1), may set aside or vary any order made by the court below, notwithstanding 
that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which such o rder was made.  
192A. Using vehicle without permit —(1) Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a 
motor vehicle to be used in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 66 or in 
contravention of any condition of a permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the 
purpose for which the vehicle may be used, shall be punishable for the first offence with a fine which may 
extend to five thousand rupees but shall not be less than two thousand rupees and for any subsequent 
offence with imprisonment which may extend to one year but shall not be less than three months or with 
fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees but shall not be less than five thousand rupees or with both:  
Provided  that the court may for reasons to be recorded, impose a lesser punishment.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 55, for section 192 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  91 
 (2) Nothing in this section shall apply to the use of a motor vehicle in an emergency for the 
conveyance of persons suffering from sickness or injury or for the transport of materials for repair or for 
the transport of food or materials to relieve distress or of medical supplies for a like purpose:  
Provided that the person using the vehicle reports about the same to the Regional Transport Authority 
within seven days from the date of such use.  
(3) The court  to which an appeal lies from any conviction in respect of an offence of the nature 
specified in sub -section ( 1), may set aside or vary any order made by the court below, notwithstanding 
that no appeal lies against the conviction in connection with which s uch order was made.]  
193. Punishment of agents and canva ssers without proper authority .—Whoever engages himself 
as an agent or canvasser in contravention of the provisions of section 93 or of any rules made thereunder 
shall be punishable for the first offence with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees and for any 
second or subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to two  thousand rupees, or with both.  
194. Driving vehicl e exceeding permissi ble weight .—1[(1) Whoever drivers a motor vehicle or 
causes or allows a motor vehicle to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 113 or section 
114 or section 115 shall be punishable with minimum fine of two thousand rupees and an additional 
amount of one thousand rupees per tonne of excess load, together with the liability to pay charges for  
off-loading of the excess load .]  
(2) Any driver of a vehicle who refuses to stop and submit his vehicle to weighing after being 
directed to do so by an officer autho rised in this behalf under section 114 or removes or causes the 
removal of the load or part of it prior to weighing shall be punishable with fine which may e xtend to three 
thousand rupees.  
195. Imposition of minimum fin e under certain circumstances .—(1) Wh oever having been 
convicted of an offence under this Act or the rules made thereunder commits a similar offence on a 
second or subsequent occasion within three years of the commission of the previous offence, no court 
shall, except for reasons to be record ed by it in writing, impose on him a fine of less than one -fourth of 
the maximum amount of the fi ne impossible for such offence.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed as restricting the power of the court from awarding 
such imprisonment as it considers necessary in the circumstances of the case not exceeding the maximum 
specified in this Act in respect of that offence.  
196. Driving uninsured vehicle .—Whoever drives a motor vehicle or causes or allows a motor 
vehicle to be driven in contravention of the provisions of section 146 shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees , 
or with both.  
197. Ta king vehicle without authority .—(1) Whoever takes and drives away any motor vehicle 
without having either the consent of the owner thereof or other lawful authority shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to three mont hs or with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, 
or with both.  
Provided that no person shall be convicted under this section if the Court is satisfied that such person 
acted in the reasonable belief that he had lawful authority or in the reasonable  belief that the owner would 
in the circumstances of the case have given his consent  if he had been asked therefor.  
(2) Whoever, unlawfully by force or threat of force or by any other form of intimidation, seizes or 
exercises control of a motor vehicle, sh all be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three 
months, or with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
(3) Whoever attempts to commit any of the acts referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) in 
relation to any motor vehicle, or abets the commission of any such act, shall also be deemed to have 
committed an offence under sub -section ( 1) or, as th e case may be, sub -section ( 2). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 57, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  92 
 198. Unauthorised interference  with vehicle .—Whoever otherwise than with lawful authori ty or 
reasonable execuse enters or mounts any stationary motor vehicle or tampers with the brake or any part of 
the mechanism of a motor vehicle shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
199. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any punishment 
provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was c ommitted without his knowledge or that he 
exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company, and it is proved that the offence was committed with the consent or connivance 
of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the 
company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
200. C omposition of certain offences .—(1) Any offence whether committed before or after the 
commencement of this Act punishable under section 177, section 178, section 179, section 180, section 
181, section 182, sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 183, section 184, section 186,  1[section 189, 
sub-section ( 2) of section190]; section 191, section 192, section 194, section 196 or section 198 may 
either before or after the institution of the pro secution, be compounded by such officers or authorities and 
for such amount as the State Government may, by notification in the Official G azette, specify in this 
behalf.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), the offender, if in cu stody, shall be 
discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.  
201. Penalty for causing obstr uction to free flow of traffic .—(1) Whoever keeps a disabled vehicle 
on any public place, in such a manner, so as to cause impediment to the free flow of traffic, shall be liable 
for penalty up to fifty rupees per hour, so long as it remains in that position:  
Provided that the vehicle invo lved in accidents shall be liable for penalty only from the time of 
completion of inspec tion formalities under the law.  
2[Provided  further that where the vehicle is removed by a Government agency, towing charges shall 
be recovered from the vehicle owner or  person in -charge of such vehicle.]  
3[(2) Penalties or towing charges under this section shall be recovered by such officer or authority as 
the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise.]  
202. P ower to arrest without warrant .—(1) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant 
any person who in his presence commits an offence punishable under section 184 or secti on 185 or 
section 197:  
Provided that any person so arrested in connection with an offence punishable under s ection 185 
shall, within two hours of his arrest, be subjected to a medical examination referred to in sections 203 and 
204 by a registered medical practitioner failing which he shall be released from custody.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 58, for “section 189” (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 59,  ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
3. Subs.  by s. 59, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  93 
 1[(2) A police officer in uniform may arrest without warrant any person, who has committed an 
offence under this Act, if such person refuses to give his name and address.]   
(3) A police officer arresting without warrant the driver of a motor vehicle shall if the circumstances 
so require take or cause  to be taken any steps he may consider proper for the tem porary disposal of the 
vehicle.  
203. Breath tests .—2[(1) A police officer in uniform or an officer of the Motor Vehicles Department, 
as may be authorised in this behalf by that Department, may require any person driving or attempting to 
drive a motor vehicle in a public place to provide one or more specimens of breath for breath test there or 
nearby, if such police officer or officer has any reasonable cause to suspect him of having committed an  
offence under section 185:  
Provided  that requirement for breath test shall be made (unless, it is made) as soon as reasonably 
practicable after the commission of such offence.]  
 (2) If a motor vehicle is involved in an accident in a public place and a pol ice officer in uniform has 
any reasonable cause to suspect that the person who was driving the motor vehicle at the time of the 
accident, had alcohol in his blood or that he was driving under th e influence of a drug referred to in 
section 185 he may require the person so driving the motor vehicle, to provide a specimen of his breath 
for a breath test: — 
(a) in the case of a person who is at a ho spital as an i ndoor patient, at the hospital,  
(b) in the case of any other person, either at or near the place where the requirement is made, or, 
if the police officer thinks fit, at a police station s pecified by the police officer:  
Provided that a person shall not be required to provide such a specimen while at a hospital as an 
indoor patient if the registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case is not first notified of 
the proposal to make the requirement or objects to the provision of a specimen on the ground that its 
provision or the requirement to provi de it would be prejudicial to the proper ca re or treatment of the 
patient.  
(3) If it appears to a police officer in uniform, in consequence of a breath test carried out by him on 
any person under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), that the device by means  of which the test has been 
carried out indicates the presence of alcohol in the person ’s blood, the police officer may arrest that 
person without warrant except while that person is at a  hospital as an indoor patient.  
(4) If a person, required by a police  officer under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) to provide a 
specimen of breath for a breath test, refuses or fails to do so and the police officer has reasonable cause to 
suspect him of having alcohol in his blood, the police officer may arrest him with out warrant except while 
he is at a  hospital as an indoor patient.  
(5) A person arrested under this section shall while at a police station, be given an opportunity  to 
provide a specimen of breath for a breath test there.  
(6) The results of a breath test m ade in pursuance of the provisions of this section s hall be admissible 
in evidence.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “breath test ”, means a test for the purpose of 
obtaining an indication of the presence of alcohol in a person ’s blood carried  out, on one or more 
specimens of breath provided by that person, by means of a device of a type approved by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, for the purpose of such a test.  
204. L aboratory test .—(1) A person, who has been arrested under section 203 may, while at a police 
station, be required by a police officer to provide to such registered medical practitioner as may be 
produced by such police officer, a specimen of his blood for a Laboratory test, — 
(a) it appears to the police officer that the device, by means of which breath test was taken in 
relation to such person, indicates the presence of alcohol in the blood of such person, or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 60, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 61, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  94 
 (b) such person, when given the opportunity to submit to a breath test, has refused, omitted or 
failed to do so:  
Provided that where the person required to provide such specimen is a female and the registered 
medical practitioner produced by such police officer is a male medical practitioner, the specimen shall be 
taken only in the presence of a female, whether  a medical practitioner or not.  
(2) A person while at a hospital as an indoor patient may be required by a police officer to provide at 
the hospital a specimen of his blood for a laboratory te st:— 
(a) if it appears to the police officer that the device by means of which test is carried out in 
relation to the breath of such person indicates the presence of alcohol in the blood of such person, or  
(b) if the person having been required, whether at the hospital or elsewh ere, to provide a 
specimen of breath for a breath test, has refused, omitted or failed to do so and a police officer has 
reasonable cause to suspect him of having alcohol in his blood:  
Provided that a person shall not be required to provide a specimen of h is blood for a laboratory test 
under this sub -section if the registered medical practitioner in immediate charge of his case is not first 
notified of the proposal to make the requirement or objects to the provision of such specimen on the 
ground that its p rovision or the requirement to provide it would be prejudicial to the proper ca re or 
treatment of the patient.  
(3) The results of a laboratory test made in pursuance of this section shall be admissible in evidence.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “laboratory test ” means the analysis of a specimen of 
blood made at a laboratory established, maintained or recognised by the Central Go vernment or a State 
Government.  
205. Presumption of unfitness to drive .—In any proceeding  for an offence punishable under section 
185 if it is proved that the accused, when requested by a police officer at any time so to do, had refused, 
omitted or failed to consent to the taking of or providing a specimen of his breath for a breath test or a 
specimen of his blood for a laboratory test, his refusal, omission or failure may, unless reasonable cause 
therefor is shown, be presumed to be a circumstance supporting any evidence given on behalf of the 
prosecution, or rebutting any evidence given on be half of the defence, with respect  to his condition at that 
time.  
206. Power of poli ce officer to impound document .—(1) Any police officer or other person 
authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if he has reason to believe that any identification 
mark carried on a motor vehicle or any licence, permit, certificate of registration, certificate of insurance 
or other document produced to him by the driver or person in charge of a motor vehicle is a false 
document within the meaning of section 464 of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ), seize the mark or 
document and call upon the driver or owner of the vehicle to  account for his possession of or the presence 
in the ve hicle of such mark or document.  
(2) Any police officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if he 
has reason to believe that the driver of a  motor vehicle who is char ged with any offence under this Act 
may abscond or otherwise avoid the service of a summons, seize any licence held  by such driver and 
forward it to the Court taking cognizance of the offence and the said Court shall on the first appearance of 
such driver before it, return the licence to him in exchange for the temporary acknowledgme nt given 
under sub -section (3).  
(3) A police officer or other pers on seizing a licence under sub -section ( 2) shall give to the person 
surrendering the licence a temporary acknowledgment therefor and such acknowledgment shall authorise 
the holder to drive until the licence has been returned to him or until such date as may be specified by the 
police officer or other person in the acknow ledgment, whichever is earlier:  
Provide d that if any magistrate, police officer or other person authorised by the State Government in 
this behalf is, on an application made to him, satisfied that the licence cannot be, or has not been, returned 95 
 to the holder thereof before the date specified in  the acknowledgment for any reason for which the holder 
is not responsible, the magistrate, police officer or other person, as the case may be, may extend the 
period of authorization to drive to such date as may be s pecified in the acknowledgment.  
207. Pow er to detain vehicles used without certifica te of registration permit, etc .—(1) Any police 
officer or other person authorised in this behalf by the State Government may, if he has reason to believe 
that a motor vehicle has been or is being used in contrave ntion of the provisions of section 3 or section 4 
or section 39 or without the permit required by sub -section ( 1) of section 66 or in contravention of any 
condition of such permit relating to the route on which or the area in which or the purpose for which  the 
vehicle may be used, seize and detain the vehicle, in the prescribed manner and for this purpose take or 
cause to be taken any steps he may consider proper for the temporary safe custody of the vehicle:  
Provided that where any such officer or person h as reason to believe that a motor vehicle has been or 
is being used in contravention of section 3 or section 4 or without the permit required by sub -section ( 1) 
of section 66 he may, instead of seizing the vehicle, seize the certificate of registration of the vehicle and 
shall issue an ack nowledgment in respect thereof.  
(2) Where a motor vehicle has been  seized and detained under sub -section ( 1), the owner or person in 
charge of the motor vehicle may apply to the transport authority or any officer authorise d in this behalf by 
the State Government together with the relevant documents for the release of the vehicle and such 
authority or officer may, after verification of such documents, by order release the vehicle subject to such 
conditions as the authority o r officer may deem fit to impose.  
208. Summary disposal of cases .—(1) The Court taking cognizance of any offence (other than an 
offence which the Central Government may by rules specify in  this behalf) under this Act, — 
(i) may, if the offence is an offence  punishable with impri sonment under this Act; and  
(ii) shall, in any other case,  
state upon the summons to be served on the accused person that he — 
(a) may appear by pleader or in pe rson; or  
(b) may, by a specified date prior to the hearing of the charge,  plead guilty to the charge and remit 
to the Court, by money order, such sum (not exceeding the maximum fine that may be imposed for 
the offence) as the Court may specify, and the plea of guilt indicated in the money order coupon 
itself:  
Provided that the Court shall, in the case of any of the offences referred to in sub -section ( 2), state 
upon the summons that the accused person, if he pleads guilty, shall so plead in the manner specified in 
clause ( b) and shall forward his driving licence to the Court wit h his letter containing such plea.  
(2) Where the offence dealt with in accordance with sub -section ( 1) is an offence specified by the 
Central Government by rules for the purposes of this sub -section, the Court shall, if the accused person 
pleads guilty to the charge and forward his driving licence to the Court with the letter containing his plea, 
make an endorsement of such con viction on his driving licence.  
(3) Where an accused person pleads guilty and remits the sum specified and has complied with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1), or as the case may be, sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), no further proceedings in 
respect of the offence shall be taken against him nor shall he be liable, notwithstanding anything to the 
contrary contained in this Act, to be disqualif ied for holding or obtaining a licence by reaso n of his having 
pleaded guilty.  
209. Restriction on conviction .—No person prosecuted for an offence punishable under section 183 
or section 184 shall be convicted unless — 
(a) he was warned at the time the offe nce was committed that the question of prosecuting him 
would be taken into consideration, or  
(b) within fourteen days from the commission of the offence, a notice specifying the nature of the 
offence and the time and place where it is alleged to have been committed was served on or sent by 96 
 registered post to him or the person registered as the owner of the vehicle at the time of the 
commission of the of fence, or  
(c) within twenty -eight days of the commission of the offence, a summons for  the offence was 
served on him:  
Provided that nothing, in this section shall apply wher e the Court is satisfied that — 
(a) the failure to serve the notice or summons referred to in this sub -section was due to the fact 
that neither the name and address of th e accused nor the name and address  of the registered owner of 
the vehicle could with reasonable diligence ha ve been ascertained in time, or  
(b) such failure was brought about  by the conduct of the accused.  
210. Courts to se nd intimation about conviction .—Every Court by which any person holding a 
driving licence is convicted of an offence under this Act or of an offence in the commission of which a 
motor vehicle was u sed, shall send intimation to — 
(a) the licensing authority which issued the driving licence, and  
(b) the licensing authority by whom the licence was last renewed,  
and every such intimation shall state the name and address of the holder of the licence, the licence 
number, the date of issue and renewal of the same, the nature of the offenc e, the punishment awarded for 
the same and such other pa rticulars as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER XIV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
211. Power to levy fee .—Any rule which the Central Government or the State Government is 
empowered to make under this Act may, notwithstanding  the absence of any express provision to that 
effect, provide for the levy of such fees in respect of applications, amendment of documents, issue of 
certificates, licences, permits, tests, endorsements, badges, plates, countersignatures, authorisation, sup ply 
of statistics or copies of documents or orders and for any other purpose or matter involving the rendering 
of any service by the officers or authorities under this Act or any rule made thereunder as may be 
considered necessary:  
Provided that the Govern ment may, if it considers necessary so to do, in the public interest, by 
general or special order, exempt any class of persons from the payment of any such fee either in part or in 
full. 
212. Publication, commencement and lay ing of rules and notifications .—(1) The power to make 
rules under this Act is subject to the condition of the rules being m ade after previous publication.  
(2) All rules made under this Act shall be published in the Official Gazette, and shall unless some 
later date is appointed, come into force on  the date of such publication.  
(3) Every rule made by any State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is mad e before 
the State Legislature.  
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act, every scheme made by the C entral 
Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 75 and sub -section ( 1) of section 163 and every notification 
issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 4) of section 41, sub -section ( 1) of section 58,  
sub-section ( 1) of section 59, the proviso to sub-section ( 1) of section 112 , 1[sub-section ( 4) of  
section 163A]  and sub -section ( 4) of section 213 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the exp iry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, scheme or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or scheme should not be made or the 
notification should not be issued, the rule, scheme or notification shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 54 of 1994, s. 62 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  97 
 annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anythi ng previously done under tha t rule, scheme 
or notification.  
213. Appointm ent of motor vehicles officers .—(1) The State Government may, for the purpose of 
carrying into effect the provisions of this Act, establish a Motor Vehicles Department and appoint as 
officers thereof  such persons as it thinks fit.  
(2) Every such officer shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of the  Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860 ).  
(3) The State Government may make rules to regulate the discharge by officers of the Motor Vehicles 
Department of their functions and in particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power to prescribe the uniform to be worn by them, the authorities to which they shall be subordinate, the 
duties to be performed by the m, the powers (including the powers exercisable by police officers under 
this Act) to be exercised by them, and the conditions governi ng the exercise of such powers.  
(4) The Central Government may, having regard to the objects of the Act, by notification i n the 
Official Gazette, prescribe the minimum qualifications which the said officers or any class thereof shall 
posse ss for being appointed as such.  
(5) In addition to the powers that may be conferred on any officer of the Motor Vehicles Department 
under s ub-section ( 3), such officer as may be empowered by the State Government in this behalf shall 
also have the power to, — 
(a) make such examination and inquiry as he thinks fit in order to ascertain whether the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made  thereu nder are being observed;  
(b) with such assistance, if any, as he thinks fit, enter, inspect and search any premises which is in 
the occupation of a person who, he has reason to believe, has committed an offence under this Act or 
in which a motor vehicle in  respect of which such offe nce has been committed is kept:  
Provided that, — 
(i) any such search without a warrant shall be made only by an officer of the rank of a 
gazet ted officer;  
(ii) where the offence is punishable with fine only the search shall not be  made a fter sunset 
and before sunrise;  
(iii) where the search is made without a warrant, the gazetted officer concerned shall record 
in writing the grounds for not obtaining a warrant and report to his immediate superior that such 
search has been made;  
(c) examine any person and require the production of any register or other document maintained 
in pursuance of this Act, and take on the spot or otherwise statements of any person which he may 
consider necessary for carryin g out the purposes of this Act;  
(d) seize or take copies of any registers or documents or portions thereof as he may consider 
relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been committed;  
(e) launch prosecutions in respect of any offence under this Act and to take a bond for ensuring 
the attendance of  the offender before any court;  
(f) exercise such oth er powers as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no person shall be compelled under this sub -section to answer any question or make 
any statement tending to incriminate himself.  
(6) The provisions of the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ) shall, so far as may be apply 
to any search or seizure under this section as they apply to any search or seizure under the authority of 
any warrant issued  under section 94 of that Code.  
214. Effect of appeal and revision on orders passed by original aut hority .—(1) Where an appeal 
has been preferred or an application for revision has been made against any order passed by an original 98 
 authority under this Act,  the appeal or the application for revision shall not operate as a stay of the order 
passed by the original authority and such order shall remain in force pending the disposal of the appeal or 
the application for revision, as the case may be, unless the pr escribed appellate authority or revisional 
authority otherwise directs.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if an application made by a person for the 
renewal of permit has been rejected by the original authority and such person has preferred an appeal or 
made an application for revision under this Act against such rejection, the appellate authority or, as the 
case may be, the revisional authority may by order direct that the permit shall, notwithstanding the 
expiration of the term sp ecified therein, continue to be valid until the appeal or applicati on for revision is 
disposed of.  
(3) No order made by a competent authority under this Act shall be reversed or altered on appeal or 
revision on account of any error, omission or irregularity in the proceedings, unless it appears to the 
prescribed appellate authority or revisional authority, as the case may be, that such error, omission or 
irregularity has, in fact, o ccasioned a failure of justice.  
215. Road Safety Councils and Com mittees .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, constitute for the country a National Road Safety Council consisting of a Chairman 
and such other members as that Government considers necessary and on such terms and conditi ons as  that 
Government may determine.  
(2) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute for the State a State 
Road Safety Council consisting of a Chairman and such other members as that Government considers 
necessary and on su ch terms and conditions as  that Government may determine.  
(3) A State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute District Road Safety 
Committee for each district in the State consisting of a Chairman and such other members as that 
Government considers necessary and on such terms and conditions as that Government may determine.  
(4) The Councils and Committees referred to in this section shall discharge such functions relating to 
the road safety programmes as the Central Government or  the State Government, as the case may be, 
may, having regard to t he objects of the Act, specify.  
216. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published  in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years  from the date of 
commencemen t of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
217. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Moto r Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939 ) and any law corresponding 
to that Act in force in any State immediately before the commencement of this Act in that State (hereafter 
in this section referred to as the repealed e nactments) are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal by sub -section ( 1) of the r epealed e nactments, — 
(a) any notification, rule, regulation, order or notice issued, or any appointment or declaration 
made, or exemption granted, or any confiscation made, or any penalty or fine imposed, any forfeiture, 
cancellation or any other thing don e, or any other action taken under the repealed enactments, and in 
force immediately before such commencement shall, so far as it is not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been issued, made, granted, done or taken under the 
correspondi ng provision of this Act;  
(b) any certificate of fitness or registration or licence or permit issued or granted under the 
repealed enactments shall continue to have effect after such commencement under the same 
conditions and for the same period as  if this  Act had not been passed;  99 
 (c) any document referring to any of the repealed enactments or the provisions thereof, shall be 
construed as referring to this Act or to the corre sponding provision of this Act;  
(d) the assignment of distinguishing marks by the registering authority and the manner of display 
on motor vehicles in accordance with the provision of the repealed enactments shall, after the 
commencement of this Act, continue to remain in force until a notification under sub -section ( 6) of 
sectio n 41 of this Act is issued;  
(e) any scheme made under section 68C of the Moto r Vehicles Act, 1939 (4 of 1939 ) or under the 
corresponding law, if any, in force in any State and pending immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall be disposed of in accordance with the provisi ons of section 100 of this Act;  
(f) the permits issued under sub -section ( 1A) of section 68F of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1939   
(4 of 1939 ), or under the corresponding provision, if any, in force in any State immediately before the  
commencement of this Act shall continue to remain in force until the approved scheme under Chapt er 
VI of this Act is published.  
(3) Any penalty payable under any of the repealed enactments may be recovered in the manner 
provided by or under this Act, but without prejudice to any action already taken for the recovery of such 
penalty  under the repealed enactments.  
(4) The mention of particular matters in this section shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general 
application of section 6 of the General  Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897 ), with regard to the effect of 
repeals.  
1[217A. Renewal of permits, driving licences and registration granted under the Motor Vehicles 
Act, 1939 .—Notwithstanding the repeal by sub -section ( 1) of section 217 of the enactments referred to in 
that sub -section, any certificate of fitness or registration or licence or permit issued or granted under the 
said enactments may be renewed under this Act.]  
  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2000, s. 5 (w.e.f. 11 -8-2000).  100 
 1[THE  FIRST SCHEDULE ] 
(See sections 116 and 119)  
TRAFFIC  SIGNS  
Part A.—Mandatory Signs  
 
 
 
Notes —(1) The figure 20 is given merely as an example. The actual figures will be as prescribed in each case  where this sign is used.  
(2) The general design of the post is given for guidance.  
(3) Where the speed limit is, or is to be, imposed only on a certain class or classes of motor vehicle, the class or classes will be specified 
on the “definition plate ”. Where in addition to a general speed limit applicable to other motor vehicles a special speed limit is or is to be 
imposed on vehicles of a certain class or classes, the general speed limit will be specified on the disc and the special spee d limit togeth er 
with the class or classes of vehicle to which it applies, will be specified on the “definition plate ”. 
(4) The paints to be used on the traffic signs should be of reflecting kind.  
                                                           
1. The S chedule renumbered as the First Schedule thereof  by Act 54 of 1994, s. 63 (w.e.f. 14 -11-1994).  
101 
  
 
 
 
 
 
102 
  
Note. —Sign NO .5 as here set forth may be amplified by instructions inscribed upon a definition plate placed below it as in the general 
arrangement set forth in sign No. 1 of this Part. Upon the definition plate may be set forth the times during which parking i s prohibit ed. 
In like manner an arrow -head inscribed on the definition plate will indicate that parking is prohibited on that part of the street or road 
lying to the side of the sign to which the arrow -head points.  
 
 
103 
   
104 
 Part B.—Cautionary Signs  
The signs of this Part shall be used in conjunction with a red triangular plate, the centre of which shall be either bollow or painted white, i n 
the manner indicated in the general design reproduced below.  
 
 
  
105 
  
 
 
106 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
107 
  
 
 
 
 
108 
 Part C.—Informatory Signs  
 
 
 
 
109 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
110 
 1[THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See Section 163 A)  
SCHEDULE FOR COMPENSATION FOR THIRD PART FATAL ACCIDENT/INJURY CASES CLAIMS  
 
1. Fatal Accidents  : 
 
NOTE: The amount of compensation so arrived at in the case of fatal accident claims shall be reduced by 1 /3rd in consideration of the 
expenses  which the victim would have incurred towards maintaining himself had he been alive.  
                                                           
1. Ins. b y Act 54 of 1994, s. 64 (w.e.f. 14-11-1994).  Annual Income    Rs. 
3000  Rs. 
4200  Rs. 
5400  Rs. 
6600  Rs. 
7800  Rs. 
9000  Rs. 
10200    Rs. 
11400    Rs.  
12000  Rs. 
18000  Rs. 
24000  Rs. 
36000 Rs. 
40000  
AGE OF VICTIM  MULTIPLIER                                                   RUPEES IN THOUSANDS  
                                                   compensation in case of death  
    Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. 
Up to 15 yrs.  .....15  60 84 108 132 156 180 204 228 240 360 480 720 800 
Above 15 yrs. but not exdg. 20 yrs.  .....16  57 79.8 102 125.4  148.2 171 193.8  216.6  228 342 456 684 760 
Above 20 yrs. but not exdg. 25 yrs.  ....17 54 75.6 97.2 118.8  140.4 162 183.6  205.2  216 324 432 648 720 
Above 25 yrs. but not exdg. 30 yrs.  .....18  51 71.4 91.8 112.2  132.6 153 173.4  193.8  204 306 408 612 680 
Above 30 yrs. but not exdg. 35 yrs.  .....17  50 67.2 86.4 105.6  124.8 144 163.2  192.4  192 288 384 576 640 
Above 35 yrs. but not exdg. 40 yrs.  .....16  50 63 81 99 117 135 153 171 180 270 360 540 600 
Above 40 yrs. but not exdg. 45 yrs.  .....15  50 58.8 75.6 92.4 109.2 126 142.8  159.6  168 252 336 504 560 
Above 45 yrs. but not exdg. 50 yrs.  .....13  50 50.4 64.8 79.2 93.6 108 122.4  136.8  144 216 286 432 480 
Above 50 yrs. but not exdg. 55 yrs.  .....11  50 50 54 66 78 90 102 114 120 180 240 360 400 
Above 55 yrs. but not exdg. 60 yrs.  .......8 50 50 50 52.8 62.4 72 81.6 91.2 96 114 192 286 320 
Above 60 yrs. but not exdg. 65 yrs. .......5 50 50 50 50 50 54 61.2 68.4 72 108 144 216 240 
Above 65 yrs.  .......5 50 50 50 50 50 50 51 57 60 90 120 180 200 
2. Amount of compensation shall not be less than Rs. 50,000.    
3. General Damages (in case of death):    
    The following General Damages shall be payable in addition to compensation s outlined above:    
    (i) Funeral expenses   -- Rs.    2,000/ - 
    (ii) Loss of Consortium, if beneficiary is the spouse   -- Rs.    5,000/ - 
    (iii) Loss of Estate   -- Rs.    2,500/ - 
     (iv) Medical Expenses —Actual expenses incurred before death supported by bills/vouchers but not 
exceeding   -- Rs.  1 5, 000/ - 
4. General Damages in ca se of Injuries and Disabilities :   
     (i) Pain and Sufferings    
         (a) Grievous injuries   -- Rs.    5,000/ - 
         (b) Non-grievous injuries   -- Rs.    1,000/ - 111 
  
 
 
      (ii) Medical Expenses —Actual expenses incurred supported by bills/vouchers but not exceeding 
as one time payment   -- Rs.   15,000/ - 
5. Disability in non-fatal accidents :   
   The following compensation shall be payable in case of disability to the victim ari sing out of non -
fatal accidents :   
   Loss of income, if any, for actual period of disablement not exceeding fifty -two weeks.    
   PLUS either of the following :—   
    (a) In case of permanent total disablement the amount payable shall be arrived at by multiplying the annual loss of income by the  
Multiplier applicable to the age on the date of determining the compensation, or  
(b) In case of permanent partial disablement such percentage of compensation which would have been payable in the case of permane nt 
total disablement as specified under item ( a) above.  
Injuries deemed to result in Permanent Total Disablement /Permanent Part ial Disablement and percentage of loss of earning capacity shall 
be as per Schedule I under Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923.  
6. Notional income for compensation to those who had no income prior to accident :—  
Fatal and disability in non -fatal accidents: —  
(a) Non-earning persons   —Rs. 15,000 p.a.  
(b) Spouse                                                                                                                       —Rs. l/3rd of income of the 
earning/surviving spouse.  
In case of other injuries only "general damage" as applicable.]   
--------------------------The National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1988  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONA L H IGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Constitution of the Authority . 
4. Term of office and conditions of service of members.  
5. Disqualifications for appointment as member.  
6. Eligibility of member for reappointment.  
7. Meetings.  
8. Vacancy in the Authority not to invalidate proceedings.  
9. Appointment of officers,  consultants and other employees of the Authority.  
10. Authority to act on business principles.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
11. Power of the Central Government to vest or entrust any national highway in the Authority.  
12. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Central Government to the Authority.  
13. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Authority.  
14. Contracts by the Authority.  
15. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
16. Functions of the Authority.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCO UNTS AND AUDIT  
17. Additional capital and Grants  to the Authority by the Central Government.  
18. Fund of the Authority.  
19. Budget.  
20. Investment of funds.  
21. Borrowing powers of the Authority.  
22. Annual report.  2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Accounts and audit.  
24. Annual report and auditor’s report to be laid before Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Delegation of powers.  
26. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority.  
27. Employees of the Authority to be public servants.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
29. Power of the Authority to underta ke certain works.  
30. Power to enter.  
31. Power of the Central Government to temporarily divest the Authority of the management of any 
national highway.  
32. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Authority.  
33. Power of the Central Government to issue directions . 
34. Power of the Central Government to made rules.  
35. Power  of the Authority to make regulations.  
36. Power to remove difficulties.  
37. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
 3 
 THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 68 OF 1988  
[16th December , 1988 .] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of an Authority for the development, maintenance and 
management of national highways and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Highways 
Authority of India Act, 1988.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Authority ” means the National Highways Authority of India constituted under section 3;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Authority;  
(c) “employee ” means a person in the full -time service of the Authority;  
(d) “member ” means a member of the Authority appointed under section 3 and includes the 
Chairman;  
(e) “national highway ” means any highw ay for the time being declared as a national highway 
under section 2 of the National Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956);  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Authority under this Act;  
(h) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the National Highways           
Act, 1956 (48 of 1956) shall have the meanings assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONA L HIGHWAYS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Constitution of the Authority .—(1) With effect from such date  as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be constituted for the purposes of 
this Act an Authority to be called the National Highways Authority of India.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract  and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
2[(3) The Authority shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairman;  
(b) not more than six full -time members; and  
(c) not more than six part -time members,  
to be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette:  
                                                           
1. 15th  June, 1989, vide notificat ion No. S.O. 451(E), dated 15th  June, 1989, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,              
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 19 of 2013, s. 2, for sub-section  3 (w.e.f. 10 -9-2013).  4 
 Provided that the Central Government shall, while appointing the part -time members, ensure that at 
least two of them are non -Government professionals having  knowledge or exper ience in financial 
management, transportation planning or any other relevant disc ipline. ] 
4. Term of office and conditions of service of members .—The term of office and other conditions 
of service of the members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
5. Disqualifications for appointment as member .—A person shall be disqualified for bei ng 
appointed as a member if he — 
(a) has  been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and sta nds so declared by a competent C ourt; or  
(d) has b een removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a Corporation owned 
or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other interest in the Authority 
as is likely to affect prejudicially  the discharge by him of his functions as a member.  
6. Eligibility of member for re appointment .—Subject to the other terms and conditions of service 
as may be prescribed, any person ceasing to be a member shall be eligible for re appointment as such 
member.  
7. Meetings .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings, including the quorum thereat, as may be 
provided by regulations.  
(2) If for any reason the Chairman is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority any other member 
chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in 
his absence the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
8. Vacancy in the Authority not to invalidate proceedings .—No act or proceeding of the Authority 
shall be invalidated merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure adopted by the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
9. Appointment of officers, consultants and other employees of the Authority .—(1) For the 
purpose of discharging its functions, the Authority shall appoint such n umber of officers and other 
employees as it may consider necessary on such terms and conditions as may be laid down by the 
regulations.  
(2) The Authority may appoint, from time to time, any person as adviser or consultant as it may 
consider necessary, on s uch terms and conditions as may be laid down by the regulations.  
10. Authority to act on business principles .—In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the 
Authority shall act, so far as may be, on business principles.  
CHAPTER III  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
11. Power of the Central Government to vest or entrust any national highway in the 
Authority .—The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
vest in, or entrust to, the Authority, such national highway or any stretch thereof as may be specified in 
such notification.  5 
 12. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Central Government to the Authority .—(1) On and 
from the date of publication of the  notification under section 11, — 
(a) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be done by, with, or for, the Central Government, immediately before such date for 
or in connection with the purposes of any national highway or any stretch thereof vest ed in, or 
entrusted to, the Authority under that section, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into and 
engaged to be done by, with, or for, the Authority;  
(b) all non -recurring expenditure incurred by or for the Central Government for or in conn ection 
with the purposes of any national highway or any stretch thereof, so vested in, or entrusted to, the 
Authority, up to such date and declared to be capital expenditure by the Central Government shall, 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be pr escribed, be treated as capital provided by the 
Central Government to the Authority;  
(c) all sums of money due to the Central Government in relation to any national highway or any 
stretch thereof, so vested in, or entrusted to, the Authority immediately be fore such date shall be 
deemed to be due to the Authority;  
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Central Government immediately before such date for any matter in relation to such 
national highway or any stretch thereof may be continued or instituted by  or against the Authority.  
(2) If any dispute arises as to which of the assets, rights or liabilities of the Central Government have 
been transferred to the Authority, such dispute shall be decided by the Central Government.  
1[13. Compulsory acquisition of  land for the Authority .—Any land required by the Authority for 
discharging its functions under this Act shall be deemed to be land needed for a public purpose and such 
land may be acquired for the Authority under the provisions of the National Highways Ac t, 1956                       
(48 of 1956).]  
14. Contracts by the Authority .—Subject to the provisions of section 15, the Authority shall be 
competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 
15. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority .—(1) Every contract shall, on behalf of 
the Authority, be made by the Chairman or such other member or such officer of the Authority as may be 
generally or specially empowered in this behalf by the Aut hority and such contracts or classes of contracts 
as may be specified in the regulations shall be sealed with the common seal of the Authority:  
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as the Central Government may prescribe 
in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously approved by that Government:  
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of immovable property or for the lease of 
any such property for a term exceeding thirty years and no other contract excee ding such value or amount 
as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously 
approved by that Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the form and manner in which any contract shall be 
made under this Act shall be such as may be provided by regulations.  
(3) No contract which is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations shall be 
binding on the Authority.  
CHAPTER IV  
FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
16. Functions of the  Authority .— (1) Subject to the rules made by the Central Government in this 
behalf, it shall be the function of the Authority to develop, maintain and manage the national highways 
and any other highways vested in, or entrusted to, it by the Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1997, s. 6, for section 13 (w.e.f. 24 -1-1997).  6 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Authority 
may, for the discharge of its functions —  
(a) survey, develop, maintain and manage highways vested in, or entrusted to, it;  
(b) construct offices or worksho ps and establish and maintain hotels, motels, restaurants and             
rest-rooms at or near the highways vested in, or entrusted to, it;  
(c) construct residential buildings and townships for its employees;  
(d) regulate and control the plying of vehicle s on the highways vested in, or entrusted to, it for the 
proper management thereof;  
(e) develop and provide consultancy and construction services in India and abroad and carry on 
research activities in relation to the development, maintenance and management of highways or any 
facilities thereat;  
(f) provide such facilities and amenities for the users of the highways vested in, or entrusted to, it 
as are, in the opinion of the Authority, necessary for the smooth flow of traffic on such highways;  
(g) form one or more companies under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) to further the 
efficient discharge of the functions imposed on it by this Act;  
1[(h) engage, or entrust any of its functions to, any person on such terms and conditions as may be 
prescri bed;]  
(i) advise the Central Government on matters relating to highways;  
(j) assist, on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon, any State Government in 
the formulation and implementation of schemes for highway development;  
(k) collect fee s on behalf of the Central Government for services or benefits rendered under 
section 7 of the National Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956), as amended from time to time, and such 
other fees on behalf of the State Governments on such terms and conditions as ma y be specified by 
such State Governments; and  
(l) take all such steps as may be necessary or convenient for, or may be incidental to, the exercise 
of any power or the discharge of any function conferred or imposed on it by this Act.  
(3) Nothing contained i n this  section shall be construed as — 
(a) authorising the disregard by the Authority of any law for the time being in force; or  
(b) authorising  any person to institute any proceeding in respect of a duty or liability to which the 
Authority or its officers or other employees would not otherwise be subject under this Act.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
2[17. Additional capital and grants to the Authority by the Central Government .—The Central 
Government may, after due appropriation made by Parl iament, by law in this behalf, — 
(a) provide any capital that may be required by the Authority for the discharge of its functions 
under this Act or for any purpose connected therewith on such terms and conditions as that 
Government may determine;  
(b) pay to the Authority, on such terms and conditions as the Central Government may determine, 
by way of loans or grants such sums of money as that Government m ay consider necessary for the 
efficient discharge by the Authority of its functions under this Act.]  
18. Fund of the Authority .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National 
Highways Authority of India Fund and t here shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any grant or aid received by the Authority;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1997, s. 7, for clause ( h) (w.e.f. 24 -1-1997).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for section 17 (w.e.f. 24 -1-1997).  7 
 (b) any loan taken by the Authority or any borrowings made by it;  
(c) any other sums received by the Authority.  
(2) The Fund  shall be utilised for meeting — 
(a) expenses  of the Authority in the discharge of its functions having regard to the purposes for 
which such grants, loans or borrowings are received and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto;  
(b) salary, allowances, other remuneration and facilities p rovided to the members, officers and 
other employees of the Authority;  
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.  
19. Budget .—The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as 
may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure 
of the Authority and forward the same to the Central Government.  
20. Investment of funds .—The Authority may invest its funds (including any reserve fund) in the 
securities o f the Central Government or in such other manner as may be prescribed.  
21. Borrowing powers of the Authority .—(1) The Authority may, with the consent of the Central 
Government or in accordance with the terms of any general or special authority given to it by the Central 
Government, borrow money from any source by the issue of bonds, debentures or such other instruments 
as it may deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions under this Act.  
(2) Subject to such limits as the Central Government may, fro m time to time, lay down, the Authority 
may borrow temporarily by way of overdraft or otherwise, such amounts as it may require for discharging 
its functions under this Act.  
(3) The Central Government may guarantee in such manner as it thinks fit the repay ment of the 
principal and the payment of interest thereon with respect to the borrowings made by the Authority under 
sub-section ( 1). 
22. Annual report .—The Authority shall prepare, in such form and at such time  in each financial 
year as may be prescribed,  its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
23. Accounts and audit .—The accounts of the Authority shall be maintained and audited in such 
manner as may, in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India, be prescribed and the 
Authority shall furnish, to the Central Government before such date as may be prescribed, its audited 
copy of acc ounts together with the auditor’ s report thereon.  
24. Annual report and auditor’ s report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government 
shall cause the annual report and auditor ’s report to be laid, as soon as may be, after they are received, 
before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Delegation of powers .—The Authority may, by general or special order in writing , delegate to 
the Chairman or any other member or to any officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, suc h of its powers and functions under this Act 
(except its powers under section 35) as it may deem necessary.  
26. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority .—All orders, decisions and 
other instruments of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any other 
member or any officer of the Authority authorised by it in this behalf.  
27. Employees of the Authority to be public servants .—All members, officers and employees of 
the Authority shall, when actin g or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of any 
rule or regulation made thereunder, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  8 
 28. Protection of action taken in good f aith.—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Authority or any member or officer or employee of the Authority for anything which 
is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
(2) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Authority or any member or 
officer or employee of the Authority for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done  under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
29. Power of the Authority to undertake certain works .—The Authority may undertake to carry 
out on behalf of the Government or any local authority any works or services or any class of works or 
services on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between the Authority and the Government 
or local authority concerned.  
30. Power to enter .—Subject to any regulations made in this behalf any person, generally or 
specially authorised by the Author ity in this behalf, may, whenever it is necessary so to do for any of the 
purposes of this Act, at all reasonable times, enter upon any land or premises, and —  
(a) make any inspection, survey, measurement, valuation or enquiry;  
(b) take levels;  
(c) dig or bore into sub -soil; 
(d) set out boundaries and intended lines of work;  
(e) mark such levels, boundaries and lines by placing marks and cutting trenches; or  
(f) do such other acts or things as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no such person shall enter any boundary or any enclosed court o r garden attached to a 
dwelling -house (except with the consent of the occupier thereof) without previously giving such occu pier 
at least twenty -four hours’  notice in writing of his intention to do so.  
31. Power of the Central Government to temporarily divest the Authority of the management of 
any national highway .—(1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion that in the public 
interest it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order, direct the Authority to entrust the 
development, maintenance or management of any national highway or a part thereof with effect from 
such date and for such period and to such person as may be specified in the order and the Authority shall 
be bound to comply with suc h direction.  
(2) Where development, maintenance or management of any national highway or part thereof is 
entrusted to any person specified under sub -section ( 1) (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
authorised person), the Authority shall cease to exercise and discharge all its powers and functions under 
this Act in relation to such national highway or part thereof and such powers and functions shall be 
exercised and discharged by the authorised person in accordance with the instructions, if any, wh ich the 
Central Government may give to the authorised person from time to time:  
Provided that no such power or function as may be specified by the Central Government by a general 
or special order shall be exercised or discharged by the authorised person ex cept with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Government may reduce or extend the period mentioned in sub -section ( 1) as it 
considers necessary.  
(4) During the operation of an order made under sub -section ( 1), it shall be compe tent for the Central 
Government to issue, from time to time, such directions to the Authority as are necessary to enable the 
authorised person to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the Authority under this Act in 
relation to the national hi ghway or part thereof, the management of which has been entrusted to him and 
in particular, to transfer any sum of money from the Fund of the Authority to the authorised person for the 
management of the national highway or part thereof and every such direc tion shall be complied with by 
the Authority.  
(5) On the cesser of operation of any order made under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any national 
highway or part thereof, the authorised person shall cease to exercise and perform the powers and 9 
 functions of the Authority under this Act in relation to such national highway or part thereof and the 
Authority shall continue to exercise and perform such powers and functions in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act.  
(6) On the cesser  of operation of any order made under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any national 
highway or part thereof, the authorised person shall hand over to the Authority any property (including 
any sum of money or other asset) remaining with him in connection with  the management of such 
national highway or part thereof.  
32. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Authority .—(1) If, at any time, the Ce ntral 
Government is of opinion — 
(a) that on account of a grave emergency the Authority is unable to dischar ge the functions and 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions a nd duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Authority for such 
period, not exceeding one year, as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section for the reasons m entioned in               
clause ( b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause 
why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the 
Authority.  
(2) Upon the publi cation of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Authority, — 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall, until the A uthority is reconstituted 
under sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the Central 
Government may direct;  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under            
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may — 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further term, not exceeding one year, as it may 
consider necessary; or  
(b) reconstitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such a case, any person who vacated 
office under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession whether as originally  specified under sub -section ( 1) or as  extended under this sub -section, 
take action under clause ( b) of this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) or                            
sub-section ( 3) and a full report of any action taken under  this section and the circumstances leading to 
such action to be laid before both Houses of Parliament as soon as may be.  
33. Power of the Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the other 
provisions of this Act, the Authority shal l, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be 
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give to it in writing from 
time to time.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final.  10 
 34. Power of the Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to  the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the term of office and other conditions of service of the members;  
(b) the powers and duties of the Chairman and of the members;  
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which the non-recurring expenditure incurred by or for the 
Central Government for or in connection with the purposes of any national highway shall be treated 
as capital provided by the Central Government to the Authority under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
sectio n 12;  
(d) the value or amount required to be prescribed under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
1[(dd) the terms and conditions subject to which the functions of the Authority may be entrusted 
to any person under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 16;]  
(e) the form in which and the time within which the Authority shall prepare its budget under 
section 19 and its annual report under section 22;  
(f) the manner in which the Authority may invest its funds under section 20;  
(g) the manner in which the account s of the Authority shall be maintained and audited and the 
date before which the audited copy of the acc ounts together with the auditor’ s report thereon shall be 
furnished to the Central Government under section 23;  
(h) the conditions and restrictions with respect to the exercise of the power to enter under            
section 30 and the matters referred to in clause ( f) of that section; and  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
35. Power of the Authority to make regulations .—(1) The Authority may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prej udice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed for the 
transaction of business at such meetings;  
(b) the terms and conditions of service, method of recruitment and the remuneration of officers 
and other employees appoin ted by the Authority;  
(c) the form and manner in which a contract or class of contracts may be made by the Authority 
and the contracts or classes of contracts which are to be sealed with the common seal of the 
Authority;  
(d) the manner of preventing obstru ctions on the national highways for their normal functioning;  
(e) the manner of prohibiting the parking or waiting of any vehicle or carriage o n the national 
highway except at  places specified by the Authority;  
(f) the manner of prohibiting or restricting access to any part of the national highway;  
(g) the manner of regulating or restricting advertisements on and around national highways; and  
(h) generally for the efficient and proper maintenance and management of the national highways.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 1997, s. 9 (w.e.f. 24 -1-1997).  11 
 36. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make order not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it to be nec essary or expedient for the removal of the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the commencement 
of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made,  before each 
House of Parliament.  
37. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifi cation in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modifica tion or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
 
--------------------------The National Waterway (Sadiya-Dhubri Stretch of the Brahmaputra River) Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (SADIYA -DHUBRI STRETCH OF THE  
BRAHMAPUTRA  RIVER) ACT, 1988  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Declaration of Sadiya -Dhubri Stretch of Brahmaputra river to be national waterway . 
3. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union of Sadiya -Dhubri Stretch of Brahmaputra 
river for certain purposes . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (SADIYA -DHUBRI STRETCH OF THE  
BRAHMAPUTRA  RIVER) ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1988  
            
          [1st September , 1988 .] 
An Act to provide for the declaration of the Sadiya -Dhubri  Stretch of the Brahmaputra river to be 
a national waterway and also to provide for the regulation and development of the said 
stretch of that river  for purposes of shipping and navigation on the said waterway and for 
matters connected therewith or incide ntal thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the National Waterway (Sadiya -
Dhubri Stretch of the Brahmaputra River) Act, 1988.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Sadiya -Dhubri Stretch of Brahmaputra river to be national waterway. —The 
Sadiya -Dhubri Stretch of the Brahmaputra river, th e limits of which are specified in the Schedule, is 
hereby declared to be a national waterway.  
3. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union of Sadiya -Dhubri Stretch of 
Brahmaputra river for certain purposes. —It is hereby declared that it is expe dient in the public 
interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation and development of Sadiya -Dhubri 
Stretch of the Brahmaputra river for purposes of shipping and navigation on the national waterway to the 
extent provided in the Inland  Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 (82 of 1985). 
  
                                                           
1. 26th December, 1988, vide notification  No. S.O. 1198(E), dated 26th December, 1988, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section  2) 
LIMITS OF THE NATIONAL WATERWAY  (SADIYA -DHUBRI  STRETCHOF THE BRAHMAPUTRA RIVER ) 
From a line drawn across the Brahmaputra river from the point on the north bank of the Kundil  river 
at its confluence with the Brahmaputra river near Sadiya to the beginning of the river island Majuli and 
therefrom through all the channels of the Brahmaputra river on either side of the river island Majuli up to 
the end of the river island Majuli a nd then up to the international border down stream of Dhubri.  
--------------------------The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988--------------------------
1 THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988 
_________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS 
1. Short title and extent. 
2. Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL JUDGES
3. Power to appoint special Judges. 
4. Cases triable by special Judges. 
5. Procedure and powers of special Judge. 
6. Power to try summarily.
CHAPTER III 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES 
7. Offence relating to public servant being bribed. 
7A. Taking undue advantage to influence public servant by corrupt or illegal means or by exercise 
of personal influence .
8. Offence relating to bribing of a public servant. 
9. Offence relating to bribing a public servant by a commercial organisation. 
10. Person in charge of commercial organisation to be guilty of offence. 
11. Public servant obtaining undue advantage, without consideration from person concerned in 
proceeding or business transacted by such public servant. 
12. Punishment for abetment of offences. 
13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant. 
14. Punishment for habitual offender. 
15. Punishment for attempt. 
16. Matters to be taken into consideration for fixing fine. 
CHAPTER IV 
INVESTIGATION INTO CASES UNDER THE ACT
17. Persons authorised to investigate. 
17A. Enquiry or Inquiry or investigation of offences relatable to recommendations made or 
decision taken by public servant in discharge of official functions or duties. 
18. Power to inspect bankers’ books. 
CHAPTER IV A 
ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY
 18A. Provisions of Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944 to apply to attachment under this 
Act. 
CHAPTER V 
SANCTION FOR PROSECUTION AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution. 
20. Presumption where public servant accepts any undue advantage. 
21. Accused person to be a competent witness. 
22. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to apply subject to certain modifications. 2 SECTIONS
23. Particulars in a charge in relation to an offence under section 13 ( 1) (a). 
24. [Omitted. ] 
25. Military, Naval and Air Force or other law not to be affected. 
26. Special Judges appointed under Act 46 of 1952 to be special Judges appointed under this Act. 
27. Appeal and revision. 
28. Act to be in addition to any other law. 
29. Amendment of the Ordinance 38 of 1944. 
29A. Power to make rules. 
30. Repeal and saving. 
31. [Repealed. ]3 THE PREVENTION OF CORRUPTION ACT, 1988 
ACT NO. 49 OF 1988
[9th September, 1988.] 
 An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to the prevention of corruption and for matters 
connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty-ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and extent.— (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir and it applies also to all 
citizens of India outside India. 
2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “election” means any election, by whatever means held under any law for the purpose of 
selecting members of Parliament or of any Legislature, local authority or other public authority; 
1[(aa) ‘‘prescribed’’ means prescribed by rules made under this Act and the expression 
‘‘prescribe’’ shall be construed accordingly;] 
(b) “public duty” means a duty in the discharge of which the State, the public or the community at 
large has an interest; 
Explanation.— In this clause “State” includes a corporation established by or under a Central, 
Provincial or State Act, or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the Government or a 
Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); 
(c) “public servant” means— 
(i) any person in the service or pay of the Government or remunerated by the Government by 
fees or commission for the performance of any public duty; 
(ii)  any person in the service or pay of a local authority; 
(iii) any person in the service or pay of a corporation established by or under a Central, 
Provincial or State Act, or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the 
Government or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956               
(1 of 1956); 
(iv) any Judge, including any person empowered by law to discharge, whether by himself or 
as a member of any body of persons, any adjudicatory functions; 
(v) any person authorised by a court of justice to perform any duty, in connection with the 
administration of justice, including a liquidator, receiver or commissioner appointed by such 
court; 
(vi)  any arbitrator or other person to whom any cause or matter has been referred for decision 
or  report by a court of justice or by a competent public authority; 
(vii) any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is empowered to prepare, publish, 
maintain or revise an electoral roll or to conduct an election or  part of an election; 
(viii) any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is authorised or required to 
perform any public duty; 
(ix) any person who is the president, secretary or other office-bearer of a registered 
co-operative society engaged in agriculture, industry, trade or banking, receiving or having 
received any financial aid from  the Central Government or a State Government or from any 
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 4 corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State Act, or any authority or body 
owned or controlled or aided by the  Government or a Government company as defined in section 
617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956); 
(x) any person who is a chairman, member or employee of any Service Commission or Board, 
by whatever name called, or a member of any selection committee appointed by such 
Commission or Board for the conduct of any examination or making any selection on behalf of 
such Commission or Board; 
(xi) any person who is a Vice-Chancellor or member of any governing body, professor, 
reader, lecturer or any other teacher or employee, by whatever designation called, of any 
University and any person whose services have been availed of by a University or any other 
public authority in connection with holding or conducting examinations; 
(xii)  any person who is an office-bearer or an employee of an educational, scientific, social, 
cultural or other institution, in whatever manner established, receiving or having received any 
financial assistance from the Central Government or any State Government, or local or other 
public authority. 
1[(d) “undue advantage” means any gratification whatever, other than legal remuneration. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause,— 
(a) the word “gratification” is not limited to pecuniary gratifications or to gratifications 
estimable in money; 
(b) the expression “legal remuneration” is not restricted to remuneration paid to a public 
servant, but includes all remuneration which he is permitted by the Government or the 
organisation, which he serves, to receive.] 
Explanation 1.— Persons falling under any of the above sub-clauses are public servants, whether 
appointed by the Government or not. 
Explanation 2.— Wherever the words “public servant” occur, they shall be understood of every person 
who is in actual possession of the situation of a public servant, whatever legal defect there may be in his 
right to hold that situation. 
CHAPTER II 
APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL JUDGES
3. Power to appoint special Judges. —(1) The Central Government or the State Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as many special Judges as may be necessary for such area or 
areas or for such case or group of cases as may be specified in the notification to try the following 
offences, namely:— 
(a) any offence punishable under this Act; and 
(b) any conspiracy to commit or any attempt to commit or any abetment of any of the offences 
specified in clause ( a). 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a special Judge under this Act unless he is or 
has been a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions Judge or an Assistant Sessions Judge under the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
4. Cases triable by special Judges.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or in any other law for the time being in force, the offences 
specified in sub-section ( 1) of section 3 shall be tried by special Judges only. 
(2) Every offence specified in sub-section ( 1) of section 3 shall be tried by the special Judge for the 
area within which it was committed, or, as the case may be, by the special Judge appointed for the case, or 
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 5 where there are more special Judges than one for such area, by such one of them as may be specified in 
this behalf by the Central Government. 
(3) When trying any case, a special Judge may also try any offence, other than an offence specified in 
section 3, with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be 
charged at the same trial. 
1[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
trial of an offence shall be held, as far as practicable, on day-to-day basis and an endeavour shall be made 
to ensure that the said trial is concluded within a period of two years: 
Provided that where the trial is not concluded within the said period, the special Judge shall record the 
reasons for not having done so: 
Provided further that the said period may be extended by such further period, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing but not exceeding six months at a time; so, however, that the said period together with 
such extended period shall not exceed ordinarily four years in aggregate.] 
5. Procedure and powers of special Judge.— (1) A special Judge may take cognizance of offences 
without the accused being committed to him for trial and, in trying the accused persons, shall follow the 
procedure prescribed by the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), for the trial of warrant cases 
by Magistrates. 
(2) A special Judge may, with a view to obtaining the evidence of any person supposed to have been 
directly or indirectly concerned in, or privy to, an offence, tender a pardon to such person on condition of 
his making a full and true disclosure of the whole circumstances within his knowledge relating to the 
offence and to every other person concerned, whether as principal or abettor, in the commission thereof 
and any pardon so tendered shall, for the purposes of sub-sections ( 1) to ( 5) of section 308 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be deemed to have been tendered under section 307 of that Code. 
(3) Save as provided in sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), the provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as they are not inconsistent with this Act, apply to the 
proceedings before a special Judge; and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Court of the special 
Judge shall be deemed to be a Court of Session and the person conducting a prosecution before a special 
Judge shall be deemed to be a public prosecutor. 
(4) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub-section ( 3), 
the provisions of sections 326 and 475 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far 
as may be, apply to the proceedings before a special Judge and for the purposes of the said provisions, a 
special Judge shall be deemed to be a Magistrate. 
(5) A special Judge may pass upon any person convicted by him any sentence authorised by law for 
the punishment of the offence of which such person is convicted. 
(6) A special Judge, while trying an offence punishable under this Act, shall exercise all the powers 
and functions exercisable by a District Judge under the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944           
(Ord. 38 of 1944). 
6. Power to try summarily.— (1) Where a special Judge tries any offence specified in sub-section ( 1) 
of section 3, alleged to have been committed by a public servant in relation to the contravention of any 
special order referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 12A of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955           
(10 of 1955) or of an order referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of that section, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) of section 5 of this Act or section 260 of the Code 
of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the special Judge shall try the offence in a summary way, and 
 the provisions of sections 262 to 265 (both inclusive) of the said Code shall, as far as may be, apply to 
such trial: 
Provided that, in the case of any conviction in a summary trial under this section, it shall be lawful for 
the special Judge to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year: 
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 3, for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 6 Provided further that when at the commencement of, or in the course of, a summary trial under this 
section, it appears to the special Judge that the nature of the case is such that a sentence of imprisonment 
for a term exceeding one year may have to be passed or that it is, for any other reason, undesirable to try 
the case summarily, the special Judge shall, after hearing the parties, record an order to that effect and 
thereafter recall any witnesses who may have been examined and proceed to hear or re-hear the case in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed by the said Code for the trial of warrant cases by Magistrates. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), there shall be no appeal by a convicted person in any case tried summarily 
under this section in which the special Judge passes a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding one month, 
and of fine not exceeding two thousand rupees whether or not any order under section 452 of the said 
Code is made in addition to such sentence, but an appeal shall lie where any sentence in excess of the 
aforesaid limits is passed by the special Judge. 
CHAPTER III 
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
1[7.Offence relating to public servant being bribed .—Any public servant who,— 
(a) obtains or accepts or attempts to obtain from any person, an undue advantage, with the intention 
to perform or cause performance of public duty improperly or dishonestly or to forbear or cause 
forbearance to perform such duty either by himself or by another public servant; or  
(b) obtains or accepts or attempts to obtain, an undue advantage from any person as a reward for 
the improper or dishonest performance of a public duty or for forbearing to perform such duty either 
by himself or another public servant; or  
(c) performs or induces another public servant to perform improperly or dishonestly a public duty 
or to forbear performance of such duty in anticipation of or in consequence of accepting an undue 
advantage from any person,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may 
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine.  
Explanation 1.—For the purpose of this section, the obtaining, accepting, or the attempting to obtain 
an undue advantage shall itself constitute an offence even if the performance of a public duty by public 
servant, is not or has not been improper.  
Illustration .—A public servant, ‘S’ asks a person, ‘P’ to give him an amount of five thousand rupees 
to process his routine ration card application on time. 'S' is guilty of an offence under this section.  
Explanation 2.—For the purpose of this section,— 
(i) the expressions “obtains” or “accepts” or “attempts to obtain” shall cover cases where a person 
being a public servant, obtains or “accepts” or attempts to obtain, any undue advantage for himself or 
for another person, by abusing his position as a public servant or by using his personal influence over 
another public servant; or by any other corrupt or illegal means; 
(ii) it shall be immaterial whether such person being a public servant obtains or accepts, or 
attempts to obtain the undue advantage directly or through a third part y.
7A. Taking undue advantage to influence public servant by corrupt or illegal means or by 
exercise of personal influence .—Whoever accepts or obtains or attempts to obtain from another person 
for himself or for any other person any undue advantage as a motive or reward to induce a public servant, 
by corrupt or illegal means or by exercise of his personal influence to perform or to cause performance of 
a public duty improperly or dishonestly or to forbear or to cause to forbear such public duty by such 
public servant or by another public servant, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. 
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 4, for sections 7, 8, 9 and 10 (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 7 8. Offence relating to bribing of a public servant .—(1) Any person who gives or promises to give 
an undue advantage to another person or persons, with intention— 
(i) to induce a public servant to perform improperly a public duty; or 
(ii) to reward such public servant for the improper performance of public duty, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or with fine or with 
both: 
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply where a person is compelled to give such 
undue advantage: 
Provided further that the person so compelled shall report the matter to the law enforcement 
authority or investigating agency within a period of seven days from the date of giving such undue 
advantage:  
Provided also that when the offence under this section has been committeed by commercial 
organisation, such commercial organisation shall be punishable with fine. 
Illustration .—A person, ‘P’ gives a public servant, ‘S’ an amount of ten thousand rupees to ensure 
that he is granted a license, over all the other bidders. ‘P’ is guilty of an offence under this sub-section.  
Explanation .—It shall be immaterial whether the person to whom an undue advantage is given or 
promised to be given is the same person as the person who is to perform, or has performed, the public 
duty concerned, and, it shall also be immaterial whether such undue advantage is given or promised to be 
given by the person directly or through a third party. 
(2) Nothing in sub-section ( 1) shall apply to a person, if that person, after informing a law 
enforcement authority or investigating agency, gives or promises to give any undue advantage to another 
person in order to assist such law enforcement authority or investigating agency in its investigation of the 
offence alleged against the later.  
9. Offence relating to bribing a public servant by a commercial organisation .—(1) Where an 
offence under this Act has been committed by a commercial organisation, such organisation shall be 
punishable with fine, if any person associated with such commercial organisation gives or promises to 
give any undue advantage to a public servant intending— 
(a) to obtain or retain business for such commercial organisation; or 
(b) to obtain or retain an advantage in the conduct of business for such commercial organisation:  
Provided that it shall be a defence for the commercial organisation to prove that it had in place 
adequate procedures in compliance of such guidelines as may be prescribed to prevent persons associated 
with it from undertaking such conduct. 
(2) For the purposes of this section, a person is said to give or promise to give any undue advantage to 
a public servant, if he is alleged to have committed the offence under section 8, whether or not such 
person has been prosecuted for such offence. 
(3) For the purposes of section 8 and this section,— 
(a) “commercial organisation” means— 
(i) a body which is incorporated in India and which carries on a business, whether in India 
or outside India; 
(ii) any other body which is incorporated outside India and which carries on a business, or 
part of a business, in any part of India; 
(iii) a partnership firm or any association of persons formed in India and which carries on a 
business whether in India or outside India; or 
(iv) any other partnership or association of persons which is formed outside India and which 
carries on a business, or part of a business, in any part of India; 8 (b) “business” includes a trade or profession or providing service; 
(c) a person is said to be associated with the commercial organisation, if such person performs 
services for or on behalf of the commercial organisation irrespective of any promise to give or giving 
of any undue advantage which constitutes an offence under sub-section ( 1). 
Explanation 1.—The capacity in which the person performs services for or on behalf of the 
commercial organisation shall not matter irrespective of whether such person is employee or agent or 
subsidiary of such commercial organisation. 
Explanation 2.—Whether or not the person is a person who performs services for or on behalf of the 
commercial organisation is to be determined by reference to all the relevant circumstances and not merely 
by reference to the nature of the relationship between such person and the commercial organisation.  
Explanation 3.—If the person is an employee of the commercial organisation, it shall be presumed 
unless the contrary is proved that such person is a person who has performed services for or on behalf of 
the commercial organisation. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
offence under sections 7A, 8 and this section shall be cognizable. 
(5) The Central Government shall, in consultation with the concerned stakeholders including 
departments and with a view to preventing persons associated with commercial organisations from 
bribing any person, being a public servant, prescribe such guidelines as may be considered necessary 
which can be put in place for compliance by such organisations. 
10. Person in charge of commercial organisation to be guilty of offence .—Where an offence under 
section 9 is committed by a commercial organisation, and such offence is proved in the court to have been 
committed with the consent or connivance of any director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be of 
the commercial organisation, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to 
fine. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, ‘‘director’’, in relation to a firm means a partner in 
the firm.] 
11. Public servant obtaining 1[undue advantage], without consideration from person concerned 
in proceeding or business transacted by such public servant.— Whoever, being a public servant, 
accepts or obtains 2*** or attempts to obtain for himself, or for any other person, any 1[undue advantage] 
without consideration, or for a consideration which he knows to be inadequate, from any person whom he 
knows to have been, or to be, or to be likely to be concerned in any proceeding or business transacted or 
about to be transacted by such public servant, or having any connection with the 3[official functions or 
public duty] of himself or of any public servant to whom he is subordinate, or from any person whom he 
knows to be interested in or related to the person so concerned, shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which shall be not less than six months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable 
to fine. 
4[12. Punishment for abetment of offences .—Whoever abets any offence punishable under this Act, 
whether or not that offence is committed in consequence of that abetment, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years, but which may extend to seven years 
and shall also be liable to fine.] 
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 5, for “valuable thing” (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
2. The words “or agrees to accept” omitted by s. 5, ibid. (we.f. 26-7-2018). 
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “ official functions” (w.e.f. 26-7-2018).
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for section 12 (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 9 13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant.—1[(1) A public servant is said to commit the offence 
of criminal misconduct,— 
(a) if he dishonestly or fraudulently misappropriates or otherwise converts for his own use any 
property entrusted to him or any property under his control as a public servant or allows any other 
person so to do; or 
(b) if he intentionally enriches himself illicitly during the period of his office. 
Explanation 1.—A person shall be presumed to have intentionally enriched himself illicitly if he or 
any person on his behalf, is in possession of or has, at any time during the period of his office, been in 
possession of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate to his known sources of income which the 
public servant cannot satisfactorily account for. 
Explanation 2 .—The expression ‘‘known sources of income’’ means income received from any 
lawful sources .] 
(2) Any public servant who commits criminal misconduct shall be punishable with imprisonment for 
a term which shall be not less than 2[four years] but which may extend to 3[ten years] and shall also be 
liable to fine. 
4[14. Punishment for habitual offender. —Whoever convicted of an offence under this Act 
subsequently commits an offence punishable under this Act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than five years but which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to 
fine.] 
15. Punishment for attempt.— Whoever attempts to commit an offence referred to in 5[clause ( a)] of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 13 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 6[which shall not be less 
than two years but which may extend to five years] and with fine. 
16. Matters to be taken into consideration for fixing fine .—Where a sentence of fine is imposed 
under 7[section 7 or section 8 or section 9 or section 10 or section 11 or sub-section ( 2) of section 13 or 
section 14 or section 15], the court in fixing the amount of the fine shall take into consideration the 
amount or the value of the property, if any, which the accused person has obtained by committing the 
offence or where the conviction is for an offence referred to in 8[clause ( b)] of sub-section ( 1) of section 
13, the pecuniary resources or property referred to in that clause for which the accused person is unable to 
account satisfactorily. 
CHAPTER IV 
INVESTIGATION INTO CASES UNDER THE  ACT
17. Persons authorised to investigate.— Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no police officer below the rank,— 
(a) in the case of the Delhi Special Police Establishment, of an Inspector of Police; 
(b) in the metropolitan areas of Bombay, Calcutta, Madras and Ahmedabad and in any other 
metropolitan area notified as such under sub-section ( 1) of section 8 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), of an Assistant Commissioner of Police; 
(c) elsewhere, of a Deputy Superintendent of Police or a police officer of equivalent rank, 
shall investigate any offence punishable under this Act without the order of a Metropolitan Magistrate or 
a Magistrate of the first class, as the case may be, or make any arrest therefor without a warrant: 
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 7, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
2. Subs. by Act 1 of 2014, s. 58 and the Sch., for “one year” (w.e.f. 16-1-2014). 
3. Subs. by s. 58 and the Sch., ibid., for “seven years” (w.e.f. 16-1-2014). 
4. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 8, for section 14 (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “clause ( c) or clause ( d)” (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
6. Subs. by Act 1 of 2014, s. 58 and the Sch., for “which may extend to three years” (w.e.f. 16-1-2014). 
7. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 10, for “sub-section ( 2) of section 13 or section 14”(w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
8. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “clause ( e)” (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 10 Provided that if a police officer not below the rank of an Inspector of Police is authorised by the State 
Government in this behalf by general or special order, he may also investigate any such offence without 
the order of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first class, as the case may be, or make arrest 
therefor without a warrant: 
Provided further that an offence referred to in 1[clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1)] of section 13 shall not 
be investigated without the order of a police officer not below the rank of a Superintendent of Police. 
2[17A. Enquiry or Inquiry or investigation of offences relatable to recommendations made or 
decision taken by public servant in discharge of official functions or duties .—No police officer shall 
conduct any enquiry or inquiry or investigation into any offence alleged to have been committed by a 
public servant under this Act, where the alleged offence is relatable to any recommendation made or 
decision taken by such public servant in discharge of his official functions or duties, without the previous 
approval— 
(a) in the case of a person who is or was employed, at the time when the offence was alleged to 
have been committed, in connection with the affairs of the Union, of that Government; 
(b) in the case of a person who is or was employed, at the time when the offence was alleged to 
have been committed, in connection with the affairs of a State, of that Government; 
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority competent to remove him from his office, at 
the time when the offence was alleged to have been committed: 
Provided that no such approval shall be necessary for cases involving arrest of a person on the spot on 
the charge of accepting or attempting to accept any undue advantage for himself or for any other person: 
Provided further that the concerned authority shall convey its decision under this section within a 
period of three months, which may, for reasons to be recorded in writing by such authority, be extended 
by a further period of one month .] 
 18. Power to inspect bankers’ books.— If from information received or otherwise, a police officer 
has reason to suspect the commission of an offence which he is empowered to investigate under section 
17 and considers that for the purpose of investigation  or inquiry into such offence, it is necessary to 
inspect any bankers’ books, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any law for  the time being in 
force, he may inspect any bankers’ books in so far as they relate to the accounts of the persons suspected 
to have  committed that offence or of any other person suspected to be holding money on behalf of such 
person, and take or cause to be taken certified copies of the relevant entries therefrom, and the bank 
concerned shall be bound to assist the police officer in the exercise of his powers under this section: 
Provided that no power under this section in relation to the accounts of any person shall be exercised 
by a police officer below the rank of a Superintendent of Police, unless he is specially authorised in this 
behalf by a police officer of or above the rank of a Superintendent of Police. 
Explanation .—In this section, the expressions “bank” and “bankers’ books” shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in the Bankers’ Books Evidence Act, 1891 (18 of 1891). 
3[CHAPTER IVA 
ATTACHMENT AND FORFEITURE OF PROPERTY 
18A. Provisions of Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944 to apply to attachment under 
this Act .—(1) Save as otherwise provided under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002              
(15 of 2003), the provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944 (Ord. 38 of 1944) shall, as 
far as may be, apply to the attachment, administration of attached property and execution of order of 
attachment or confiscation of money or property procured by means of an offence under this Act. 
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 11, for “clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 11 (2) For the purposes of this Act, the provisions of the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 1944 
(Ord. 38 of 1944) shall have effect, subject to the modification that the references to “District Judge” shall 
be construed as references to “Special Judge”.] 
CHAPTER V 
SANCTION FOR PROSECUTION AND OTHER MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
19. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution.— (1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence 
punishable under 1[sections 7, 11, 13 and 15] alleged to have been committed by a public servant, except 
with the previous sanction 2[save as otherwise provided in the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013                 
(1 of 2014)]— 
(a) in the case of a person 3[who is employed, or as the case may be, was at the time of 
commission of the alleged offence employed] in connection with the affairs of the Union and is not 
removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the Central Government, of that 
Government; 
(b) in the case of a person 3[who is employed, or as the case may be, was at the time of 
commission of the alleged offence employed] in connection with the affairs of a State and is not 
removable from his office save by or with the sanction of the State Government, of that Government; 
(c) in the case of any other person, of the authority competent to remove him from his office: 
4[Provided that no request can be made, by a person other than a police officer or an officer of an 
investigation agency or other law enforcement authority, to the appropriate Government or competent 
authority, as the case may be, for the previous sanction of such Government or authority for taking 
cognizance by the court of any of the offences specified in this sub-section, unless— 
(i) such person has filed a complaint in a competent court about the alleged offences for 
which the public servant is sought to be prosecuted; and 
(ii) the court has not dismissed the complaint under section 203 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and directed the complainant to obtain the sanction for prosecution 
against the public servant for further proceeding: 
Provided further that in the case of request from the person other than a police officer or an 
officer of an investigation agency or other law enforcement authority, the appropriate Government or 
competent authority shall not accord sanction to prosecute a public servant without providing an 
opportunity of being heard to the concerned public servant: 
Provided also that the appropriate Government or any competent authority shall, after the receipt 
of the proposal requiring sanction for prosecution of a public servant under this sub-section, 
endeavour to convey the decision on such proposal within a period of three months from the date of 
its receipt: 
Provided also that in case where, for the purpose of grant of sanction for prosecution, legal 
consultation is required, such period may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, be extended by a 
further period of one month: 
Provided also that the Central Government may, for the purpose of sanction for prosecution of a 
public servant, prescribe such guidelines as it considers necessary.  
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 14, for “sections 7, 10, 11, 13 and 15” (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 2014, s.58 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 16-1-2014). 
3. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 14, for “who is employed” (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 12 Explanation .—For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the expression “public servant” includes such 
person— 
(a) who has ceased to hold the office during which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed; or 
(b) who has ceased to hold the office during which the offence is alleged to have been 
committed and is holding an office other than the office during which the offence is alleged to have 
been committed.] 
(2) Where for any reason whatsoever any doubt arises as to whether the previous sanction as required 
under sub-section ( 1) should be given by the Central Government or the State Government or any other 
authority, such sanction shall be given by that Government or authority which would have been 
competent to remove the public servant from his office at the time when the offence was alleged to have 
been committed. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),— 
(a) no finding, sentence or order passed by a special Judge shall be reversed or altered by a Court 
in appeal, confirmation or revision on the ground of the absence of, or any error, omission or 
irregularity in, the sanction required under sub-section ( 1), unless in the opinion of that court, a failure 
of justice has in fact been occasioned thereby; 
(b) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on the ground of any error, omission or 
irregularity in the sanction granted by the authority, unless it is satisfied that such error, omission or 
irregularity has resulted in a failure of justice; 
(c) no court shall stay the proceedings under this Act on any other ground and no court shall 
exercise the powers of revision in relation to any interlocutory order passed in any inquiry, trial, 
appeal or other proceedings. 
(4) In determining under sub-section ( 3) whether the absence of, or any error, omission or irregularity 
in, such sanction has occasioned or resulted in a failure of justice the court shall have regard to the fact 
whether the objection could and should have been raised at any earlier stage in the proceedings. 
Explanation.— For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) error includes competency of the authority to grant sanction; 
(b) a sanction required for prosecution includes reference to any requirement that the prosecution 
shall be at the instance of a specified authority or with the sanction of a specified person or any 
requirement of a similar nature. 
1[20. Presumption where public servant accepts any undue advantage.— Where, in any trial of an 
offence punishable under section 7 or under section 11, it is proved that a public servant accused of an 
offence has accepted or obtained or attempted to obtain for himself, or for any other person, any undue 
advantage from any person, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he accepted or 
obtained or attempted to obtain that undue advantage, as a motive or reward under section 7 for 
performing or to cause performance of a public duty improperly or dishonestly either by himself or by 
another public servant or, as the case may be, any undue advantage without consideration or for a 
consideration which he knows to be inadequate under section 11.] 
21. Accused person to be a competent witness.— Any person charged with an offence punishable 
under this Act, shall be a competent witness for the defence and may give evidence on oath in disproof of 
the charges made against him or any person charged together with him at the same trial: 
Provided that— 
(a)  he shall not be called as a witness except at his own request; 
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 15, for section 20 (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 13 (b) his failure to give evidence shall not be made the subject of any comment by the prosecution 
or give rise to any presumption against himself or any person charged together with him at the same 
trial; 
(c) he shall not be asked, and if asked shall not be required to answer, any question tending to 
show that he has  committed or been convicted of any offence other than the offence with which he is 
charged, or is of bad character, unless— 
(i) the proof that he has committed or been convicted of such offence is admissible evidence 
to show that he is guilty of the offence with which he is charged, or 
(ii) he has personally or by his pleader asked any question of any witness for the prosecution 
with a view to establish his own good character, or has given evidence of his good character, or 
the nature or conduct of the defence is such as to involve imputations on the character of the 
prosecutor or of any witness for the prosecution, or 
(iii) he has given evidence against any other person charged with the same offence. 
22. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to apply subject to certain modifications.— The 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall in their application to any 
proceeding in relation to an offence punishable under this Act have effect as if,— 
(a) in sub-section ( 1) of section 243, for the words “The accused shall then be called upon”, the 
words “The accused shall then be required to give in writing at once or within such time as the Court 
may allow, a list of the persons (if any) whom he proposes to examine as his witnesses and of the 
documents (if any) on which he proposes to rely and he shall then be called upon” had been 
substituted; 
(b) in sub-section ( 2) of section 309, after the third proviso, the following proviso had been 
inserted, namely:— 
“Provided also that the proceeding shall not be adjourned or postponed merely on the ground 
that an application under section 397 has been made by a party to the proceeding.”; 
(c) after sub-section ( 2) of section 317, the following sub-section had been inserted, namely:— 
“(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), the Judge may, 
if he thinks fit and  for reasons to be recorded by him, proceed with inquiry or trial in the absence 
of the accused or his  pleader and record the evidence of any witness subject to the right of the 
accused to recall the witness for cross -examination.”; 
(d) in sub -section ( 1) of section 397, before the Explanation,  the following proviso had been 
inserted, namely : — 
“Provided that where the powers under this section are exercised by a Court on an application 
made by a party to such proceedings, the Court shall not ordinarily call for the record of the 
proceedings: — 
(a) without giving the other party an opportunity of showing cause why the record should 
not be called  for; or 
(b) if it is satisfied that an examination of the record of the proceedings may be made 
from the certified copies.”. 
23. Particulars in a charge in relation to an offence under 1[section 13( 1)(a)].— Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), when an accused is charged 
with an offence under 2[clause ( a)] of sub-section ( 1) of section 13, it shall be sufficient to describe in the 
charge the property in respect of which the offence is alleged to have been committed and the dates 
between which the offence is alleged to have been committed, without specifying particular items or exact 
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 16, for “section 13( 1) (c)” (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid.,  for “clause ( c)”(w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 14 dates, and the charge so framed shall be deemed to be a charge of one offence within the meaning of 
section 219 of the said Code: 
Provided that the time included between the first and last of such dates shall not exceed one year. 
[24. Statement by bribe giver not to subject him to prosecution .] Omitted by the Prevention of
Corruption  (Amendment ) Act, 2018 (16 of 2018), s. 17 ( w.e.f . 26-7-2018). 
 25. Military, Naval and Air Force or other law not to be affected.— (1) Nothing in this Act shall 
affect the jurisdiction exercisable by, or the procedure applicable to, any court or other authority under the 
Army Act, 1950 (45 of 1950), the Air Force Act, 1950 (46 of 1950), the Navy Act, 1957 (62 of 1957), the 
Border Security Force Act, 1968 (47 of 1968), the Coast Guard Act, 1978 (30 of 1978) and the National 
Security Guard Act, 1986 (47 of 1986). 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of any such law as is referred 
to in sub-section ( 1), the court of a special Judge shall be deemed to be a court of ordinary criminal 
justice. 
26. Special Judges appointed under Act 46 of 1952 to be special Judges appointed under this 
Act.— Every special Judge appointed under the Criminal Law Amendment Act, 1952, for any area or 
areas and is holding office on the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be a special Judge 
appointed under section 3 of this Act for that area or areas and, accordingly, on and from such 
commencement, every such Judge shall continue to deal with all the proceedings pending before him on 
such commencement in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
27. Appeal and revision.— Subject to the provisions of this Act, the High Court may exercise, so far 
as they may be applicable, all the powers of appeal and revision conferred by the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) on a High Court as if the court of the special Judge were a court of Session 
trying cases within the local limits of the High Court. 
28. Act to be in addition to any other law.— The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, any otherlaw for the time being in force, and nothing contained herein shall exempt 
any public servant from any proceeding which might, apart from this Act, be instituted against him.
29. Amendment of the Ordinance 38 of 1944.— In the Criminal Law Amendment Ordinance, 
1944,— 
(a) in sub-section ( 1) of section 3, sub-section ( 1) of section 9, clause ( a) of section 10, sub-
section ( 1) of section 11 and sub-section ( 1) of section 13, for the words “State Government”, 
wherever they occur, the words “State Government or, as the case may be, the Central Government” 
shall be substituted; 
(b)  in section 10, in clause ( a), for the words “three months”, the words “one year” shall be 
substituted; 
(c)  in the Schedule,— 
(i) paragraph 1 shall be omitted; 
(ii) in paragraphs 2 and 4,— 
(a) after the words “a local authority”, the words and figures “or a corporation established 
by or  under a Central, Provincial or State Act, or an authority or a body owned or controlled 
or aided by Government or a Government company as defined in section 617 of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or a society aided by such corporation, authority, body or 
Government company” shall be inserted; 
(b) after the words “or authority”, the words “or corporation or body or Government 
company or society” shall be inserted; 
(iii) for paragraph 4A, the following paragraph shall be substituted, namely:— 
“4A.An offence punishable under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.”; 15 (iv) in paragraph 5, for the words and figures “items 2, 3 and 4”, the words, figures and letter 
“items 2, 3, 4  and 4A” shall be substituted. 
1[29A. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) guidelines which can be put in place by commercial organisation under section 9; 
(b) guidelines for sanction of prosecution under sub-section ( 1) of section 19; 
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
(3) Every rule made under this Act, shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.] 
30. Repeal and saving.— (1) The Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 (2 of 1947) and the Criminal 
Law Amendment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952) are hereby repealed. 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, but without prejudice to the application of section 6 of the General 
Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or 
taken under or in pursuance of the Acts so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under or in pursuance of the corresponding 
provision of this Act. 
31.[Omission of certain sections of Act 45 of 1860.] —Rep. by the Repealing and Amending  
Act, 2001(30 of 2001),  s.2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001). 
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 18 (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 
--------------------------The Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE PREVENTION OF ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC 
SUBSTANCES  ACT, 1988  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
 SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power to make orders detaining certain persons . 
4. Execution of detention orders . 
5. Power to regulate place and conditions of detention . 
6. Grounds of detention severable . 
7. Detention orders not to be invalid or inoperative on certain grounds . 
8. Powers in relation to absconding persons . 
9. Advisory Boards . 
10. Cases in wh ich and circumstances under which persons may be detained for periods longer than 
three months without obtaining the opinion of Advisory Board . 
11. Maximum period of detention . 
12. Revocation of detention orders  
13. Temporary release of persons detaine  
14. Protection of action taken in good faith  
15. [Repealed .] 
16. Repeal and saving  
 
  2 
 THE PREVENTION OF ILLICIT TRAFFIC IN NARCOTIC DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC 
SUBSTANCES  ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 46 OF 1988  
 [6th September , 1988.]  
An Act to provide for detention in certain cases for the purpose of preventing illicit traffic in 
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances and for matters connected therewith.  
WHEREA  Sillicit  traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances poses a serious threat to the 
health and welfare of the people and the activities of persons enga ged in such illicit traffic have a 
deleterious effect on the national economy;  
AND WHEREAS  having regard  to the persons by whom and the manner in which such activities are 
organised and carried on, and having regard to the fact that in certain areas  which are highly vulnerable to 
the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, such activit ies of a considerable 
magnitude are clandestinely organised and carried on, it is necessary for the effective prevention of such 
activities to provide for detention of persons concerned in any manner therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
 1. Short  title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Illicit 
Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 4th day of July, 1988.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, as respects a detention order made by the Central 
Government or by an officer of the Central Government, or a person detained under such order, the 
Central Government, and as respects a detention order made by a State Government or by an officer 
of a State Government, or a person detained under such order, the State Government;  
(b) “customs airport ” means any airport appointed under clause ( a) of section 7 of th e Customs 
Act, 1962 (52 of 1962 ) to be a customs airport;  
(c) “detention order ” means an order made under section 3;  
(d) “foreigner ” has the same meaning as in the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946);  
(e) “illicit traffic ”, in relation to narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, means — 
(i) cultivating  any coca plant or gathering any portion of coca plant;  
(ii) cultivating the opium poppy or any cannabis plant;  
(iii) engaging in the production, manufacture, possession, sale, purchase, transportation, 
warehousing, concealment, use or consumption, impor t inter -State, export inter -State, import into 
India, expor t from India or transhipment, of  narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances;  
(iv) dealing in any activities in narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances ot her than those 
provided in sub -clauses ( i) to (iii); or  3 
 (v) handling or letting any premises for the carrying on of any of the activities referred to in 
sub-clauses ( i) to ( iv),  
other than those permitted under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 
1985 ), or any rule or  order made, or any condition of any licence, term or authorisation issued, 
thereunder and includes — 
(1) financing, directly or indirectly, any of the aforementioned activities;  
(2) abetting  or conspiring in the furtherance of or in support of doing any of the 
aforementioned activities; and  
(3) harbouring persons engaged in any of the aforementioned activities;  
(f) “Indian customs waters ” has the same meaning as in clause ( 28) of section 2 o f the Customs 
Act, 1962 (52 of 1962 );  
(g) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator thereof;  
(h) words and expressions used herein but not defined, and defined in the Narcotic Drugs and 
Psychotropic S ubstances Act, 198 5 (61 of 1985 ), have the meanings respectively assigned to them  in 
that Act.  
3. Power to make o rders detaining certain persons .—(1) The Central Government or a State 
Government, or any officer of the Central Government, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to that 
Government, specially empowered for the purposes of this section by that Government, or any officer of a 
State Government, not below the rank of a Secretary to that Government, specially empowered for the 
purposes of this section by that Government, may , if satisfied, with respect to any person (including a 
foreigner) that, with a view to preventing him from engaging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and 
psychotropic substances, it is necessary so to do, make an order directing that suc h person be detained.  
(2) When any order of detention is made by a State Government or by an officer empowered by a 
State Government, the State Government shall, within ten days, forward to the Central Government a 
report in respect of the order.  
(3) For  the purposes of clause ( 5) of article 22 of the Constitution, the communication to a person 
detained in pursuance of a detention order of the grounds on which the order has been made shall be made 
as soon as may be after the detention, but ordinarily not later than five days, and in exceptional 
circumstances and for reasons to be recorded in writing not later than fifteen days, from the date of 
detention.  
4. Execution of detention orders .—A detention order may be executed at any place in India in the 
manner provided for the execut ion of warrants of arrest under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974).  
 5. Power to regulate place and conditions of detention .—Every person in respect of whom a 
detention order has been made shall be liable — 
 (a) to be detained in such place an d under such conditions including conditions as to 
maintenance, interviews or communication with others, discipline and punishment for breaches of 
discipline, as the appropriate Government may, by general or special order, specify; and  
(b) to be removed fr om one place of detention to another place of detention, whether within the 
same State or in another State by order of the appropriate Government:  
Provided that no order shall be made by a State Government under clause ( b) for the removal of a 
person from  one State to another State except with the consent of the Government of that other State.  4 
 6. Grounds of detention severable .—Where a person has been detained in pursuance of an order of 
detention under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 which has been made on two or more grounds, such order of 
detention shall be deemed to have been made separately on each of such grounds and accordingly — 
(a) such order shall not be deemed to be invalid or inoperative merely because one or some of the 
grounds is or are — 
(i) vagu e,  
(ii) non -existent,  
(iii) not relevant,  
(iv) not connected or not proximately connected with such person, or  
(v) invalid for any other reason whatsoever,  
and it is not therefore possible to hold that the Government or officer making such order would have 
been satisfied as provided in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 with reference to the remaining ground or 
grounds and made the order of detention;  
(b) the  Government or officer making the order of detention shall be deemed to have made the 
order of detention under the said sub -section ( 1) after being satisfied as provided in that sub -section 
with reference to the remaining ground or grounds.  
7. Detention  orders not to be invalid or inoperative on certain grounds. — No detention order 
shall be invalid or inoperative merely by reason — 
(a) that the person to be detained thereunder is outside the limits of the territorial jurisdiction of 
the Government or the of ficer making the order of detention; or  
(b) that the place of detention of such person is outside the said limits.  
8. Powers in r elation to absconding persons .—(1) If the appropriate Government has reason to 
believe that a person in respect of whom a detention order has been made has absconded or is concealing 
himself so that the order cannot be executed, that Government may — 
(a) make a report in writing of the fact to a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Magistrate of the first 
class having jurisdiction in the place where the said person ordinarily resides; and thereupon the 
provisions of sections 82, 83, 84 and 85 of the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ) shall 
apply in respect of the said person and his property as if the order directing that he be detained were a 
warrant issued by the Magistrate;  
(b) by order notified in the Official Gazette direct the said person to appear before such officer, at 
such place and within such period as may be specified in the order; and if the said person fails to  
comply with such direction, he shall,  unless  he proves that it was not possible for him to comply 
therewith and that he had, within the period specified in the order, informed the officer mentioned in 
the order of the reason which rendered compliance ther ewith impossible and of his whereabouts, be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Co de of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , every 
offence under clause ( b) of sub - section ( 1) shall be cognizable.  
9. Advisory Boards. —For the purposes of sub -clause ( a) of clause (4) and sub -clause ( c) of clause 
(7) of article 22 of the Constitution, — 
(a) the Central Government and each State Go vernment shall, whenever necessary, constitute one 
or more Advisory Boards each of which shall consist of a Chairman and two other persons possessing 
the qualifications specified in sub -clause ( a) of clause (4) of article 22 of the Constitution;  5 
 (b) save as otherwise provided in section 10, the appropriate Government shall, within five weeks 
from the date of detention of a person under a detention order, make a reference in respect thereof to 
the Advisory Board constituted under clause ( a) to enable the Ad visory Boar d to make the report 
under sub -clause ( a) of clause (4) of article 22 of the Constitution;  
(c) the Advisory Board to which a reference is made under clause ( b) shall after considering the 
reference and the materials placed before it and after ca lling for such further information as it may 
deem necessary from the appropriate Government or from any person called for the purpose through 
the appropriate Government or from the person concerned, and if, in any particular case, it considers 
it essential  so to do or if the person concerned desires to be heard in person, after hearing him in 
person, prepare its report specifying in a separate paragraph thereof its opinion as to whether or not 
there is sufficient cause for the detention of the person concer ned and submit the same within eleven 
weeks from the date of detention of the person concerned;  
(d) when there is a difference of opinion among the members forming the Advisory Board, the 
opinion of the majority of such members shall be deemed to be the op inion of the Board;  
(e) a person against whom an order of detention has been made under this Act shall not be 
entitled to appear by any legal practitioner in any matter connected with the reference to the Advisory 
Board and the proceedings of the Advisory  Board and its report, excepting that part of the report in 
which the opinion of the Advisory Board is specified, shall be confidential;  
(f) in every case where the Advisory Board has reported that there is in its opinion sufficient 
cause for the detentio n of a person, the appropriate Government may confirm the detention order and 
continue the detention of the person concerned for such period as it thinks fit and in every case where 
the Advisory Board has reported that there is in its opinion no sufficient  cause for the detention of the 
person concerned, the appropriate Government shall revoke the detention order and cause the person 
to be released forthwith.  
10. Cases in which and circumstances under which persons may be detained  for periods longer 
than three months without obtaining the opinion of  Advisory Board .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act, any person (including a foreigner) in respect of whom an order of detention is made 
under this Act at any time before the 1[31st day of July, 1999] may be detained without obtaining, in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -clause ( a) of clause (4) of article 22 of the Constitution, the opinion 
of an Advisory Board for a period longer than three months but not exceeding six months from the date of 
his detention, where the order of detention has been made against such person with a view to preventing 
him from engaging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, and the Central 
Government or any officer of the Central Governme nt, not below the rank of an Additional Secretary to 
that Government, specially empowered for the purposes of this section by that Government, is satisfied 
that such person engages or is likely to engage in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropi c 
substances into, out of, through or within any area highly vulnerable to such illicit traffic and makes a 
declaration to that effect within five weeks of the detention of such person.  
Explanation 1.—In this sub -section, “area highly vulnerable to such illicit traffic ” means— 
(i) the India customs waters;  
(ii) the customs airports;  
(iii) the metropolitan cities of Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi, Madras and the city of Varanasi;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 1996, s. 2, for “31st day of July, 1996” (w.e.f. 30 -7-1990).  6 
 (iv) the inland area one hundred kilo  metres  in width from the coast of India falling within the 
territories of the States of Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Gujarat, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa, 
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal and the Union territories of Daman and Diu and Pondicherry;  
(v) the inland a rea one hundred kilo  metres in width from — 
(a) the India -Pakistan border in the States of Gujarat, Punjab and Rajasthan;  
(b) the India -Nepal border in the States of Bihar, Sikkim, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal;  
(c) the  India -Burma border in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram and 
Nagaland;  
(d) the India -Bangladesh border in the States of Assam, Meghalaya, Tripura and West 
Bengal;  
(e) the India -Bhutan border in the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Sikk im and West 
Bengal;  
(vi) such other area or customs station, as the Central Government may, having regard to the 
vulnerability o f such area or customs station, as the case may be, to illicit traffic, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify in thi s behalf.  
Explanation 2 .—For the purposes of Explanation 1 , “customs station ” has the same meaning as in 
clause ( 13) of section 2 of the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962 ). 
(2) In the case of any person detained under a detention order to which the provisions  of sub -section 
(1) apply, section 9 shall have effect subject to the following modifications, namely: — 
(i) in clause ( b), for the words “shall, within five weeks ”, the words “shall, within four months 
and two weeks ” shall be substituted;  
(ii) in clause (c), — 
(a) for the words “the detention of the person concerned ”, the words “the continued detention 
of the person concerned ” shall be substituted;  
(b) for the words “eleven weeks ”, the words “five months and three weeks ” shall be 
substituted;  
(iii) in clause ( f), for the words “for the detention ”, at both the places where they occur, the words 
“for the continued detention ” shall be substituted.  
11. Maximum period of detention .—The maximum period for which any person may be detained in 
pursuance of  any detention order to which the provisions of section 10 do not apply and which has been 
confirmed under clause ( f) of section 9 shall be one year from the date of detention, and the maximum 
period for which any person may be detained  in pursuance of any  detention order to which the provisions 
of section 10 apply and which has been confirmed under clause ( f) of section 9, read with sub -section ( 2) 
of section 10, shall be two years from the date of detention:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sectio n shall affect the power of appropriate Government in 
either case to revoke or modify the detention order at any earlier time.  
12. Revocation of detention orders .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 21 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897) , a detention order may, at any time, be revoked or modified — 
(a) notwithstanding that the order has been made by a n officer of a State Government,  by that 
State Government or by the Central Government;  7 
 (b) notwithstanding that the order has b een made by an officer of the Central Government or by a 
State Government, by the Central Government.  
(2) The revocation of a detention order shall not bar the making of another detention order under 
section 3 against the same person.  
13. Temporary relea se of persons detained .—(1) The Central Government may, at any time, direct 
that any person detained in pursuance of a detention order made by that Government or by an officer 
subordinate to that Government or by a State Government or by an officer subordi nate to a State 
Government, may be released for any specified period either without conditions or upon such conditions 
specified in the direction as that person accepts, and may, at any time, cancel his release.  
(2) A State Government may, at any time, di rect that any person detained in pursuance of a detention 
order made by that Government or by an officer subordinate to that Government may be released for any 
specified period either without conditions or upon such conditions specified in the direction as  the person 
accepts, and may, at any time, cancel his release.  
(3) In directing the release of any person under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Government 
directing the release may require him to enter into a bond with sureties for the due observance of the 
conditions specified in the direction.  
(4) Any person released under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall surrender himself at the  time 
and place, and to the authority, specified in the order directing his release, or cancelling his release, as the 
case may be.  
(5) If any person fails without sufficient cause to surrender himself in the manner specified in sub -
section ( 4), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with 
fine, or with both.  
(6) If any person released under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) fails to fulfil any of the conditions 
imposed upon him under the said sub -section or in the bond entered into by him, the bond shall be 
declared to be forfeited and any person bound thereby shall be liab le to pay the penalty thereof.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law and save as otherwise provided in this 
section, no  person against whom a detention order made under this Act is in force shall be released 
whether on bail or bail bond or otherwise.  
14. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or  a State Government and no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
15. [Amendment of Act 52 of 1974 .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001  (30 of 2001 ), s. 2 
and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 3-9-2001 ). 
16. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Ordinance, 1988 (Ord. 7 of 1988 ), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Prohibition of Benami Property Transactions Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE PROHIBITION OF BENAMI PRO PERTY TRANSACTIONS ACT, 1988  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
PROHIBITION OF BENAMI  TRANSACTIONS  
3. Prohibition of benami  transactions . 
4. Prohibition of the right to recover property held benami . 
5. Property held benami  liable to confiscation . 
6. Prohibition on re -transfer of property by benamidar . 
 
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES  
7. Adjudicating Authority . 
8. Composition of Authority . 
9. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members . 
10. Constitution of Benches of Adjudicating Authority . 
11. Power of Adjudicating Authority to regulate its own procedure . 
12. Term of office of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating Authority . 
13. Terms and conditions of services of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating Authority . 
14. Removal of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating Authority . 
15. Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances . 
16. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Adjudicating  Authority . 
17. Officers and employees of Adjudicating Authority . 
18. Authorities and jurisdiction . 
19. Powers of authorities . 
20. Certain officers to assist in inquiry, etc . 
21. Power to call for information . 
22. Power of authority to impound documents . 
23. Power of authority to con duct inquiry, etc . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
ATTACHMENT, ADJUDICATION AND CONFISCATION  
24. Notice and attachment of property involved in benami  transaction . 
25. Manner of service of notice . 
26. Adjudication of benami  property . 
27. Confiscation and vesting of benami  property . 
28. Management  of properties confiscate d. 
29. Possession of the property . 2 
  
CHAPTER V  
APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
SECTIONS  
30. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal . 
31. Composi tion, etc., of Appellate Tribunal . 
32. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal . 
33. Terms and conditions of services of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal . 
34. Term of office of Chairperson and Members . 
35. Removal of Chairperson and Member from office in certain circumstances.  
36. Vacancies et c., not to invalidate proceedings of Appellate  Tribunal . 
37. Resignation and removal . 
38. Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances . 
39. Staff of Appellate Tribunal . 
40. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal . 
41. Distribution of business amongst Benches of Appellate Tribunal . 
42. Power of Chairperson of Appe llate Tribunal to transfer cases . 
43. Decision to be by majority . 
44. Members , etc., to be public servants . 
45. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts . 
46. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal . 
47. Rectification of mistakes . 
48. Right to representation . 
49. Appeal to High Court . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL  COURTS  
50. Special Courts . 
51. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special Court . 
52. Appeal and revision . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTION  
53. Penalty for benami  transaction . 
54. Penalty for false information . 
55. Previous sanction . 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
56. Repeal of provisions of certain Acts . 
57. Certain transfers to be null and void . 
58. Exemption . 
59. Power of Central Government to issue directions, etc . 
60. Application of other laws not barred . 
61. Offences to be non -cognizable . 
62. Offences by compan ies. 
  3 
 SECTIONS  
63. Notice, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds . 
64. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
65. Transfer of pending cases . 
66. Proceedings, etc., against legal representative . 
67. Act to have overriding effect . 
68. Power to make rules . 
69. Laying  of rules and notifications before Parliament . 
70. Power to remove difficulties . 
71. Transitional provision . 
72. Repeal and saving . 
 
  4 
 THE  PROHIBITION OF BENAMI  PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 45 OF 1988  
[5th September,  1988 .] 
An Act to prohibit benami  transactions and the right to recover property held benami  and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1[CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY ] 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—2[(1) This Act may be called the Prohibition of Benami  
Property Transactions Act, 19 88.] 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) The provisions of sections 3, 5 and 8 shall come into force at once, and the remaining provisions 
of this Act shall be deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of May, 1988.  
3[2. Definitions .— In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “Adjudicating Authority ” means the Adjudicating Autho rity appointed under section 7;  
(2) “Administrator ” means an Income -tax Officer as defined in clause ( 25) of section 2 of the 
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 196 1); 
(3) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribuna l established under section 30;  
(4) “Approving Authority ” means an Additional Commissioner or a Joint Commissioner as 
defined in clauses ( 1C) and ( 28C) respectively of section 2 of the Income -tax Ac t, 1961  (43 of 1961) ; 
(5) “attachment ” means the prohibition of transfer , conversion, disposition or movement of 
property, by an order issued under this Act;  
(6) “authority ” means an authority referred to in  sub-section ( 1) of section 18;  
(7) “banking company ” means a company to which the provisions of the Banking Regulation  
Act, 1949  (10 of 1949) , applies and includes any bank or banking institution referre d to in section 51 
of that Act;  
(8) “benami  property ” means any property which is the subject matter of a benami  transaction 
and also includes t he proceeds from such proper ty; 
(9) “benami  transaction ” means, — 
(A) a transaction or an arrangement — 
(a) where a property is transferred to, or is held by, a person, and the consideration for 
such property has been provided, or paid by, a nother person; and  
(b) the  property is held for the immediate or future benefit, direct or indirect, of the 
person who has provided the consideration,  
excep t when the property is held by — 
(i) a Karta, or a member of a Hindu undivided family, as the case may be, and the property is 
held for his benefit or benefit of other members in the family and the consideration for such 
property has been provided or paid out of the known sources  of the Hindu undivided family;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for section 2 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  5 
 (ii) a person standing in a fiduciary capacity for the benefit of another person towards whom 
he stands in such capacity and includes a trustee, executor, partner, director of a company, a 
depository or a participant as an agent of a depository under the Depositories Act, 1996   
(22 of 1996)  and any other person as may be  notified by the Centr al Government for this purpose;  
(iii) any person being an individual in the name of his spouse or in the name of any child of 
such individual and the consideration for such property has been provided or paid out of the 
known s ources o f the individual;  
(iv) any person in the name of his brother or sister or lineal ascendant or descendant, where 
the names of brother or sister or lineal ascendant or descendant and the individual appear as joint -
owners in any document, and the consideratio n for such property has been provided or paid out of 
the know n sources of the individual; or  
(B) a transaction or an arrangement in respect of a property carried out or made in a fictitious 
name; or  
(C) a transaction or an arrangement in respect of a prope rty where the owner of the property 
is not aware of, or, denie s knowledge of, such ownership;  
(D) a transaction or an arrangement in respect of a property where the person providing the 
consideration is not traceable or is fictitious;  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that benami  transaction shall not 
include any transaction involving the allowing of possession of any property to be taken or retained in 
part performance of a contract referred to in section 53A of the Transfer of Property  
Act, 1882  (4 of 1882) , if, under any la w for the time being in force, — 
(i) consideration for such property has been provided by the person to whom possession of 
property has been allowed but the person who has granted possession thereof continues  to hold 
ownership of such property;  
(ii) stamp duty on such transaction or  arrangement has been paid; and  
(iii) the contract has been registered.  
(10) “benamidar ” means a person or a fictitious person, as the case may be, in whose name the 
benami property  is transferred or held and includ es a person who lends his name;  
(11) “Bench ” means a Bench of the Adjudicating Authority or the Appellat e Tribunal, as the case 
may be;  
(12) “beneficial owner ” means a person, whether his identity is known or not, for whos e benefit 
the benami  property is held by a benamidar ; 
(13) “Board ” means the Central Board of Direct Taxes constituted under the Centr al Boards of 
Revenue Act, 1963  (54 of 1963) ; 
(14) “director ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 34) of section 2 of th e 
Companies Act , 2013  (18 of 2013) ; 
(15) “executor ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( c) of section 2 of t he 
Indian Succession Act, 1925  (39 of 1925) ; 
(16) “fair market value ”, in relation to a property, means — 
(i) the price that the property would ordinarily fetch on sale in the open market on t he date of 
the transaction; and  
(ii) where the price referred to in sub -clause ( i) is not ascertainable, such price as may be 
determined in accordance with su ch manner as may  be prescribed;  
(17) “firm” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian Partnership 
Act, 1932  (9 of 1932)  and shall include a limited liability partnership as defined in the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008  (6 of 2009) ;  6 
 (18) “High Court ” means — 
(i) the High Court within the jurisdiction of which the aggrieved party ordinarily resides or 
carries on business or personally works for gain; and  
(ii) where  the Government is the aggrieved party, the High Court within the jurisdiction of 
which the respondent, or in a case where there are more than one respondent, any of the 
respondents, ordinarily resides or carries on busines s or personally works for gain;  
(19) “Initiating Officer ” means an Assistant Commissioner or a Deputy Commissioner as defined 
in clauses ( 9A) and ( 19A) respectively of section  2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) ; 
(20) “Member ” means the Chairperson or the Member of the Adjudicating  Authority or the 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case ma y be;  
(21) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette and the expression 
“notified ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(22) “partner ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian Partnership 
Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) , and shall include, — 
(a) any person who, being a minor, has been admitted to t he benefits of partnership; and  
(b) a partner of a limited liability partnership formed and registered under the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008  (6 of 2009) ; 
(23) “partnership ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 4 of the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) , and shall include a limited liability partnership formed and 
registered under the Limited L iability Partnership Act, 2008  (6 of 2009) ; 
(24) “person ” shall include — 
(i) an individua l; 
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;  
(iii) a company;  
(iv) a firm;  
(v) an assoc iation of persons or a body of individual s, whether incorporated or not;  
(vi) every artificial juridical person, not fallin g under sub -clauses ( i) to ( v); 
(25) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(26) “property ” means assets of any kind, whether movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, 
corporeal or incorporeal and includes any right or interest or legal documents or instruments 
evidencing title to or interest in the property and where the property is capable of conversion into 
some other form, then the property in the converted form and also includes the proceeds from the 
property;  
(27) “public financial institution ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( 72) of 
sectio n 2 of the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) ; 
(28) “Special Court ” means a Court of Session designated as Special Court under  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 50;  
(29) “transfer ” includes sale, purchase or any other form of transfer of right, t itle, possession or 
lien; 
(30) “trustee ” means the trustee as defined in the section 3 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882  (2 of 
1882) ; 
(31) words and expressions used herein and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian 
Trusts Act, 1882  (2 of 1882) , the Indian Succession Act, 1925  (39 of 192 5), the Indian Partnership 
Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) , the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , the Depositories Act,  7 
 1996  (22 of 1996) , the Prevention of Money -Laundering Act, 2002  (15 of 2003) , the Limited 
Liability Partnership Act, 2008  (6 of 2009)  and the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) , shall have the 
same meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.]  
1[CHAPTER II  
PROHIBITION OF BENAMI  TRANSACTIONS ] 
3. Prohibition of benami  transactions .—(1) No person shall enter into any benami transaction.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[(2)] Whoever enters into any benami  transaction shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or with fine or with both.  
4[(3) Whoever enters into any benami  transaction on and after the date of commencement of the 
Benami  Transactions (Prohibition) Amendment Act, 2016  (43 of 2016)  shall, notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section ( 2), be punishable in accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter VII.]  
5*   *   *  *   * 
4. Prohibition of the right to recover property held benami .—(1) No suit, claim or action to 
enforce any right in respect of any property held benami  against the person in whose name the property is 
held or against any other person shall lie by or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner of such 
property.  
(2) No defence based on any right in respect of any property held benami , whether again st the person 
in whose name the property is held or against any other person, shall be allowed in any suit, claim or 
action by or on behalf of a person claiming to be the real owner of such property.  
6*   *   *  *   * 
7[5. Property held benami  liable to confiscation. —Any property, which is subject matter of benami  
transaction, shall be liable to be confiscated by the Central Government.  
 6. Prohibition on re -transfer of property by benamidar .—(1) No person, being a benamidar  shall 
re-transfer the benami  property held by him to the beneficial owner or any other person acting on his 
behalf.  
(2) Where any property is re -transferred in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the 
transaction  of such property shall  be deemed to be null and void.  
(3) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall not apply to a transfer made in accordance with 
the provisions of sectio n 190 of the Finance Act, 2016  (28 of 2016) .] 
 
8[CHAPTER III  
AUTHORITIES  
7. Adjudicating Authority .—The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint one or more 
Adjudicating Authorities to exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred by or under this Act.  
8. Composition of Authority .—An Adjudicating Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and at 
least two other Me mbers.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 2016, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
2. Omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
3. Sub-section ( 3) renumbered as sub -section ( 2) thereof by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
5. Omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
6. Omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
7. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for sect ions 5 and 6 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
8. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  8 
 9. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members .—(1) A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the Adj udicating Authority unless he, — 
(a) has been a member o f the Indian Revenue Service and has held the post of Commissioner of 
Income -tax or equivalent pos t in that Service; or  
(b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post of Joint Secretary or 
equivalent post in that Service.  
(2) The C hairperson and other Members of the Adjudicating Authority shall be appointed by the 
Central Government in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Central Government shall appoint the seniormost Member to be the Chairperson of the 
Adjudicating Authority.  
10. Constitution of Benches of Adjudicating Authority .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this 
Act,— 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Adjudicating Authority may b e exercised by Benches thereof;  
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson of the Adjudicatin g Authority with two 
Members, a s the Chairperson may deem fit;  
(c) the Benches of the Adjudicating Authority shall ordinarily sit in the National Capital Territory 
of Delhi and at such other places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the 
Chairpe rson, by notification, specify;  
(d) the Central Government shall, by notification, specify the areas in relation to which each 
Bench of the Adjudicating Autho rity may exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chairperson may transfer a Member 
from one Bench to another Bench.  
11.  Power of Adjudicating Authority to regulate its own procedure .—The Adjudicating 
Authority shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908   
(5 of 1908) , but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of 
this Act, the Authority shall have powers  to regulate its own procedure.  
12. Term of office of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating Authority .—The Ch airperson 
and Members of the Adjudicating Authority shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years from the 
date on which they enter upon their office, or until they attain the age of sixty -two years, whichever is 
earlier and shall not  be eligible f or reappointment.  
13. Terms and conditions of services of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating 
Authority .—(1) The  salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of 
the Chairperson and other Members of the Adjudicating Authority shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other Member shall be filled up within 
a period of three months from the date on which s uch vacancy occurs.  
14. Removal of Chairperson and Members of Adjudicating Authority .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by order, remove from office, the Chairperson or other M embers of the Adjudicating 
Authority, if the Chairperson or such oth er Member, as the case may be, — 
(a) has be en adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence , involving moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally inca pable of acting as a Member; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office is prejudicial to the public 
interest.   9 
 (2) No Chairperson or Member shall be removed from his office under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of  
sub-section ( 1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunit y of being heard in the matter.  
15.  Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances .—(1) In the  event of the occurrence 
of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the 
seniormost Member shall act as the Chairperson of the Adjudicating Authority until the date on which a 
new Chairperson, appointed  in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters 
upon his office.  
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, the seniormost Member shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the 
Chairperson resumes his duties.  
16. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Adjudicating Authority .—No act or 
proceeding of the Adjudicating Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any  vacancy in, or any defect in the co nstitution of the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting a s a Member of the Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not af fecting the merits of the case.  
17. Offic ers and employees of Adjudicating Authority .—(1) The Central Government shall 
provide each Adjudicating Authority with such officers and employees as that Government may think fit.  
(2) The officers and employees of the Adjudicating Authority shall discharge their functions under 
the general superintendence of the Chairperson of the Adju dicating Authority.  
18. Authorities and jurisdiction .—(1) The following shall be the authorities for the  purposes of this 
Act, namely: — 
(a) the Initiating Officer;  
(b) the Approving Authority;  
(c) the Administrator; and  
(d) the Adjudicating Authority.  
(2) The authorities shall exercise all or any of the powers and perform all or any of the functions 
conferred on, or, assigned, as the case may be, to it under this Act o r in accordance with s uch rules as may 
be prescribed.  
19. Powers of authorities .—(1) The authorities shall, for the purposes of this Act, have the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a 
suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) discovery and inspection;  
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any official of a banking company or a 
public financial institution or any other intermediary or reporti ng entity, and examining him on oath;  
(c) compelling the production of books of account and other documents;  
(d) issuing commissions;  
(e) receiving evidence on affidavits;  and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) All the persons summoned under  sub-section ( 1) shall be bound to attend in person or through 
authorised agents, as any authority under this Act may direct, and shall be bound to state the truth upon 
any subject respecting which they are examined or make statements, and produce suc h doc uments as may 
be required.   10 
 (3) Every proceeding under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a judicial 
proceeding within the meaning of section 193 and sectio n 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
(4) For the purposes of this Act,  any authority under this Act may requisition the service of any police 
officer or of any officer of the Central Government or State Government or of both to assist him for all or 
any of the purposes specified in sub -section ( 1), and it shall be the duty o f every such officer to comply 
with the requisition or direction.  
(5) For the purposes of this section, “reporting entity ” means any intermediary or any authority or of 
the Central or the State Government or any other person as may be notified in this behalf.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -section ( 5), “intermediary ” shall have the same meaning as 
assigned to it in clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Prevention of Money -Laundering  
Act, 2002  (15 of 2003) .  
20. Certain officers to ass ist in inquiry, etc .—The following officers shall assist the authorities in 
the en forcement of this Act, namely: — 
(a) income -tax authorities appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 11 7 of the Income -tax  
Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) ; 
(b) officers  of the Customs an d Central Excise Departments;  
(c) officers appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1985  (61 of 1985) ; 
(d) officers of the stock exchange recognised under section 4 of the Securit ies Contracts 
(Regulation) Act,  1956  (42 of 1956) ; 
(e) officers of the Reserve Bank of India constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) ; 
(f) police;  
(g) officers  of enforcement appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 36 of the Foreign Exchange 
Management  Act, 1999  (40 of 1999) ; 
(h) officers of the Securities and Exchange Board of India established under section 3 of the 
Securities and Exc hange Board of India Ac t, 1992  (15 of 1992) ; 
(i) officers of any other body corporate constituted or established under a Central or a State Act; 
and 
(j) such other officers of the Central Government, State Government, local authorities or banking 
companies as the Central Governm ent may, by notific ation, specify, in this behalf.  
21. Power to call for information .—(1) The Initiating Officer or the Approving Authority or the 
Adjudicating Authority shall have power to require any officer of the Central Government or State 
Government or a local body or any person or officer who is responsible for registering and maintaining 
books of account or other documents containing a record of any transaction relating to any property or 
any other person to furnish any information in relation to an y person, point or matter as in his opinion 
shall be useful for or relevan t for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to sub -section ( 1), every officer or person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall 
furnish such information to any authority under  this Act in such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
22. Power of authority to impound documents .—(1) Where any books of account or other 
documents are produced before the authority in any proceedings under this Act and the authority in this 
behalf has reason to believe that any of the books of account or other documents are required to be 
impounded and retained for any inquiry under this Act, it may impound and retain the books of account or 
other documents for a period not exceeding three months from t he date of order of attachment made by 
the Adjudicating Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 26:  11 
 Provided that the period for retention of the books of account or other documents may be extended 
beyond a period exceeding three months from the date of  order of attachment made by the Adjudicating 
Authority under sub -section ( 3) of section 26 where the authority records in writing the reasons for 
extending the same.  
(2) Where the authority impounding and retaining the books of account or other documents,  under 
sub-section ( 1) is the Initiating Officer, he shall obtain approval of the Approving Authority within a 
period of fifteen days from the date of initial impounding and seek further approval of the Approving 
Authority for extending the period of initi al retention, before the expiry of the period of ini tial retention, if 
so required.  
(3) The period of retention of the books of account or other documents under sub -section ( 1) shall in 
no case exceed a period of thirty days from the date of conclusion of all the proceedings under this Act.  
(4) The person, from whom the books of account or other documents were impounded under  
sub-section ( 1), shall be ent itled to obtain copies thereof.  
(5) On the expiry of the period specified under sub -section ( 1), the books of account or other 
documents shall be returned to the person from whom such books of account or other documents were 
impounded unless the Approving Authority or the Adjudicating Authority permits the ir release to any 
other person.  
23. Power of autho rity to conduct inquiry, etc .—The Initiating Officer, after obtaining prior 
approval of the Approving Authority, shall have power to conduct or cause to be conducted any inquiry or 
investigation in respect of any person, place, property, assets, documents,  books of account or other 
documents, in respect of any other relevant matters under this Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
ATTACHMENT, ADJUDICATION AND CONFISCATION  
24. Notice and attachment of property involved in benami  transaction .—(1) Where the Initiating 
Officer, on the basis of material in his possession, has reason to believe that any person is a benamidar  in 
respect of a property, he may, after recording reasons in writing, issue a notice to the person to show 
cause within such ti me as may be specified in the notice why the property should not be treated as benami  
property.  
(2) Where a notice under sub -section ( 1) specifies any property as being held by a benamidar  referred 
to in that sub -section, a copy of the notice shall also be  issued to the beneficial owner if his identity is 
known.  
(3) Where the Initiating Officer is of the opinion that the person in possession of the property held 
benami  may alienate the property during the period specified in the notice, he may, with the pre vious 
approval of the Approving Authority, by order in writing, attach provisionally the property in the manner 
as may be prescribed, for a period not exceeding ninety days from the date of issue o f notice under  
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) The Initiating Officer , after making such inquires and calling for such reports or evidence as he 
deems fit and taking into account all relevant materials, shall, within a period of ninety days from the date 
of issue of  notice under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) where  the provisional attachment has b een made under sub -section ( 3),— 
(i) pass an order continuing the provisional attachment of the property with the prior approval 
of the Approving Authority, till the passing of the order by the Adjudicating Authority under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 26; or  
(ii) revoke the provisional attachment of the property with the prior appro val of the 
Approving Authority;  
  12 
 (b) where provisional attachment has not be en made under sub -section ( 3),— 
(i) pass an order provisionally attaching the property with the prior approval of the Approving 
Authority, till the passing of the order by the Adjudicating Authority under su b-section ( 3) of 
section 26; or  
(ii) decide not to attach the property as specified in the notice, with the prior  appro val of the 
Approving Authority.  
(5) Where the Initiating Officer passes an order continuing the provisional attachment of the property 
under sub -clause ( i) of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) or passes an order provisionally attaching the property 
under  sub-clause ( i) of clause ( b) of that sub -section, he shall, within fifteen days from the date of the 
attachment, draw up a statement of the case and refer it  to the Adjudicating Authority.  
25. Manner of service of notice .—(1) A notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 24 may be served on 
the person named therein either by post or as if it were a summons issued by a Court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) . 
(2) Any notice referred to in su b-section ( 1) may be addressed — 
(i) in case of an individual, to such individual;  
(ii) in the case of a firm, to the managing part ner or the manager of the firm;  
(iii) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, to Karta or any member of such family;  
(iv) in the case of a company, to  the principal officer thereof;  
(v) in the case of any other association or body of individuals, to the principal  officer or any 
member thereof;  
(vi) in the case of any other person (not being an individual), to the person who m anages or 
controls his affai rs. 
26. Adjudication of benami  property .—(1) On receipt of a reference under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 24, the Adjudicating Authority shall issue notice, to furnish such documents, particulars or 
evidence as is considered necessary on a date to be specifi ed therein, on the following persons, namely: — 
(a) the person sp ecified as a benamidar  therein;  
(b) any person referred to as the beneficial owner  therein or identified as such;  
(c) any interested party, includin g a banking company;  
(d) any  person who has made a cl aim in respect of the property:  
Provided that the Adjudicating Authority shall issue notice within a period of thirty days from the 
date on which  a reference has been received:  
Provided further that the notice shall provide a perio d of not less than thirty days to the person to 
whom the notice is issued to furnish the information sought.  
(2) Where the property is held jointly by more than one person, the Adjudicating Authority shall 
make all endeavours to serve notice to all persons  holding the property:  
Provided that where the notice is served on anyone of the persons, the service of notice shall not be 
invalid on the ground that the said notice was not served to all th e persons holding the property.  
(3) The Adjud icating Authority s hall, after — 
(a) considering the reply, if any, to the notic e issued under sub -section ( 1); 
(b) making or causing to be made such inquiries and calling for such reports o r evidence as it 
deems fit; and  
  13 
 (c) taking into account a ll relevant materials,  
provide an opportunity of being heard to the person specified as a benamidar therein, the Initiating 
Officer, and any other person who claims to be the owner of the property, and, thereafter, pass an order — 
(i) holding the property not to be a benami  prope rty and re voking the attachment order; or  
(ii) holding the property to be a benami  property and confirming the attach ment order, in all 
other cases.  
(4) Where the Adjudicating Authority is satisfied that some part of the properties in respect of which 
reference has been made to him is benami  property, but is not able to specifically identify such part, he 
shall record a finding to the best of his judgment as to which part of  the properties is held benami . 
(5) Where in the course of proceedings before it, th e Adjudicating Authority has reason to believe that 
a property, other than a property referred to it by the Initiating Officer is benami  property, it shall 
provisionally attach the property and the property shall be deemed to be a property referred to it o n the 
date of receipt of the reference under  sub-section ( 5) of section 24.  
(6) The Adjudicating Authority may, at any stage of the proceedings, either on the application of any 
party, or suo motu , strike out the name of any party improperly joined or add the name of any person 
whose presence before the Adjudicating Authority may be necessary to enable him to adjudicate upon and 
settle all the quest ions involved in the reference.  
(7) No order under sub -section ( 3) shall be passed after the expiry of one yea r from the end of the 
month in which the reference under sub -section (5) of section 24 was received.  
(8) The benamidar  or any other person who claims to be the owner of the property may either appear 
in person or take the assistance of an authorised repres entative of his choice to present his case.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -section ( 8), authorised representative means a perso n 
authorised in writing, being — 
(i) a person related to the benamidar  or such other person in any manner, or a person regul arly 
employed by the benamidar  or such othe r person as the case may be; or  
(ii) any officer of a scheduled bank with which the benamidar  or such other person maintains an 
account or  has other regular dealings; or  
(iii) any  legal practitioner who is entitled to practice in any civil court in India; or  
(iv) any person who has passed any accountancy examination recognised in this behalf by the Board; 
or 
(v) any person who has acquired such educational qualifications as the Boa rd may pres cribe for this 
purpose.  
27. Confiscation and vesting   of benami  property .—(1) Where an order is passed in respect of any 
property under sub -section ( 3) of section 26 holding such property to be a benami  property, the 
Adjudicating Authority shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the person concerned, make an 
order confiscating the property held to be a benami  property:  
Provided that where an appeal has been filed against the order of the Adj udicating Authority, the 
confiscation of property shall be made subject to the order passed by the Appellate Tribunal under  
section 46:  
Provided further that the confiscation of the property shall be made in accordance with such 
procedure as may be presc ribed.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a property held or acquired by a person from the 
benamidar  for adequate consideration, prior to the issue of notice under sub -section ( 1) of section 24 
without his having knowledge of the benami  transact ion. 
(3) Where an order of confiscation has been made under sub -section ( 1), all the rights and title in such 
property shall vest absolutely in the Central Government free of all encumbrances and no compensation 
shall be payable i n respect of such confiscation.  14 
 (4) Any right of any third person created in such property with a view to defeat the purposes of t his 
Act shall be null and void.  
(5) Where no order of confiscation is made upon the proceedings under this Act attaining finality, no 
claim shall lie against the Government.  
28. Management of properties confiscate d.—(1) The Administrator shall have the power to receive 
and manage the prop erty, in relation to which an order of confiscation under sub -section ( 1) of section 27 
has been made, in such manner and subject to such co nditions, as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, notify a s many of its 
officers as it thinks fit, to perform t he functions of Administrators.  
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may direct, to 
dispose of the property which is vested in the Central Government under sub -section ( 3) of section 27, in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
29. Possession of the property .—(1) Where an order of confiscation in respect of a property under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 27, has been made, the Administrator shall proceed to take the possession of the 
property.  
(2) The Administrator shall, — 
(a) by notice in writing, order within seven days of the date of the service of notice to any person, 
who may be in posses sion of the benami  property, to surrender or deliver possession thereof to the 
Administrator or any other person duly authorised in  writing by him in this behalf;  
(b) in the event of non -compliance of the order referred to in clause ( a), or if in his opini on, 
taking over of immediate possession is warranted, for the purpose of forcibly taking over possession, 
requisition the service of any police officer to assist him and it shall be the duty of the officer to 
comply with the requisition.  
CHAPTER V  
APPELLAT E TRIBUNAL  
30. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal .—The Central Government shall, by notification, establish 
an Appellate Tribunal to hear appeals against the orders of the Adjudicating Authority under this Act.  
31. Composi tion etc., of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a 
Chairperson and at least two other Members of which one shall be a Judicial Member and other sha ll be 
an Administrative Member.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, — 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Appellat e Tribunal may b e exercised by Benches thereof;  
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson with two Members as the Chairperson may 
deem fit;  
(c) the Benches of the Appellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit in the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi an d at such other places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairpe rson, 
by notification, specify;  
(d) the Central Government shall, by notification, specify the areas in relation to which each 
Bench of the Appellate Tribunal  may exercise its jurisdiction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Chairperson may transfer a Member 
from one Bench to another Bench.  
32. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) A 
person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal unless he is a 
sitting or retired Judge of a High Court, who has completed not le ss than five years’ of service.   15 
 (2) A person shall not be qualified for app ointment as a Member unless he — 
(a) in the case of a Judicial Member, has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held 
the post of Additional Secretary or e quivalent post in that Service;  
(b) in the case of an Administrative Member, has been a Member of the Indian Revenue Service 
and has held the post of Chief Commissioner of Income  tax or e quivalent post in that Service.  
(3) No sitting Judge of a High Court shall be appointed under this section except after consultation 
with the C hief Justice of the High Cou rt. 
(4) The Chairperson or a Member holding a post as such in any other Tribunal, established under any 
law for the time being in force, in addition to his being the Chairperson or a Member of that Tribunal, 
may be appointed as the Chairperson or a Member,  as the case may be, of the Appellate Tribunal under 
this Act.  
33. Terms and conditions of services of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) 
The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson 
and other Members shall be such as may be prescribed and shall not be varied to their di sadvantage 
during their tenure.  
(2) Any vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other Member shall be filled up within 
a period of three mont hs from the date on which such vacancy occurs.  
34. Term of office of Chairperson and Members .—The Chairperson and Members of the Appellate 
Tribunal shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years from the date on which they enter upon their 
office, or until they attain the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier and shall not  be eligible for 
reappointment.  
35. Removal of Chairperson and Member from office in certain circumstances .—(1) The Central 
Government may, in consultation with the Chief J ustice of High Court, remove from office of the 
Chairperson or any Member, who — 
(a) has be en adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Governme nt involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physi cally or mentally incapable; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prej udicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) The Chair person or Judicial Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order 
made by the Central Government after an inquiry made by Chief Justice of the High Court in which the 
Chairperson or Judicial Member has been informed of the charges against h im and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being hea rd in respect of those charges.  
(3) The Central Government may suspend from office the Chairperson or Judicial Member in respect 
of whom a reference of conducting an inquiry has been made to the Chief Justi ce of the High Court under 
sub-section ( 2), until the Central Government passes an order on receipt of the report of inquiry made by 
Chief Justice of t he High Court on the reference.  
(4) The Central Government may regulate the procedure for inquiry referre d to in sub -section ( 2) in 
the manner as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Administrative Member may be removed from his office by an order of the Central 
Government on the grounds specified in sub -section ( 1) and in accordance with the procedure noti fied by 
the Central Government:  
Provided that the Administrative Member shall not be removed unless he has been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter.   16 
 36. Vacancies , etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Appellate Tribunal .—No act or proceeding of 
the A ppellate Tribunal shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of the Tribunal; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Member of the Tribunal; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Tribunal not af fecting the merits of the case.  
37. Resignation and removal .—The Chairperson or any other Member may, by notice in writing 
under his hand addressed to the Central  Government, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or any other Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central 
Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from 
the date of receipt of the notice or until a person dul y appointed as his successor enters upon his office or 
until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier.  
38. Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances .—(1) In the event of the occurrence of 
any vacancy in the office of the Chairper son of the Appellate Tribunal by reason of his death, resignation 
or otherwise, the senior -most Member shall act as the Chairperson until the date on which a new 
Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such v acancy, ent ers upon his 
office.  
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence, illness or any other 
cause, the senior -most Member shall discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which 
the Chairperson resumes his dut ies.  
39. Staff of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall provide the Appellate Tribunal 
with such officers and employees as it may thinks fit.  
(2) The officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the  
general supe rintendence of the Chairperson.  
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and employees of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be such, as may be prescribed.  
40. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound 
by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have powers  to regulate its own procedure.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, have the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  while 
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject  to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872   
(1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such reco rd or document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses or documents ; 
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing a representation for d efault or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any o rder passed by it 
ex parte ; and  
(i) any other matter, which may be, presc ribed by the Central Government.   17 
 (3) An order made by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by it as a decree of 
civil court and, for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have a ll the powers of a civil court.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having jurisdiction and the civil court shall execute the order as if it we re 
a decree made by that court.  
(5) All proceedings before the Appel late Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  and the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of  Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) .  
41. Distribution of business amongst Benches of Appellate Tribunal .—Where any Benches are 
constituted, the Chairperson may, from time to time, by notification, make provision as to the distribution 
of the business of  the Appellate Tribunal amongst the Benches and also provide for the matters which 
may be dealt with by each Bench.  
42. Power of Chairperson of Appellate Tribunal to transfer cases .—On the application of any of 
the parties and notice to the parties, and after hearing them, or on his own motion without any notice, the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal may transfer any case pending before one Bench, fo r disposal, to 
any other Bench.  
43. Decision to be by majority .—If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in 
opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal who shall eithe r hear the point or points himself or refer the case 
for hearing on the point or points by one or more of the other Members and the point or points shall be 
decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members of the Appellate Tribunal who have 
heard the case, incl uding those who first heard it.  
44. Members , etc., to be public servants .—The Chairperson, Members and other officers and 
employees of the Appellate Tribunal, the Adjudicating Authority, Approving Authority, Initiating Officer, 
Administ rator and the officers subordinate to all of them shall be deemed to be public servants within the 
meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
45. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which any of the authorities, an Adjudicating Authority or the 
Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine, and no injunction shall be  granted by 
any court or other forum in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred 
by or under this Act.  
46. Appeals to Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Any person, including the Initiating Officer, aggrieved by 
an order of the Adjudicating Authority may prefer an appeal in such form and along with such fees, as 
may be prescribed, to the Appellate Tribunal against the order passed by the Adjudicating Authority 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 26, within a period of forty -five day s from the date of the order.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the said period of forty -five days, if it is 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented, by sufficient cause, from filing the appeal in time.  
(3) On receipt of an appea l under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties 
to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such o rders thereon as it thinks fit.  
(4) An Appellate Tribunal while deciding t he appeal shall have the power — 
(a) to determine a case finally, where the ev idence on record is sufficient;  
(b) to take additional evidence or to require any evidence to be taken by the Adjudicating 
Authority, where the Adjudicating Authority has refused to admit evidence, whi ch ought to have  been 
admitted;  
(c) to require any document to be produced or any witness to be examined for the purposes of 
proceeding befor e it; 18 
 (d) to frame issues which appear to the Appellate Tribunal essential for adjudication of the case 
and refer them to the Adjud icating Authority for determination;  
(e) to pass final order and affirm, vary or reverse an order of adjudication passed by the 
Adjudicating Authority and pass such other order or orders as may be necessa ry to meet the ends of 
justice.  
(5) The Appellate Tr ibunal, as far as possible, may hear and finally decide the appeal within a period 
of one year from the last date of the mont h in which the appeal is filed.  
47. Rectification of mistakes .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal or the Adjudicating Authority may, in 
order to rectify any mistake apparent on the face of the record, amend any order made by it under  
section 26 and section 46 respectively, within a period of one year from the end of the month  in which the 
order was passed.  
(2) No amendment shall be made unde r sub -section ( 1), if the amendment is likely to affect any 
person prejudicially, unless he has been given notice of intention to do so and has been given  an 
opportunity of being heard.  
48. Right to representation .—(1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under this 
Act may either appear in person or take the assistance of an authorised representative of his choice to 
present his case  before the Appellate Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government may auth orise one or more of its officers to act as presenting officers on 
its behalf, and every person so authorised may present the case with respect to any appeal  before the 
Appellate Tribunal.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “authorised represen tative ” means a person authorised 
by the appellant in writing to appear on his behalf, being — 
(i) a person related to the appellant in any manner, or a person regularl y employed by the 
appellant; or  
(ii) any  officer of a scheduled bank with which the appellant maintains an account or  has other 
regular dealings; or  
(iii) any legal practitioner who is entitled to practice in any civil c ourt in India; or  
(iv) any  person who has passed any accountancy examination recognised in this behalf by the 
Board; or  
(v) any person who has acquired such educational qualifications as the Board may prescribe for 
this purpose.  
49. Appeal to High Court .—(1) Any party aggrieved by  any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within a period of sixty days from the date of 
communication of the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of law arising 
out of such orde r. 
(2) The High Court may entertain any appeal after the said period of sixty days, if it is satisfied that 
the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal within the period specified in  
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Where the High Court is sati sfied that a substantial question of law is involved in any case, it  shall 
formulate that question.  
(4) The appeal shall be heard only on the question so formulated, and the respondents shall, at the 
hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such question.  
(5) Nothing in this sub -section shall be deemed to take away or abrid ge the power of the court to hear, 
for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other substantial question of law not formulated by it, if it is 
satisfied that t he case involves such question.  19 
 (6) The High Court shall decide the question of law so formula ted and deliver the judgment thereon 
containing the grounds on which any decision is founded and may award any cost as it deems fit.  
(7) The High Court  may determine any issue which — 
(a) has not been determine d by the Appellate Tribunal; or  
(b) has been wr ongly determined by the Appellate Tribunal, by reason of a decision on such 
question of law as is referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(8) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908   
(5 of 1908) , relating to appe als to the High Court shall, as far as may be, apply in the case of appeals 
under this section.  
CHAPTER VI  
SPECIAL  COURTS  
50. Special Courts .—(1) The Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High 
Court, shall, for trial of an offence punishable under this Act, by notification, designate one or more 
Courts of Session as Special Court or Special Courts for such area or areas or for such case or class or 
group of cases as may be  specified in the notification.  
(2) While trying an o ffence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an offence other than an 
offence referred to in sub -section ( 1), with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , be charged at the same trial.  
(3) The Special Court s hall not take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act except upon 
a complaint in writing made by — 
(i) the authority; or 
(ii) any officer of the Central Government or State Government authorised in writing by that 
Government by a general or spe cial order made in this behalf.  
(4) Every trial under this section shall be conducted as expeditiously as possible and every endeavour 
shall be made by the Special Court to conclude the trial within six months from the date of filing of the 
complaint.  
51. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special Court .—(1) 
Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973   
(2 of 1974) , shall apply to the proceedings before a Special Court and the persons conducting the 
prosecution before the Special Court, shall be d eemed to be Public Prosecutors:  
Provided that the Central Government may also appoint for any case or class or group of cases, a 
Special Public Prosecuto r. 
(2) A person shall not be  qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public 
Prosecutor under this section unless, the Public Prosecutor has been in practice as an advocate for not less 
than seven years, and the Special Public Prosecutor has been in practice as a n advocate for not le ss than 
ten years in any court.  
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section 
shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  and the provisions of that Code shall have effect accordingly.  
52. Appeal and revision .—The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers 
conferred by Chapter XXIX or Chapter XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , on a 
High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court 
of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.  
  20 
 CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PROSECUTION  
53. Penalty for benami  transaction .—(1) Where any person enters into a benami  transaction in 
order to defeat the provisions of any law or to avoid payment of statutory dues or to avoid payment to 
creditors, the beneficial owner, benamidar  and any other person who abets or induces any person to enter 
into the benami  transaction, shall be guilty of the offence of benami  transaction.  
(2) Whoever is found guilty of the offence of benami  transaction referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall  be 
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year, but which may 
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to twenty -five per cent. of the fair 
market value of th e property.  
54. Penalty  for false information .—Any person who is required to furnish information under this 
Act knowingly gives false information to any authority or furnishes any false document in any proceeding 
under this Act, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for  a term which shall not be less than six 
months but which may extend to five years and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to ten per 
cent. of the fair  market value of the property . 
55. Previous sanction .—No prosecution shall be instituted against any person in respect of any 
offence under sections 3, 53 or section 54 without the previous sanction of the Board.]  
1[CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
56. Repeal of provisions of certain Acts .—(1) Sections 81, 82 and 94 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882  
(2 of 1882) , section 66 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  and section 281A of the  
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , are hereby repealed.  
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in  sub-section ( 1) shall affect the 
continued operation of section 281A of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961)  in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir.  
57. Certain transfers to be null and void .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Transfer of 
the Property Act, 1882  (4 of 1882)  or any other law for the time being in force, where, after the issue of a 
notice under section 24, any property referred to in the said notice is transferred by any mode whatsoever, 
the transfer shall, for the purposes of the proceedi ngs under this Act, be ignored and if the property is 
subsequently confiscated by the Central Government under section 27, then, the transfer of the property 
shall  be deemed to be null and void.  
58. Exemption .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any property relating to 
charitable or religious trusts from the operation of this Act.  
(2) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid b efore each House of Parliament.  
59. Power of Ce ntral Government to issue directions, etc .—(1) The Central Government may, 
from time to time, issue such orders, instructions or directions to the authorities or require any person to 
furnish information as it may deem fit for the proper administration of this Act and such authorities and 
all other persons employed in execution of this Act shall observe and follow the orders, instructions and 
direct ions of the Central Government.  
(2) In issuing the directions or orders referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may have 
regard to anyone or more of t he following criteria, namely: — 
(a) territorial area;  
(b) classes of persons;  
(c) classes of cases; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 2016, s. 10, for sections 7 and 8 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  21 
 (d) any other criterion that may be specified by the Central Gover nment in this behalf.  
(3) No orders, instructions or directions under sub -sectio n (1) shall be issued so as to — 
(a) require any authority to decide a particular case in a particular manner; or  
(b) interfere with the discretion of the Adjudicating Authority in the discharge of its functions.  
60. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not, save as hereinafter expressly provided, in derogation of any other l aw for the time being in force.  
61. Offences to be non -cognizable .—Notwith standing anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , an offence under th is Act shall be non -cognizable.  
62. Offences by companies .—(1) Where a person committing contravention of any of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time 
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company, for the conduct 
of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to  be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and  punished accordingly.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1), shall render any person liable to punishment if he proves 
that the contravention to ok place without his knowledg e. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention has taken pl ace with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
the director, manager, secretary or other officer shal1 also be deemed to be guilty of the contraventi on and 
shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate, and includes — 
(i) a firm; and  
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals w hether incorporated or not; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to — 
(i) a firm, means a partn er in the firm;  
(ii) any association of persons or a body of individuals, means any member c ontrolling the 
affairs thereof.  
63. Notice, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds .— No notice, summons, order, document or 
other proceeding, furnished or made or issued or taken or purported to have been furnished or made or 
issued or taken in pursuance of any of the provisions of this  Act shall be invalid, or shall be deemed to be 
invalid merely by reason of any mistake, defect or omission in the notice, summons, order, document or 
other proceeding if the notice, summons, order, document or other proceeding is in substance and effect 
in conformity with or according to the intent and purpose of this Act.  
64. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie 
against the Government or any officer of the Government or the Appellate Tribunal or the Adjudicating 
Authority established under this Act, for anything done or intended to be don e in good faith under this 
Act. 
65. Transfer of pending cases .—(1) Every suit or proceeding in respect of a benami  transaction 
pending in any Court (other than a High Court) or Tribunal or before any forum on the date of the 
commencement of this Act shall stand transferred to the Adjudicating Authority or the Appellate 
Tribunal, as the case may be, hav ing jurisdiction  in the matter.  
  22 
 (2) Where any suit, or other proceeding stands transferred to the Adjudicating Authority or the 
Appellate T ribunal under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the court, Tribunal or other forum shall, as soon as may be, after the transfer, forward the 
records of the suit, or other proceeding to the Adjudicating Authority or the Appellate Tribunal, as the 
case may be;  
(b) the Adjudicating Authority may, on receipt of the records, proceed to deal with the suit, or 
other proceeding, so far as may be, in the same manner as in the case of a reference made under  
sub-section ( 5) of section 24, from the stage which was reached before the transfer or from any earlier 
stage or de novo  as the Adjud icating Authority may deem fit.  
66. Proceedings, etc., against legal representative .—(1) Where a person dies during the course of 
any proceeding under this Act, any proceeding taken against the deceased before his death shall be 
deemed to have been taken against the legal representative and  may be continued against the legal 
representative from the stage at which it stood on the dat e of the death of the deceased.  
(2) Any proceeding which could have been taken against the deceased if he had survived may be 
taken against the legal representati ve and all the provisions of this Act, except sub -section ( 2) of section 3 
and the provisions of Chapte r VII, shall apply accordingly.  
(3) Where any property of a person has been held benami  under sub -section ( 3) of section 26, then, it 
shall be lawful for  the legal representative of the person to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal, in 
place of the person and the provisions of section 46 shall, so far as may be, apply, or continue to apply, to 
the appeal.  
67. Act to have overriding effect .—The provi sions of this Act shall have effect, notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
68. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) manner of ascertaining the fair market valu e under clause 16 of section 2; 
(b) the manner of appointing the Chairperson and the Member of the Adjudicating Authorities 
unde r sub -section ( 2) of section 9;  
(c) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the Members of the Adjudicating 
Authority under  sub-section ( 1) of section 13;  
(d) the powers and functions of the authorities under  sub-section ( 2) of section 18;  
(e) other powers of the authorities under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(f) the  form and manner of furnishing any information to the authority under  sub-section ( 2) of 
section 21;  
(g) the manner of provisional attachment of property under  sub-section ( 3) of section 24;  
(h) the procedure for confiscation of benami  property under the s econd proviso to  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 27;  
(i) the manner and conditions to receive and manage the property under  sub-section ( 1) of  
section 28;  
(j) the manner and conditions of disposal of property vested in the Central Government under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 28;  
(k) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal under  sub-section ( 1) of section 33;  
(l) the manner of prescribing proce dure for removal of Chairperson or Member under   
sub-section ( 4) of section 35;  23 
 (m) the salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) of sectio n 39;  
(n) any power of the Appellate Tribunal under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of section 40;  
(o) the form in which appeal shall be filed and the fee for filing the appeal under  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 46;  
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which pro vision is to 
be made, by rules.  
69. Laying of rules and notifications  before Parliament .—Every rule made and notification issued 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive se ssions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rules or notifications, 
as the case may be, both Houses agree that the rules or notifications, as the case may be, should not be 
made or issued, the rule or notification, as the case may  be, shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
notification , as the case may be.  
70. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the pro visions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty.  
(2) No order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years fro m the commencement 
of this Act.  
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
71. Transitional provision .—The Central Government may, by notification, provide that until the 
Adjudicating Authorities are appointed and the Appellate Tribunal is established under this Act, the 
Adjudicating Authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of the Money -Laundering Act, 2002  
(15 of 2003)  and the Appellate Tribunal established under section 25 of that Act may discharge the 
functions of the Adjudicating Authority and Appellate T ribunal,  respectively, under this Act.]  
1[72.] Repeal and saving .—(1) The Benami  Transactions (Prohibition of the Right to Recover 
Property) O rdinance, 1988 (Ord. 2 of 1988)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
                                                           
1. Section 9 renumbered as section 72 thereof by Act 43 of 2016, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2016).  
--------------------------The Religious Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS (PREVENTION OF MISUSE) ACT, 1988  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____ ______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Prohibition of use of religious institutions for certain purposes.  
4. Restrictions on carrying arms and ammunition into a religious institution . 
5. Prohibition of use of funds of religious institutions for certain activities . 
6. Prohibition of religious for  a for propagating political ideas . 
7. Penalties . 
8. Disqualification of persons convicted or charge -sheeted under this Act . 
9. Certain persons bound to give information to police . 
10. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE RELIGIOUS INSTITUTIONS (PREVENTION OF MISUSE) ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1988 
  [1st September , 198 8.] 
An Act to prevent the misuse of religious institutions for political and other purposes.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Religious Institu -
tions (Prevention of Misuse) Act, 1988.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 26th day of May, 1988.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “ammunition ” shall have the same meaning as in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section2 
of the Arms Act, 1959  (54 of 1959);  
(b) “arms ” shall have the same meaning as in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the 
Arms Act, 1959  (54 of 1959) ; 
(c) “manager ”, in relation to a religious institution , means every person, including  any 
religious functionary (by whatever name called), who, for the time being, either alone or in 
association with other persons, administers, manages or otherwise controls the affairs of that 
institution, its functions or prop erties;  
(d) “political activ ity” includes any activity promoting or propagating the aims or objects of 
a political party or any cause, issue or question of a political nature by organising meetings, 
demonstra tions, processions, collection or disbursement of funds, or by the issue of  directions or 
decrees, or by any other means, and includes also such activity by or on behalf of a person 
seeking election as a candidate for any election to Parliament, any State Legislature or any local 
authority;  
(e) “political party ” means an associat ion or body of persons — 
(i) which is, or is deemed to be, registered, with the Election Commission of India as a 
political party under the Election Symbols (Reservation and Allotment) Order, 1968, as in 
force for the time being; or  
(ii) which has set up ca ndidates for election to any legislature, but is not registered, or 
deemed to be registered, as a political party, under the Election Symbols (Reservation and 
Allotment) Order, 1968; or  
(iii) organis ed to carry on any political activity or to acquire or ex ercise political power 
through election or otherwise;  
(f) “religious institution ” means an institution for the promotion of any religion or 
persuasion, and includes any place or premises used as a place of public religious worship, by 
whatever name or desig nation known . 
3. Prohibition of use of religious institutions for certain purpo ses.—No religious institution 
or manager thereof shall use or allow the use of any premises belonging to, or under the control of, 
the institution — 
(a) for the promotion or propagation of any political activity; or  
(b) for the harbo uring of any person accused or convicted of an offence under any law for the 
time being in force; or  
(c) for the storing of any arms or ammunition; or   3 
 (d) for keeping any goods or articles in contravention of any law for the time being in force; 
or 
(e) for erecting or putting up of any construction or fortification, including basements, 
bunkers, towers or walls without a valid licence or permission under any law for the time being 
in force; or  
(f) for the carrying on of any unlawful or subversive act p rohibited under any law for the 
time being in force or in contravention of any order made by any court; or  
(g) for the doing of any act which promotes or a ttempts to promote disharmony or  feelings of 
enmity, hatred or ill -will between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes 
or communities; or  
(h) for the carrying on of any activity prejudicial to the sovereignty, unity and integrity of 
India; or  
(i) for the doing  of any act in contravention of the provisions of the Prevention of Insults to 
National Honour Act, 1971  (69 of1971) . 
4. Restrictions on carrying arms and ammunition into a religious institution .—No religious 
institution or manager thereof shall allow the entry of any arms or ammunition or of any person 
carrying any arms or ammunition into the religious institution : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to — 
(a) the wearing and carrying  of a Kirpan  by any person professing the Sikh religion; or  
(b) any arms which are used , as part of any religious ceremony or ritual of the instit ution as 
estab lished by custom  or usage.  
5. Prohibition of use of funds of religious institutions for certain activities .—No religious 
institution or manager thereof shall use or allow the use of any funds or other properties belonging 
to, or under the control of, the institution for the benefit of any political party or for the purpose of 
any politi cal activity or for the commission of any act which is punishable as an offence under any 
law. 
6. Prohibition of religious for  a for propagating political ideas .—No religious institution or  
manager thereof shall allow any ceremony, festival, congregation, procession or assembly organised  
or held under its auspices to be used for any political activity.  
7. Penalties .—Where any religious institution or manager thereof  contravenes the provisions of 
section 3, section 4, section 5 or s ection 6, the manager and every person connected with such  
contra vention shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and 
with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.  
8. Disqualification of persons convicted or charge -sheeted under this Act .—(1) Any manager 
or other emplo yee of a religious institution shall, upon conviction for an offence under this Act, stand 
removed from his office or post and shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
other law, be disqualified for appointment in any religious inst itution as manager or in any other 
capac ity for a period of six years from the date of his conviction.  
(2) Where any manager or other employee of a religious institution is accused of an offence 
under this Act and a charge -sheet for the prosecution of suc h person is filed in any court and the 
court is of the opinion, after considering the charge -sheet and after hearing the prosecution and the 
accused, that a prima facie  case exists, it shall pass an order or direction restraining the person from 
exercising  the powers or discharging the duties of his office or post pending trial . 
(3) Where any manager or other employee has been removed under sub -section ( 1), or restrained 
under sub -section ( 2), the vacancy arising out of such removal or restraint may be filled in the 
manner provided in the law applicable to the said religious institution.   4 
 9. Certain persons bound to give information to police .—Every manager or other employee of 
a religious institution shall be bound to give information to the officer incharge of the police station 
within whose local jurisdiction the religious institution is situate of any contravention or any 
impending contravention of the provisions of this Act and any failure to do so shall be punishable 
under section 176 of the Indi an Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
10. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Religious Institutions (Prevention of Misuse) Ordinance, 1988  
(Ord. 3 of 1988 ) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
 
--------------------------The Special Protection Group Act, 1988--------------------------
1 
 THE SPECIAL PROTECTION GROUP ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1988  
[2nd June , 1988.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for 
providing proximate security to the Prime Minister of India and the 1[former Prime Minister s 
of India and members of  their immediate famil ies] and for matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follow: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This  Act may be called the Special P rotection Group              
Act, 1988.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “active duty ” in relation to a member of the Group means any duty as such member during the 
period when he is posted to physically protect the Prime Minister of India and the members  of 3[his 
immediate family or a former Prime Minister and t he members of his immediate famil y], wherever he 
or they may be;  
(b) “Director ” means the Director of the Group appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(c) “Group ” means the Special Protection Gro up constituted under section 4;  
(d) “member  of the Group ” means a person who has been appointed to the Group by the 
prescribed authority whether before or afte r the commencement of this Act;  
(e) “members of immediate family ” means wife, husband, chi ldren and parents;  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescrib ed by rules made under this Act;  
(g) “proximate security ” means protection provided from close quarters, during journey by road, 
rail, aircraft, watercraft or on foot or any other means of transport and shall include the places of 
functions, engagements, residence or halt and shall comprise ring round teams, iso lation cordons, the 
sterile zone around, and the rostrum and access control to the person or members of his immediate 
family;  
(h) all words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in th e Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860 ) shall have the m eanings respectively assigned to them in that Code.  
3. Members subject to this Act .—Every member of the Group shall be subject to this Act, wherever 
he may be.  
4. Constitution of the Group .—4[(1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the Speci al 
Protection Group for p roviding proximate security to — 
(i) the Prime Minister and the membe rs of his immediate family; and  
5[(ii) any former Prime Minister or to the members of his immediate family — 
(a) for a period of one year from the date on  which the  former Prime Minister ceased to hold 
office and beyond one year based  on the level of threat as decided by the Central Government, so 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 48 of 1991, s. 2, for “members of his immediate family” (w.e.f. 25-9-1991).  
2. 1st August, 1988, vide notification No. S.O. 735(E), dated 1st August, 1988, See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,             
sec. 3( ii). 
3. Subs. by Act 48 of 1991, s. 3, for “his immediate family” (w.e.f. 25 -9-1991).  
4. Subs. by Act 35 of 1999, s. 2, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 18-11-1999 ). 
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 2003, s. 2, for clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 13 -3-2003)  2 
 however that not  more than twelve months  shall  elapse between two consecutive assessments 
made in regard to the need for  proximate security:  
Provided that while deciding the level of  threat, the Central Government  shall  take into 
account, among  other  things, the following factors, namely: — 
(A) that the threat emanates from any militant  or terrorist organisation or any  other  
source; and  
(B) that the threat is of a grave and continuing nature;  
(b) on their visits abroad, based on entitlement to proximate security and the level of  threat as 
assessed by the Central Government. ] 
(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) any former Prime Minister or any member of the immediate family o f the Prime Minister or 
of a former Prime Minister may decline proximate security;  
(b) where  the proximate security is withdrawn from a former Prime Minister, whether before or 
after the commencement of the Special Protection Group (Amendment) Act, 1999, such proximate 
security shall also stand withdrawn from the immediate family members of such former Prime 
Minister:  
Provided that where the level of threat faced by any member of the immediate family of a former 
Prime Minister warrants proximate security or any other security, such security shall be provided to that 
member. ] 
(2) Subject to the pro visions of this Act, the Group shall be constituted in such manner as may be 
prescribed and the terms and conditions of service of the members of the Group shal l be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any pers on or any member of any other armed 
force of the Union may be appointed to the Group by the Central Government by a general or special 
order and for such period as may be specified in such order, and the person so appointed shall, during the 
period of his appointment, be deemed to be a member of the Group, and the provisions of this Act shall, 
so far as may be, apply to such person or member.  
5. Control, direction, etc. —(1) The general superintendence, direction and control of the Group shall 
vest in, and be exercised by, the Central Government and subject thereto and to the provisions of this Act 
and the rules, the command and supervision of the Group shall vest in an officer to be appointed by the 
Central Governmen t as the Director of the Group.  
(2) The D irector shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be assisted by such number of 
1[Inspectors General , Deputy Inspectors General, Assistant Inspectors General ] and other officers as may 
be appointed by the Central Government.  
6. Liability for se rvice in and outside India .—Every member of the Group shall be liable to serve 
in any part of India as well as outside India.  
7. Members of the Group always on active duty. —Every member of the Group, not on leave or 
under suspension, shall, for all purpose s of this Act, be always on active duty and may at any time be 
employed or deployed in any manner which is consistent with the duties and responsibilities of the Group 
under this Act.  
8. Resignation and withdrawal from the post .—No member of  the Group shall be at liberty — 
(a) to resign his appointment during the terms of his engagement; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 2003, s. 3, for “ Deputy Directors, Assistant Directors, Joint Assistant Directors” (w.e.f. 13 -3-2003).  3 
 (b) to withdraw himself from all or any of the duties of his appointment,  
except with the previous permission in writing of the prescribed authority.  
9. Tenure of service. —Every member of the Group shall hold office during  the pleasure of the 
President.  
10. Restrictions respecting right to from associations, freedom of speech, etc .—(1) No member of 
the Group shall, without the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or  of the prescribed 
authority, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour union, political 
association or with any class of trade unions, labour union s or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society, institution, association or 
organisation that is not of a purely social , recre ational or religious nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter o r other 
document except where such communication or publication is in the bona fide  discharge of his duties 
or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific characte r or is of a prescribed nature.  
Explanation .—If any question arises as to whether any soc iety, institution, association or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) or whether any book, letter or 
document is a communication or publication in the bona fide  discharge of his duties or is a purely litera ry, 
artistic or scientific character or is of a prescribed nature under clause ( c), the decision of the Central 
Government thereon shall be final.  
(2) No member of the Group shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any 
demonstration or ganised by any body of persons for any political purposes or for such other purposes as 
may be prescribed.  
11. Termination of service .—The prescribed authority may, by order in writing, terminate the 
appointment of any member of the Group in the public int erest and such termination shall be deemed to 
be discharged simpliciter  and shall not amount to dismissal or removal.  
12. Appeal .—(1) Any member of the Group aggrieved by an order under section 11 may, within 
thirty days from the date of such order, prefer  an appeal to a Board to be constit uted by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The Board shall consist of suc h persons as may be prescribed.  
(3) The decision of the Board shall be final and shall not be called in question in any court or tribunal.  
(4) The Board s hall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
13. Powers and duties conferable on members of the Group. —The Central Government may, by 
general or special order published in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such conditions and 
limitations as m ay be specified in that order, any member of the Group may exercise or discharge such 
powers or duties as may be specified in the said order for giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
14. Assistance to Group .—It shall be the duty of every Ministry an d Department of the Central 
Government or the State Government or the Union territory Administration, every Indian Mission, every 
local or other authority or every civil or military authority to act in aid of the Director or any member of 
the Group wheneve r called upon to do so in furtherance of the duties and responsibilities assigned to such 
Director or member.  
15. Protection of action taken under this Act .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Group or any member thereof on  whom powers have been conferred or duties have been 
imposed under this Act, or any order issued or any rule made thereunder for anything which is in good 
faith done or purported to be done or omitted to be done in pursuance of this Act or any order issued  or 
any rule made thereunder or any order issued under any such rule.  4 
 16. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without pr ejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the Group shall be constituted and the terms and conditions of se rvice of 
its members under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(b) the authorities to be p rescribed under section 8, sub -section ( 1) of section 10 and section 11;  
(c) the nature of the communication or publication under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of             
section 10;  
(d) the  purposes, other than political purposes, for which a person subject to this Act shall not 
participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any demonstration under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 10;  
(e) the persons who shall be members of the Board unde r sub -section ( 2) of section 12;  
(f) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
17. Laying of orders and rules. —Every order issued under section 13 and every rule made under 
section 16 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or ma de, before each House of Parliament 
while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the order or the rule or 
both Houses agree that the order or rule should not be made, the order or rule shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, a s the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that order or 
rule. 
18. Provision as to existing Special Protection Group. —(1) The Special Protection Group  in 
existence at the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to be the Group constituted under this Act.  
(2) The members of the Special Protection Group in existence at the commencement of this Act shall 
be deemed to have been ap pointed as such under thi s Act.  
(3) Anything done or any action taken before the commencement of this Act in relation to the 
constitution of the Special Protection Group referred to in sub -section ( 1) and in relation to any person 
appointed, shall be as valid and as effective in l aw as if such thing or action was done or taken under this 
Act. 
--------------------------The Tamil Nadu Agricultural Service Co-operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1988--------------------------
1 THE TAMIL NADU AGRICULTURAL SERVICE CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES      
(APPOINTMENT OF SPECIAL OFFICERS) AMENDMENT ACT, 1988  
ACT NO. 22 OF 1988  
[8th April , 1988 .] 
An Act further to amend the Tamil Nadu Agricultura l Service Co -operative Societies 
(Appointment of Special Officers) Act, 1986 . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Thirty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Tamil Nadu Agricultural  
Service Co -operative Societies (Appointment of Special Officers) Amendment Act, 1988.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 28th day of March, 1 988. 
2. [Amendment of section 4.].— Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001 (30 of 2001)  s. 2 and 
the First Schedule  (w.e.f.  3-9-2001) . 
3. Validation .—Every Special Officer appointed or deemed to be appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4 of the principal Act and holding office as such immediately before the commencement of this 
Act, shall continue to hold such office on and from such commencement as i f the provisions of            
sub-section ( 2) of section 4 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, had been in force on such 
commencement, and accordingly, anything done or any action taken by such Special Officer under the 
principa l Act during the period commencing on and from the 28th day of March, 1988 and ending with 
the date of publication of this Act in the Tamil Nadu Government Gazette, shall be deemed to have been 
validly done or taken in accordance with the provisions of the  principal Act.  
 
 
