--------------------------The Assam University Act, 1989--------------------------
1 
 THE ASSAM UNIVERSITY ACT , 1989  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. The University.  
4. Objects.  
5. Power s of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction . 
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
8. The Visitor.  
9. The Chief Rector . 
10. Officers of the University . 
11. The Chancellor . 
12. The Vice -Chancellor . 
13. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor . 
14. Deans of Schools . 
15. The Registrar . 
16. The Finance Officer . 
17. Other officers . 
18. Authorities of the University . 
19. The Court . 
20. The Executive Council . 
21. The Academic Council . 
22. The Planning Board . 
23. The Board s of Schools . 
24. The Finance Committee . 
25. Other authorities of the University . 
26. Power to make Statutes . 
27. Statutes how to be made . 
28. Power to make Ordinances . 
29. Regulations . 
30. Annual report . 
31. Annual accounts.  
32. Conditions of service of employees . 
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
34. Right to appeal . 
35. Provident and pension funds . 
36. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies.  
37. Constitution of Committees . 
38. Filling of casual vacancies . 
39. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies . 2 
 SECTIONS  
40. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
41. Mode of proof of University record . 
42. Power to remove difficulties . 
43. Transitional provisions . 
44. Completion of courses of studies in Colleges or Institutions affiliated to the University.  
45. Statutes , Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
 
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE ASSAM UNIVERSITY ACT , 1989  
ACT NO. 23 OF 1989  
 [23rd May, 1989.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate  a teaching and affiliating University in the State of Assam 
and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Assam University Act, 1989.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the     
Official Gazette, ap point.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless  the context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the U niversity;  
(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff   by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(d) “Chancellor ”, “Vice -Chancellor ” and “Pro-Vice -Chancellor ” mean, res pectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice-Chancellor of the University;  
(e) “College ” means a College maintained by, or admitted to the privileges of, the University;  
(f) “Court ” means the Court of the University;  
(g) “Department ” means a Department of Studies; and includes a Centre of Studies;  
(h) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting , telecast ing, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(i) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University, and includes teachers and other 
staff of the U niversity;  
(j) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(k) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University,  or of a 
College or an Institution, maintained by the University;  
(l) “Institution ” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by , or admitted to 
the privileges of , the University;  
(m) “Planning Board ” means the Planning Board of the University;  
(n) “Principal ” means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by the University and 
includes, where there is no Principal, the person for t he time being duly appointed to act as Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal or the acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
(o) “recognised Institution ” means an institution of higher  learning recognised by the University;  
(p) “recognised teachers ” means such persons as may  be recognised by the University for the 
purpose of imparting instructions in a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(q) “Regulati ons” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under th is Act 
for th e time being in force;  
                                                           
1. 15th January, 199 4, vide notification No. G.S.R. 23 (E), dated 15th January, 199 4, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                      
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (r) “School ” means  a School of Studies of the University;  
(s) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean, respectively, the Statutes and the Ordinances of the 
University for the time being in force;  
(t) “teachers of the University”  means Profess ors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting  research in the U niversity or in any College 
or Institution maintained by the University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(u) “University ” mean s the Assam University established under this Act. 
3. The University. —(1) There shall be established a University by the name of “Assam University ”. 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Si lchar and it may also establish c ampuses at such 
other places within its jurisdiction as it may deem fit.  
(3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Planning Board and all persons who may hereafter 
become suc h officers or members , so long as they continue to hold  such office o r membership , are hereby 
constituted  a body corporate  by the name of  “Assam  University ”. 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common s eal and shall sue and  be sued by 
the said name . 
4. Objects.—The objects of the University shall be to dissemi nate and advance knowledge by 
providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem fit and by  the 
example of its corporate life to make provisions for integrated courses  in humanities , natural and physical 
sciences and social sciences in the educational programmes of the University; to take appropriate 
measures for promoting inter -disciplinary studies and research in the University;  to educate and train 
manpower for devel opment of the State of Assam; and to pay special attention to the improvement of the 
social and economic conditions and welfare of the people of that State, their intellectual,  academic and 
cultural development.  
5. Power s of the University .—The University shall have the foll owing powers, namely:— 
(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may , from time to 
time,  determine and to make provision for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to gra nt, subject to such conditions as the University may determine , diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on  the basis of examinations , evaluation or any 
other method of testing , on persons , and to withdraw any such dip lomas , certificates , degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to  undertake extra -mural studies , training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such persons as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships , Readerships, Lecture rships and other  teaching or 
academic positions , required by the University and to appoint persons to such Principalships , 
Professorships,  Readerships , Lecture rships or other teaching or academic  positions;  
(vii) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or Institution admitted to th e 
privileges of the University;  
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or organisation as teacher s of the 
University for a specified period ; 
(x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;   5 
 (xi) to co-operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution 
of higher learning in  such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine;  
(xii) to establish such campuses, special centres, specialised laboratories or other uni ts for 
research and instruction  as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the furthera nce of its 
objects;  
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentship, medals and prizes;  
(xiv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institution s and Halls;  
(xv) to make provision for research and advisory service s and for that purpose to ente r into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations , as th e University may deem 
necessary;  
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xvii) to admit to its privileges colleges and institutions not maintained by the University; to 
withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such conditions as ma y be prescribed by 
the Statutes; to recogn ise, guide, supervise, and control Halls not maintained by the University and 
other accommodation for students , and to withdraw any such recognition;  
(xviii) to appoint on contract o r otherwise visiting Professors,  Emeritus Professors, Consultants , 
Scholar s and such other persons who may  contribute to the advancement  of the objects of the 
University;  
(xix) to confer  autonomous status on a College or an Institution or  a Department , as the case may 
be, in accordance  with the Statutes;  
(xx) to determine standards  of admission to the University , which may include examination , 
evaluation or any other method of testing; 
(xxi) to demand and recei ve payment of fees  and other cha rges; 
(xxii) to supervis e the residences of the students of the University and t o make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare ; 
(xxiii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxiv) to regulate and enforce discipline a mong the students  and the employees , and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and g eneral welfare of the employees;  
(xxvi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of 
any proper ty, movable or im movable, including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of 
the University;  
(xxvii ) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of 
the Unive rsity, money for the purpose s of the University;  
(xxviii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
6. Jurisdiction .—1[(1) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the Cachar , Karimganj, 
North Cachar Hills , Karbi Anglong and Hailakandi Districts of the State of Assam. ] 
(2) On and from the commencement of this Act, all Colleges situa ted in the districts of Cachar, 
Karimganj, North Cachar Hills 2[, Karbi Anglong  and Hailkandi ] shall stand affiliated to the University.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 1995, s. 2, for sub -section (1) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1994).  
2. Subs. by s. 2,  ibid., for “and Karbi Anglong” (w.e.f. 15 -1-1994).  6 
 1*   *   *   *   * 
7. University open to all classes , castes  and creed. —The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste,  creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office t herein or be admitted as  a student in 
the University or to graduate  thereat or to enjoy or ex ercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, physically handicapped or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and th e Scheduled Tribes.  
 8. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work  and progress 
of the University , including Colleges and Institutions managed by it , and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in 
respect of any of the matter s dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct , of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment, and of any College or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its privilege s; and also of the examinations , teaching and 
other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an i nquiry to be made in like manner in 
respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University, Colleges or 
Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 2), give notice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made ,— 
(a) to the University , if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University or 
any College or Institution maintained by it , or 
(b) to the management of the Col lege or Institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of the College or Institution admitted to th e privile ges of the University,  
and the University or the management , as the case may be , shall have the right to make such 
representatio ns to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University o r the management, as the                                                                                                                                                                                       
case may be, the Visitor may caus e to be made such inspection or inquiry a s is referred to in                   
sub-section  (3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University or the 
management shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be 
heard at such inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or any College or 
Institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of addres s made by the Visitor , the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of th e Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any College or Institution 
admitted to the p rivileges of the University , address the management concerned through the                
Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon and such 
advice as he may be pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
                                                           
1. Sub-section ( 3) omitted by  Act 25 of 1995 , s. 2 (w.e.f.11 -6-1995).  7 
 (9) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may be , shall communicate, through the 
Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action, if any, as it prop oses to  take or has been taken upon the result 
of such inspection or inquiry.  
(10) Where, the Executive Council or t he management, does not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council or the management, issue such directions as he m ay think 
fit and the Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall comply with such directions.  
(11) Without prejudice to the for egoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may , by order in 
writing , annul any proceeding of the Universit y which is not in conformity  with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such o rder, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be made, and , if any  cause is shown within a re asona ble time,  he shall consider the 
same.  
(12) The Visitor shall have such other p owers as may be prescribed by t he Statutes.  
9. The Chief Rector .—The Governor  of the State of Assam shall be the Chief R ector of the 
University.  
10. Officers of the  University .—The following shall be the officers  of the University :— 
(1) the Chancellor ; 
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellors;  
(4) the Deans of Schools;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer ; and 
(7) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chan cellor shall be appointed by the  Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall , by virtue of his off ice, be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held for conferring 
degrees.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes . 
(2) The Vic e-Chancellor shall be the principal executive and aca demic officer of the University , and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The V ice-Chancellor may , if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter , 
exercise any power conferred on any authority o f the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provid ed that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken , it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision ther eon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved  by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to appeal against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Execu tive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the  
Vice -Chancellor.  8 
 (4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority con ferred by the provisions of  this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken in not in the interest of the University , may ask the authority concerned to 
review i ts decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
 13. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and 
shall exercise such  powers and perform such duties,  as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
14. Deans of Schools. —Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Regis trar.—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The R egistrar shall have the power to enter into agreement, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Finance Officer. —The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Other offic ers.—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Authorities of the University. —The following shall be the authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive  Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the Planning Board;  
(5) the Boards of Schools;  
(6) the Finance Committee; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the  
University.  
19. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the followi ng powers and functions , 
namely :— 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies  and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the Univ ersity 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor  in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice ; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council , the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.   9 
 21. The Academic Council .—(1) The  Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the academic polices of the University.  
(2) The co nstitution of the Academic Council, the term of office  of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. (1) The Planning Board. —The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Planning Board, term of office of its members and its powers and functions 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
 23. The Board s of Schools .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board s of Schools shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
 24. The Finance Committee. —The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
 25. Other authoriti es of the University. —The constitution, powers and functio ns of other 
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
 26. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Sta tutes  may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the University , as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the election and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, the 
filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities and other bodies 
for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the of ficers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University and their 
emoluments;  
(e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any  other University or organisation 
for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service  of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fund , the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing  the senio rity of service of the employees of the University ; 
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees  or students and the 
University ; 
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department;  
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees , diplomas , certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(n) the conditions under which Colleges and Institutions may be admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the withdrawal of such pr ivileges;  
(o) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(p) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University ;  10 
 (q) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;  
(r) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
27. Statutes how to be made. —(1) The first Statutes are th ose set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may , from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statues  affecting the status,  
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been g iven an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statutes or addition to the Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assent ed to by  the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -section s, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may , on the expiry of the said period of three years , make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry , such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -section,  the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter spec ified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by th e Executive Council for its inability to comply 
with such direction,  make or  amend the Statutes suitably.  
28. Power to make Ordinances. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University ; 
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees , diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be take n relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to th e 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, sch olarships, studentships , medals  and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of ex amining bodies , examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of special  courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of Centres of Studies , Boards of Studies, Special Centres, Specialised 
Laboratories and other Committees;   11 
 (l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universit ies and authorities including 
learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of Co lleges and Institution s established by the University;  
 (p) the supervision and management of College s and Institution s admitted to t he privileges of the 
University;  
(q) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees ; and  
(r) all o ther matter s which by this Act  or the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordi nances so made may be amended , repealed  or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the manner  prescribed  by the Statutes.  
29. Regulations .— The authorities of the University may make Regulations,  consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepar ed under the direction of 
the Executive Council , which shall include, among other matter s, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statute s and the Court shall consider t he report in its annual meeting . 
(2) The Court  shall  submit the annual report to the Visitor a longwith its comments, i f any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report , as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government , which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
31. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as h e may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the au dit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the obser vations of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the a nnual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall , after being considered by the Executive Council , be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted  to the Visitor , shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government,  which shall, as s oon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament  shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
32. Conditions of service  of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract , which shall be lodged  with the University and a copy of which shall be f urnished 
to the employee concerned.  
  12 
 (2) Any dispute  arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall , at the 
request of the employee , be referred to a  Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision  of the T ribunal  shall be final,  and no suit shall lie in any civil cou rt in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made  by the employee under sub -section ( 2) , shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration  upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration Act, 1940  (2 of 1940) . 
(5) The procedure  for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases  against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor , Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be , and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the Un iversity for more than 
one year,  may, within ten days of  the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him , 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm , modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee , as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student , be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of                    
sub-sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section  32 shall , as far as may be,  apply to a reference made under this 
sub-section.  
 34. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall , notwithstanding anything contain ed in 
this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as ma y be prescribed by the Statutes , to the Executive 
Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal or the 
management of any College o r an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive Council 
may confirm , modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
 35. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as ma y be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provid ent fund or pension fund has been so constituted , the Central Government may 
declare that the provision of the Provid ent Funds Act , 1925 (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund , as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
 36. Disputes a s to constitution of University  authorities and bodies. —If any question  arises as to 
whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as , or is entitled to be , a member of any authority 
or other body of the University , the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision there on shall be 
final.  
  37. Constitution of Committees .—Where any authority of the University  is given power by this 
Act or the Statutes to appoint Committees , such Committees shall , save as otherwise provided , consist of 
the members of the auth ority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the authority in each  case may 
think fit.  
 38. Filling of casual vacancies. —All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University sha ll be filled,  as soon as may be , by the 
person or body who appointed, elected or co-opted the member whose place has become vacant and 
person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for 
the residue of the  term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.     
39. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by  reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  13 
  40. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith do ne or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
 41. Mode of proof of University record .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice , order, 
proceeding  resolution of any authority or Committee of the Uni versity, or other documents in possession  
of the University, or any entry in any register du ly maintained by the University,  if certified by the 
Registrar, shall be received as prima faci e evidence of suc h receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding , 
resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions there in where the original thereof  would , if produced , have been admissib le in 
evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) or in any 
other law for the time being in force.  
42. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may , by order published in the Official Gazette , make such provisions , 
not inconsistent  with the provisions of this Act,  as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be m ade under this section after the expiry of three  years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made , before each 
House of Parliament.  
43. Trans itional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything containe d in this Act and the Statutes, —  
(a) the first Chancellor  and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar  and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three  years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty members 
and eleven members , respectively , who shall be nominated  by the Visitor and shall hold office for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first Planning Board shall consist of not more than ten members, who shall be nominated 
by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall be constituted on the expiry of a period of six months from 
the commencement of this Act and during the said period of six months, the powers of the Academic 
Council shall be performed by the Planning Board  constituted under section 22;  
(f) the first Ac ademic  Council shall consist of not more than  twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be , by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or nominated 
shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or n ominated w ould 
have held office,  if such vacancy had not occurred . 
44. Comp letion of courses of studies in Colleges or Institutions affiliated  to the                   
University .—Notwithstanding  anything contained in this Act,  or in the Statutes or the Ordinances, any 
student of a College or an Institution , who, immediately before the admission of such College or 
Institution to the privileges of the University , was studying for a degree , diploma or certificate of Gauhati 
Univer sity or Dibrugarh University, shall be permitted by the University, to complete his course for that 
degree , diploma or certificate, as the case may be, and the Assam University and such College or 
Institution shall provide for the instructions and examinat ion of such student in accordance with the 
syllabus of s tudies of Gauhati University or Dibrugarh  University, as the case may be.  14 
 45. Statutes , Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official G azette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon  as may be after 
it is made , before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session  or the successive sessions  aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statu te, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute , Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no eff ect, as the case may be ; so, however,  that any such 
modification or  annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything prev iously done under 
that Statute,  Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes , Ordinances or R egulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this A ct, to the Statutes , 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retr ospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regula tion so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute , 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable . 
  15 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 27)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE UNIVERSITY  
 The Chancellor  
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons 
recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the academic or public life 
of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended he m ay call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall co ntinue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
The Vice -Chancellor  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from  a panel of not less than three 
persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of th e persons included in the panel, he may call 
for a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee refer red to in clause ( 1), shall consist of three persons, none of whom shall be an 
employee of the University or a member of the Court , the Executive Council or the Academic Council or 
connected with an institution recognised by or associated with the Universi ty and out of the three persons, 
two shall be nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor 
shall be the convenor of the Committee.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office , or until he attains the age of sixty -five years , whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that t he Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired , to 
continue i n office for such period,  not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him.  
(5) The emoluments and other con ditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
 (i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allo wances other than the house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to t ime and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Executive Council with the approval of the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where a n employee of the University or a College or an Institution maintained by or 
affiliated to it, or of any other U niversity or any Institution maintained by or affiliated to such other 
University, is appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to con tinue to contribute to any  
provident fund of which he is a member and the University shall contribute to the account of such  
person in that provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately 
before its appointment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall m ake the necessary contribution to such scheme.  
 16 
 (iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rate as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall he credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen days ea ch on the 1st day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the   
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the 
rate of two a nd-a-half days for each completed month of service.  
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause  (iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service. This half pay leave  
may also be availed of as  commuted leave on full pay on me dical certificate.   When commuted leave 
is availed , twice the amount of half pay leave shall be debited against half pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available , the senior -most Professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assume office or the Vice -Chancellor attends 
to the duties of his office, as the case may be.  
 Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor  
3. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the Planning Board and the Finance Committee and shall , in the absence of the Chancellor, 
preside at the convocations held for conferring degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancell or shall be entitled to be present at , and address , any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the U niversity, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes , the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed , and he shall have all the power s necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall give ef fect 
to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he may d eem fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meeting of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Planning Board and the Finance Committee.  
 Pro-Vice-Chancellor  
4. (1) Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the  
recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor : 
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may  either appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another person to the Executive Council;  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor , 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor  in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years  or until the expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  17 
 Provided that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided further that, in any case, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor  shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five 
years:  
Provided also that the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2 , continue in office notwithstanding the expiration of his term of of fice as 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor, until a new Vice -Chancellor or the Vice -Chancellor, as the case may be , assumes 
office:  
Provided also that when the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant and there is no                
Pro-Vice -Chancellor to perform the functions of the Vice -Chancellor , the Executive Council may appoint 
a Pro -Vice -Chancellor and the Pro -Vice -Chancellor so appointed shall cease to hold office as such as 
soon as a Vice -Chancellor is appointed and enters upon his office.  
(3) The emoluments a nd other t erms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this  behalf , from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Registrar  
5. (1) The R egistrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of a 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of ser vice of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of  sixty years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, continu e in 
office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until th e expiry of a period of one 
year, w hichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence, 
or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The R egistrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employe es, 
excluding teachers and academic staff , as may be specified in the order of the Executive Council and to 
suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure of the withholding of increment : 
Provided that no such penal ty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Reg istrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along with 
his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  18 
 (6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic Council  and 
the Planning Board, but shall not be d eemed to be a member of any of these authorities and  he shall be   
ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records , the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charges;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the Planning Board and of any Committees  appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the Planning Board and of any Committee s appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of t he Court, the Executive Council , the Academic 
Council and the Planning Board;  
(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in accordance with the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agen da of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued; and the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University,                           
sign powers -of-attorney an d verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by the Executive Council or the                           
Vice -Chancellor.    
The Finance Officer  
6. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendations of a 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the  
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that  a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall , notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or un til the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is , by reason of 
illness , absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office , the duties of t he office shall 
be perfor med by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee , but shall not be 
deemed to be a Member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its 
financial policy;  and 
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  19 
 (7) Subject to the control of the Executive Coun cil, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget o f the University and for 
their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of col lection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings , land, furniture and equipment are maintaine d up-to-date 
and that stock -checking i s conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices , 
Special Centres , Specialised Laboratories,  Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from  any office, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by the 
University an y information or returns that he may consider necessary for the performance of his 
duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly aut horised in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the U niversity shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money.  
 Deans of School s of Studies  
7. (1) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor  from among the 
Professors in the School for a period of three years and he shall be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shall cease to hold office as such:  
Provided further that if at any time there is no P rofessor in a School, the Vice -Chancellor, or a Dean 
authorised by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, shall exercise the powers of the Dean of the School.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause , unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Studies 
or Committees  of the School , as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  
Heads of Departments  
8. (1) In the case of Departments which have more than one Professor , the Head of the Department 
shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor from among 
the Professors.  
(2) In the case of Departments where there is only one Professor, the Executive Council shall have the 
option to appoint , on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor , either the Professor or a Reader as the 
Head of the Department:  20 
 Provided that it shall be open to a Professor or Reader to decline the offer of appointment as the Head 
of the Department.  
(3) A person appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office as such for a period of three 
years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of office.  
(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the O rdinances.  
 Proctors  
9. (1) Every Proct or shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the     
Vice-Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Vice -Chancellor . 
(2) Every Procto r shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
 Librarian  
10. ( 1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendations of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Executive Council.  
 Meetings of the Court  
11. ( 1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fix ed by the Executive Council 
unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year.  
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court , a report on the working of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet as audited, and the 
financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2), shall be sent to every Member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Twelve Members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court. 
(5) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Counci l or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice -Chancellor o r if there is no Pro -Vice -Chancellor, by the 
Registrar.  
Quorum for meetings of the Executive Council  
12. Five members of the Executive Council shall f rom a quorum for a meetin g of the Executive 
Council.  
Powers and functions of the Executive Council  
13. (1) The Executive Council shall have the power of management and administration of the revenue 
and property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the  University not otherwise 
provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act , the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council shall 
in addition to all other powers vested in it, hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and aca demic posts , to determine the number and emoluments of such posts 
and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors , Readers , Lecturers and other 
academic staff and Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number, 
qualifications and the emoluments of teachers and academic staff otherwise than after consideration 
of the recommendations of the Academic Council;  21 
 (ii) to appoint su ch Professors, Readers , Lecturers and other academic staff,  as may be necessary 
and Principals of College s and Institutions maintained by the University on the recommendation of 
the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill up temporary v acancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
 (v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage a nd regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University , and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recur ring expenditure for a year on the 
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income , in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to time , as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the 
University;  
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furnit ure and apparatus and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon , and, if thought fit , to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the University who may , for any reason , feel aggrieved;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and , if necessary , to remove them , and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other all owances , after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangement s as may be necessary for the residence and discipline of 
women students ; 
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, the Deans, 
the Registrar or the Finance Officer or such other employee or authority of the University or to a 
committee appointed by it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to ins titute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes ; and  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors ; Consultants 
and Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such appointments;  
(xix) to exerc ise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act , or the Statutes.  
Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council  
14. Nine Members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Academic 
Council.   22 
 Powers of the Academic Council  
15. Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall , in addition to all 
other powers vested in it , have the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the aca demic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instructions, co -operative teaching among  Colleges and Institutions, 
evaluation of research or improvements in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -School co -ordination , to establish or appoint committees or boards, for 
taking up projects on an inter -School basis;  
(c) to consider matter s of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference 
by a School or the Executive Council and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance . 
The Planning Board  
16. ( 1) The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the University and shall be 
responsible for — 
(a) reviewing the educational programmes offered by the University;  
(b) organising the structu re of education in the University so as to provide opportunities to  
students to offer different combinations of subjects appropriate for the development of personality 
and skills for useful work in society;  
(c) creating an atmosphere and environment conducive to value -oriented education; and  
(d) developing new teaching -learning processes which will combine the lectures, tutorials, 
seminars, demonstrations, self -studies and collective practical projects.  
(2) The Planning Board shall have the power to a dvise on the development of the University and 
review the progress implementation of programmes so as to ascertain whether they are on the lines 
recommended by it and shall also have the power to advise the Executive Council and the Academic 
Council on any  matter in connection therewith.  
(3) The Academic Council and the Executive Council shall be bound to consider the 
recommendations of the Planning Board and shall implement such of the recommendations as are 
accepted by it.  
 (4) Such of those recommendatio ns of the Planning Board as have not been accepted by the 
Executive Council or the Academic Council under clause ( 3) shall be submitted by the Vice -Chancellor 
along with the recommendations of the Executive Council or the Academic Council, to the Visitor f or 
advice and the advice of the Visitor shall be implemented by the Executive Council or the Academic 
Council , as the case may be . 
(5) The Planning Board may constitute such committees as may be necessary for planning and 
monitoring  the programmes of the University.  
 Schools of Studies and Departments  
17. (1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as may be specified by the Ordinances.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and shall  hold office for a period of three years.  
(3) The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required f or such meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  23 
 (5)  (a) Each School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances.  
(b) No Department shall be established or abolished except by the Statutes:  
Provided that the Executive Council may , on the recommendation of the Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary.  
(c) Each Department shall co nsist of the following members namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any,  attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in a ccordance with the prov isions  of 
the Ordinances.  
 Board of Studies  
18. (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies . 
(2) The constitution of a Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall be prescribed by 
the Ordinances . 
(3) The functions of a Board of St udies  shall be to approve subjects for research for var ious degrees  
and other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned School Board in the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and a ppointment of examiners for courses , but excluding research degree s; 
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research : 
Provided that the above function s of a Board of Studies shall , during the period of three years 
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.  
Finance Committee  
19. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following member s, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro-Vice -Chancellor ; 
(iii) three persons nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council ; and 
(iv) three persons nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to re cord a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scrutini se proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items whic h have not been included in the 
Budget , should be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive 
Council.   24 
 (7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Office r 
shall be laid be fore the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the y ear, based on the income an d resources of the University ( which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans) . 
Selection Committees  
20. ( 1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations to the Executive Council 
for appoi ntment to the post s of Professor , Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance Officer, Librarian and 
Principals of College s and Institution s maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the post s specified in column 1 of the T able below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor , Pro-Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons 
specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table:  
 
TABLE  
  1  2 
Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned if he is a  
Professor.  
 (ii) One  Professor to be nominated by the  Vice -Chancellor . 
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Executive Council, out of a panel of 
name s recommended by the Academic Council for their 
special knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with 
which the Professor will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) 
(ii) 
(iii) 
 The Head of the Department concerned.  
One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Two persons not in the Service of the  University, 
nominated by the Executive  Council, out of a panel of 
names recommended  by the Academic Council for their 
special  knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with  
which the Reader or a Lecturer wi ll be concerned.  
Registrar, Finance Officer  (i) 
 
(ii) 
 Two members of the Executive Council  nominated by       
it; and  
One person not in the service of the  University nominated 
by the Executive Council . 
Librarian  (i) 
 
 
 
(ii) Two persons not in the service  of  the  University, who 
have  special knowledge of the  subject of the Library 
Science/Library  Administration to  be  nominated  by  the  
Executive Council.  
One person not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Executive  Council.  
Principal of College  or Institution 
maintained by  the   University   Three persons not in the service  of   the University of 
whom two shall  be nominated by the  Executive Council 
and one by the Academic Council  for their  special 
knowledge of,  or interest in, a subject i n which  
instruction is being provided by the  College o r 
Institution.  25 
 NOTE:  1.    Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary  project , the head  of the project                                                                                              
shall be deemed  to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
             2.   The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned  with the speciality for wh ich the 
selection  is being made and  that the Vice -Chancellor  shall consult the Head of the  
Department and the  Dean of School before nominati ng the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, o r in his absence, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall preside at the meetings of a 
Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with , 
and subject to the convenience of Visitor ’s nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council 
under clause ( 2): 
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Commi ttee shall not be valid unless ,— 
(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the nu mber of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council is 
three in all , at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee  shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor or in his absence 
by the Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations shall be laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by a Selection 
Committee , it shall record its re asons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made  in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for a duration longer  than one academic session , it shall be filled 
on the advice o f the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in  the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy , the appointment may be made on a purely temp orary basis by a local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a period not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year , an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice-Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person hold s the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or any 
other reason, the Dean may , in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned , make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice-Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporar ily shall , if he is not recommended by a regular  Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes , be continued in servic e on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee of a regular Selection 
Committee , for a temporary or permanent appointment,  as the case may be.  
Special mode of appointment  
21. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 20 , the Executive Council may invite a person 
of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Reader or any 
other s academic post in the University , as the case may be , on such terms and conditions as it deems fit , 
and on the person agreeing  to do so appoint him to the post.  26 
 (2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any othe r 
University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
Appointment for a fix ed tenure   
22. The Executive Council may appoint a  person selected in accordance with th e procedure laid down 
in Statute 20 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.  
 Recognised teachers  
23. ( 1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may be prescribed by the  
Ordinances.  
(2) All application s for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
in the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised  as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down i n the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may , by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than           
two-thirds of  the members present and voting , withdraw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned  calling upon him to show cause , within such time as may be specified in th e notice , why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any , and any evidence he may  produce in 
support of them have been considered  by the Academic Council.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause ( 5) may , within three months from 
the date of communication to  him of such order, appeal to the Executive Council which may pass such 
orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
Committees  
24. ( 1) Any  authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special Committees as it 
may deam fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not members of such authority.  
(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to i t subject 
to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc.  
25. ( 1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence  of any 
agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appoint ed on a written 
contract , the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
Terms and conditions of service a nd code of conduct of other employees  
26. All the employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff of the 
University , shall , in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed  by the terms and conditions 
of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statu es, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  27 
 Seniority list  
27. ( 1) Whenever , in accordance with the Stat utes, any person is to hold an office or be a member of 
an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority , such seniority shall be determine d 
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade , and, in accordance with such 
other principles as the Executive Council may, from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain , in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply , a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particula r grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt , the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall , 
at the request of any such person , submit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
Removal o f employees of the University  
28. ( 1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher , a member of the academic staff 
or other employee of the University , the Vice -Chancellor , in the case of the teacher or member of the 
academic staff , and the  authority competent to appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) 
in the case of other employee , may, by order in writing place such teacher , member of the academic staff 
or other employee , as the case may be , under suspension and shall  forthwith report to the Executive 
Council the circumstances in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion , that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff , revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees , the Execut ive Council in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff , and the appointing authority , in respect of other employees , shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff , or as the case may be , other employee on grounds of 
miscon duct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council , or as the case may be , the appointing authority , shall not 
be entitled to remove any teacher , member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months ’ notice o r on payment of three months' salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under cause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has  been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propos ed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher , member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher , member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal , such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this  Statute , a teacher , member 
of the academic staf f or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee,  only after giving three months’ notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be , or by paying three  months' salary 
in lieu thereof;  
  28 
 (b) if he is not a permanent employee , only after giving one month's notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or , as the case may be , the appointing a uthority or by paying one month’ s salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect  only on the date on which the resignation is accepted 
by the Executive Council or the appointing authority , as the case may be.  
 Honorary degrees  
29. ( 1) The Executive Council may , on the recommenda tion of the Academic Council and by a 
resolution passed by a majority of not l ess than two -thirds of the members present and voting , make 
proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency , the Executive Cou ncil may , on its own motion , make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting , withdraw , with the previous sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree  
conferred by the University.  
Withdrawal of degrees, etc.  
30. The Executive Council may , by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than           
two-thirds of the members present and voting , withdraw any degree or academic distinction conferred on , 
or any certificate or diploma granted to , any person by the University for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to th at person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them , have been considered by the Executi ve Council.  
 Maintenance of discipline among students of the University  
31. ( 1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the 
University shall vest in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to a Proctor and to 
such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him app ropriate for the maintenance of discipline , the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of his powers , by order , direct that any student or students be expelled, or rusticated , for 
a specified period , or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a College , Institution or 
Department of the University for a stated period , or be punished with fine for an amount to be specified in 
the order , or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the University , 
College, Institution or Dep artment or a School for one or more years, or that the results of the student or 
students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be cancelled.  
(4) The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies  and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the 
students in their respective Colleges , Institutions , Schools and teaching Departments in the University as  
may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching in the 
Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vic e-Chancellor , the Principals and other persons specified 
in clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. The 
Principals of Colleges , Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching Departments in 
the University may also make the supplementary rules as they deem n ecessary for the aforesaid purposes.  
(6) At the time of admission , every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University.  29 
 Maintenance of discipline among Students of Colleges, etc.  
32. All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to Students of a College or an 
Instit ution , not maintained by the Uni versity , shall vest in the Principal of the College or  Institution , as 
the case may be , in accordance with the procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Admission of Colleges, etc., to the privileges of the University  
33. ( 1) Colleges and other Institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the University may  be 
admitted to such privileges of the University as the Executive Council may decide on the following 
conditions, namely: — 
(i) Every such College or Institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing Body, 
consisting of not more than fifteen persons  approved by the Executive Council and including among 
others, two teachers of the University to be nominated by the Executive Council and three 
representatives of the teaching staff of whom the Principal of the College or Institution shall be one. 
The pro cedure for appointment of members of the Governing Body and other matters affecting the 
management of a College or an Institution shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the said condition shall not apply in the case of Colleges and Institutio ns 
maintained by Government which shall , however, have an Advisory Committee consisting of not 
more than fifteen persons which shall consist of among others, three teachers including the Principal 
of the College or Institution , and two teacher s of the University nominated by the Executive Council.  
(ii) Every such College or Institution shall satisfy the Executive Council on the following matters , 
namely: — 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for teaching;  
(b) the q ualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of their service;  
(c) the arrangements for the re sidence, welfare, discipline and supervision of students;  
(d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance of the  College o r 
Institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of the standards of University  
education.  
(iii) No College or Institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the University except on the 
recommendation of the Aca demic Council made after considering the report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the purpose by the Academic Council.  
(iv) Colleges and Institutions de sirous of admission to any pri vileges of the University shall be 
required to intimate their intention to do so in writing so as to reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preceding the year from which permission applied for is to have effect.  
(v) A College or an Institution shall not , without the previous permission of the Executive 
Counc il and the Academic Council , suspend instruction in any subject or course of study which it is 
authorised to teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointment to the teach ing staff and Principals of Colleges or Institutions admitted to the 
privileges of the Universit y shall be made  in the manner prescribed by  the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges  and Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(3) The service conditions of the administrative and other non -academic staff of every College or 
Institution referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may be laid down in the Ordinances:  
Provided that noting in this clause shall apply to College s and Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(4) Every College o r Institution admitted to the privilege of the University shall be inspected at least 
once in every two academic years by a Committee appointed by the Academic Council , and the report of 
the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic Council, which shall forward the same to the 
Executive Council with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make.  30 
 (5) The Executive Council , after considering the report and the recommendations, if any, of the 
Academic Council, shall forward a copy of the report of the Gove rning Body of the College or Institution 
with such remarks, if any, as it may deem fit for suitable action.  
(6) The Executive Council may , after consulting the Academic Council , withdraw any privileges 
granted to a College or an Institution , at any time it  considers that the College or Institution does not 
satisfy any of the conditions on the fulfilment of which the College or Institution was admitted to such 
privileges:  
Provided that before any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing Body of the College  or 
Institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Executive Council why such action 
should not be taken.  
(7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other condition s as may be cons idered necessary;  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of Colleges and Institutions to the privileges of th e University 
and for the withdrawal of th ose privileges.  
Convocations  
34. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes shall be held in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Acting Chairman of meetings  
35. Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to preside over a meeting of any 
authority of the University or any committee of such autho rity or when the President or Chairman so 
provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among themselves to preside at such 
meeting.  
Resignation  
36. Any member , other than an ex officio  member of the Court, the Executive Council, the Aca demic 
Council or any other authority of the University or any committee of such authority may resign by letter 
addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received by the 
Registrar.  
Disqualifications  
37. ( 1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as , and for being , a member of any of the 
authorities of the University ,— 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence i nvolving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
Residence condition for membership and office  
38. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statues, a person who  is not ordinarily resident in 
India shall be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the University.  
Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies  
39. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statut es, a person who holds any post in the University 
or is a member of any authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular 
authority or body or as the holder o f a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only  
for so long as he continues to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that 
particular appointment, as the case may be.  31 
  Alumni Association  
40. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for  membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of t he election and is a degree 
holder of the University of at least five years standing : 
Provided that the condition relating to the completion of one year ’s membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election  
Students ’ Council  
41. ( 1) There shall be  constituted in the University, a Students ’ Council for every academic year, 
consisting of:  
(i) the Dean of Students ’ Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students ’ Council;  
(ii) all students who have won prizes in the previous academic year in the fields of studies, fine 
arts, sports and extension work;  
(iii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports, activities and all -round development of personality:  
Provided that any student of the Universit y shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the 
University before the Students ’ Council if so permitted by the Chairman , and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration . 
(2) The function s of the Students ’ Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes of studies , students ’ welfare and other matters of 
importance in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions  shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  
(3) The Students ’ Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in th e beginning of 
that year.  
Ordinances how made  
42. ( 1) The first Ordinances made under  sub-section ( 2) of section 28 may be amended , repealed  or 
added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated  in section 28 , other than those enumerated in 
clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) thereof , shall be made by the Executive Council unless a draft of such 
Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for re -consideration , either in whole or in part , together with any amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council , the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft  
is reaffirmed by the majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and m ore than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council , the draft may be sent back to the Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four 
weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall , as 
soon as possible , inform the Executive Council about his objection to the proposed Ordinance. The 
Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the  order suspending the 
Ordinance o r disallow the Ordinance , and his decision shall be final.  32 
  Regulations  
43. ( 1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances for  the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statu tes or the Ordinances to be 
prescrib ed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes o r the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations provid ing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in suc h manner as it may specify , of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
 Delegation of powers  
44. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes , any officer or authority of the University 
may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective 
control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated 
shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
 
--------------------------The Nagaland University Act, 1989--------------------------
1 
 THE NAGALAND UNIVERSITY ACT, 1989  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and c ommencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. The University . 
4. Objects of the University.  
5. Transfer of properties of North -Eastern Hill University.  
6. Powers of the University.  
7. Jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. The Chief Rector.  
11. Officers of the University.  
12. The Chancellor.  
13. The Vice -Chancellor.  
14. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
15. Deans of Schools.  
16. The Registrar.  
17. The Finance Officer.  
18. Other  officers.  
19. Authorities of the University . 
20. The Court.  
21. The Executive Council.  
22. The Academic Council.  
23. The Planning Board.  
24. The Boards of Schools.  
25. The Finance Committee.  
26. Other authorities of the University.  
27. Power to make S tatutes.  
28. Statutes how to be made.  
29. Power  to make O rdinances.  
30. Regulations.  
31. Annual report.  
32. Annual accounts.  
33. Transfer of services of certain employees of the North -Eastern Hill University.  
34. Conditions of service of employees.  
35. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
36. Right to appeal.   2 
  
SECTIONS  
37. Provident and pension funds.  
38. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies.  
39. Constitution of Committees.  
40. Filling of casual vacancies.  
41. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
42. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
43. Mode of proof of University record.  
44. Power to remove difficulties.  
45. Transitional provisions.  
46. Completion of courses of studies in Colleges or Institutions affiliated to the                        
University . 
47. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
48. [Repealed .] 
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE NAGALAND UNIVERSITY ACT, 1989  
ACT NO. 35 OF 1989  
 
[20th October , 1989 .] 
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and affiliating University in the State of  Nagaland 
and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: —  
1. Short title and c ommencemen t.—(1) This Act may be called the Nagaland University Act, 1989 .  
(2) It s hall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may,  by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions. —In this Act, and in all Statutes made thereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Studies ” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(d) “Chancellor ”, “Vice -Chancellor ” and “Pro-Vice -Chancellor ” mean, respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
(e) “College ” means a College maintained by , or admi tted to the privile ges of, the University;  
(f) “Court ” means the Court of the University;   
(g) “Department ” means a Department o f Studies; and includes a Centre  of Studies;  
(h) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programm es or the combination of any two  or more such means;  
(i) “employee ” means any person appointed  by the University, and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(j) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Council of the University;  
(k) “Hall” means a unit of residence or o f corporate life for the students of the University, or of a 
College or an Institution, maintained by the University;  
(l) “Institution ” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by, or admitted to 
the privileges of the University;  
(m) “North -Eastern  Hill University ” means the University establis hed under section 3 of the 
North -Eastern Hill University Act, 1973 (24 of 1973);  
(n) “Planning Board ” means the Planning Board of the University;  
(o) “Principal ” means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by the University and 
includes, where  there is no Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal or the acting Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
                                                           
1. 6th September, 1994, vide notification N o. S.O. 644(E), dated 6th September, 1994, see Gazette o f India , 1994, Extraordinary,  
Part II , sec. 3(ii). 4 
 (p)  “recognised Institution ” means an institution of higher lea rning recognised by the University;  
(q) “recognised teachers ” means such person s as may be recognised by the University for the 
purpose of imparting instructions in a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of the 
University;  
(r) “Regulations ” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under this Act 
for the time being in force;  
(s) “School ” means a School of Studies of the University;  
(t) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean, respectively, the Statues and the Ordinances of the 
University for the  time being in force;  
(u) “teachers of the University ” means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other person s as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any College 
or Institution main tained by the University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(v) “University ” means the Nagaland University established under this Act . 
3. The University. —(1) There shall be established a University by the name of “Nagaland 
University ”. 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Lumami and it may also establish campuses  at such 
other places within it s jurisdiction as it may deem fit . 
(3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Planning Board and all persons who may hereafter 
become such officers or members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby 
constituted a body corporate by the name of “Nagaland University ”. 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name . 
4. Objects of the University. —The objects of the University shall be to dis seminate  and advance 
knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may  deem 
fit; to make provisions for  integrated courses in humanities, natural and physical sciences, social 
sciences, agricultural science  and forestry and other allied disciplines in the educational programmes of 
the University ; and to take ap propriate measures for promoting  innovations in teaching -learning 
processes, inter -disciplinary studies and research; to educate and train manpower for the developmen t of 
the State of Nagaland; and  to pay special attention to the improvement of the social and economic 
conditions and welfare of the people of that State, their intellectual, academic and cultural development . 
5. Transfer of properties of  North -Eastern Hill University. —On and from the commencement of 
this Act, all properties of the North -Eastern Hill University in the State of Nagaland shall stand 
transferred to, and vest in, the University and shall be applied to the objects for which the  University is 
established . 
6. Powers of the University. —The University shall have the following powers, namely: — 
 (i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University  may, from time to 
time,  determine and to make provision  for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, ev aluation or any 
other method of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificate s, degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extra -mural studies, training and extension servi ces; 
  5 
 (iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to such person s as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or 
academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such Principalships, 
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other teaching or academic positions;  
(vii) to recognise an institu tion of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to recognise person s for imparting instructions in any College or Institution admitted to the 
privileges of the University;  
(ix) to appoint p ersons working in any other University or organisation as teachers of the 
University for a specified period;  
(x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any  other University or authority or institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine;  
(xii) to establi sh such campuses, special centre s, specialised laboratories or other units for 
research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for the furtherance of its 
objects;  
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;  
(xv) to make  provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops,  seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xvii) to admit to its privileges colleges and institutions not  maintained by the University; to  
withdraw all or any of those privileges in accordance with such conditions as  may be prescribed by 
the Statutes; to recognise, guide, supervise, and control Halls not maintained by the University and 
other accommodation for students, and to withdraw any such recognition;  
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professo rs, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the 
University;  
(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may 
be, in accordanc e with the Statutes;  
(xx) to determine standards of admission to the University , which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xxi) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xxii) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xxiii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  6 
 (xxiv) to regulate and enforce discipline amo ng the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures i n this regard as may be deemed  by the University to be necessary;  
(xxv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees;  
(xxvi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of 
any property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of 
the University;  
(xxvii ) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, o n the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the   University;  
(xxviii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conceive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects .               
7. Jurisdic tion.—(1) The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of the State of 
Nagaland . 
(2) On and from commencement of this Act, all Colleges, Institutions, Schools and Departments 
affiliated to, or admitted to the privileges of, or maintained by, the North -Eastern Hill University shall 
stand affiliated to, or admitted to the privileges of, or maintained by, the University . 
(3) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the North -Eastern Hill University shall cease 
to exercise its jurisdi ction in the State of Nagaland . 
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to person s of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the Un iversity or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, physically handicapped or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes . 
9. The Visitor .—(1) The President of Ind ia shall be the Visitor of the University . 
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more person s to review the work and progress 
of the University, including Colleges and Institutions managed by it, and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon re ceipt of that report, the Visitor may , after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in 
respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with 
such directions . 
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or person s as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment, and of any Co llege or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges; and also of the examinations, teaching and 
other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in 
respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the University, Colleges of 
Institutions . 
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 2), give notice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made, — 
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be made in respect of the University or 
any College or Institution maintained by it, or  
(b) to the management of the College or Institution, if the inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of the College or Institutio n admitted to the privileges of the University , 7 
 and the University or the management, as the case may be, shall have the right to make such 
representations to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary . 
(5) After considering the representations, if any, mad e by the University or the management, as the 
case may be, the Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in                          
sub-section ( 3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visi tor, the University or the 
management shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be 
heard at such inspection or inquiry . 
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University o r any College or 
Institution maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to t he action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer,  and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon the action to be taken thereon . 
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of any College or Institution 
admitted to the privileges of the University, address the management concerned through Vice -Chancellor 
with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon and such advice  as he may be 
pleased to offer upon the action to be taken thereon . 
(9) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall communicate, through the 
Vice -Chancellor to the Visitor such action,  if any, as it proposes to take  or has been taken  upon the result 
of such inspection or inquiry . 
(10) Where, the Executive Council or the management, does not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may , after considering any explanation furnished or 
representation made by the Executive Council or the management, issue such directions as he may think 
fit and the Executive Council or the management, as the case may be, shall comply with such directions . 
(11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such ord er, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same . 
(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as m ay be prescribed by the Statutes . 
10. The Chief Rector. —The Governor of the State of Nagaland shall be the Chief Rector of the 
University . 
11. Officers of the University. —The following shall be the officers of the University: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Schools;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer; and  
(7) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University . 8 
 12. The Chancellor. —(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in s uch manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes . 
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the Head of the University . 
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held for conferring 
degrees . 
13. The Vice -Chancellor. —(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes . 
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate officer of the University, and shall 
exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions   of all the authorities of the University . 
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the action taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that  if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person   in the service of the University who is aggrieved by th e action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to appeal against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive C ouncil may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the   
Vice -Chancellor . 
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if h e is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask th e authority concerned to 
review its decision with in sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken   by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred  to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final . 
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances . 
14. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor. —The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall  be appointed in such manner and 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes . 
15. Deans of Schools. —Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes . 
16. The Registrar. —(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes . 
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreement, sign documents and authenticate 
records on be half of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes . 
17. The Finance Officer. —The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes . 
18. Other officers. —The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes . 
  9 
 19. Authorities of the University. —The following shall be the authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the Planning Board;  
(5) the Boards of Schools;  
(6) the Finance Committee; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be declared by the St atutes to be the authorities of  the 
University . 
20. The Court. —(1) The c onstitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes . 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following powers and functions, 
namely:— 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement   and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice; and  
(d) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes . 
21. The Executive Council. —(1) The Ex ecutive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University . 
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term  of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes . 
22. The Academic Council. —(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University . 
(2) The co nstitution of the Academic Coun cil, the term of office of its  members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes . 
23. The Planning Board. —(1) The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the 
University . 
(2) The constitution of the Planning Board, term of office of its members and its power s and functions 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes . 
24. The Boards of Schools. —The constitution, powers and functions of the Boards of Schools shall 
be prescribed by the Statut es. 
25. The Finance Committee. —The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes . 
26. Other authorities of the University. —The constitution, power s and functions of other 
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes . 
  10 
 27. Power  to make S tatutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the University, as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said autho rities and bodies, 
the filling up of vac ancies of members , and all other matters relating to those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, power s and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academ ic staff and other employees of  the University and their 
emoluments;  
(e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff   working in any other University or organisation 
for a specific period for undertaking a joint project ; 
(f) the conditions of service of employees including pro vision  for pension, insurance and 
provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(g)  the principles governing the seniority of service of t he employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in c ases of dispute between employees  or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(j)  the conferment of   autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department;  
(k) the establishment  and abolitio n of Schools, Departments, Cent res, Halls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(l)  the conferment of honorary d egrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(n) the conditions under which College s and Institutions may be admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the withdrawal of such privileges;  
(o) the insti tution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(p) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(q) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;  
(r)  all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes .  
28. Statutes how to be made. —(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule . 
(2) The Executive Cou ncil may, from time to time, make  new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University  until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council . 
(3) Every new Statu tes or addition to the Statu te or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
consideration . 11 
 (4) A new Statute  or a Statu te amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity 
unless  it has been assented to by the Visitor . 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament . 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -section, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Exec utive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any , communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably . 
29. Power to make O rdinances. —(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of stud y to be laid down for all degrees , diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the  same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be char ged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for awar d of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office a nd manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the st udents of the University;  
(i) the special arrangement s, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women  students  and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other  than those for whom provision has been 
made in the Statu tes; 
(k) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Special Centres, Specialised 
Laboratories and other Committee;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities including 
learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of ser vice of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the University;  12 
 (p) the supervision and management of Colleges and Institutions admitted to the privileges of th e 
University;  
(q) the setting up of a machinery for redress al of grievances of employees; and  
(r) all other matter s which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided  for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the p revious approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the manner prescribed by the Statutes . 
30. Regulations. —The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees 
appointed by them and no t provided for by this  Act, the Statu tes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Stat utes. 
31. Annual report. —(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Court on or after such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statu tes and the Court shall consider the report in its annual meeting . 
(2) The Court shall s ubmit the annual report to the V isitor along with its comments, if any . 
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
32. Annual accounts. —(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen m onths, b e audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as he may authorise in this behalf . 
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court and the Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council . 
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any, shall, after being considered by the Executive Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor . 
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with  the audit report as submitt ed to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament . 
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Gazette of India . 
33. Transfer of services of certain employees of the North -Eastern Hill University. —(1) Subject 
to the provisions of this Act, every person employed immediately before the commencement of this Act 
by the North -Eastern Hill University in the State of Nagaland shall be given an option , to be exercised in  
such manner and within such ti me as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to join the University on the 
same terms and conditions and to the same rights and privileges as to  pension, gratuity, provident fund 
and other matters, as he would have had under the North -Eastern Hill University Act, 1973 (24 of 1973) . 
(2) The option once exercised by the person under sub -section ( 1) shall be final . 
34. Conditions of service of employees. —(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned . 13 
 (2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the  University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by 
the Visitor . 
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matter s decided by the Tribunal . 
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration Act, 1940 (2 of 1940) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes . 
35. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against  students. —(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may; within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him , 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be . 
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a   Tribunal o f Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 34 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section . 
36. Right to appeal. —Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University or admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, have a right to appeal within such time  as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive 
Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the University or  of the Principal or the 
management of any College or an Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the Executive Council 
may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed against . 
37. Provident and pension funds. —(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such   conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes . 
(2) Where such provide nt fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provision o f the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund . 
38. Disputes as to constitution of Un iversity authorities and bodies. —If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been duly appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority or other 
body of the University, the m atter shall be referred to the V isitor whose decision thereon  shall be final . 
39. Constitution of Committees. —Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned an d of such other person, if any, as the authority in each case may 
think fit . 
40. Filling of c asual vacancies .—All casual vacancies amon g the members (other than ex of ficio 
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appointed or co -opted the member whose place has become vacant and person 
appointed or co -opted to a causal vacancy shall be a member o f such authority or body for the residue of 
the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member . 14 
 41. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies. —No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members . 
42. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or other employee of the Univer sity for  anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act , the Statutes or the Ordinances . 
43. Mode of proof of University record. —A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order , 
proceeding, resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession 
of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by the 
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt , application, notice , order, proceeding , 
resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have b een admissible in 
evidence, not withstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act , 1872 (1 of 1872)  or in any 
other law for the time being in force . 
44. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or ex pedient for removing 
the difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act . 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, a s soon as may be after it is ma de, before each 
House of Parliament . 
45. Transitional provisions. —Notwithstanding anyt hing contained in this Act and  the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers  shall  hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty members 
and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold office for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first Planning Board shall consist of not more than ten members, who shall be nom inated 
by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall be constituted on the expiry of a period of six months from 
the commencement of this Act and during the said period of six months, the powers o f the Academic 
Council shall be performed by the Planning Board constituted under section 23; 
(f) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or nominated 
shall hold office for so long as the o fficer or member in whose place he is appointed or nominated would 
have held office, if such vacancy had not occurred . 
  15 
 46. Completion of courses of studies in Colleges or Institutions affiliated to the                        
University. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in the Statu tes or the Ordinances, any 
student of College, Institution, School or Department, who, immediately before the admission of such 
College, Institution, School or Department, to the privileges of the University, was studying for a degree, 
diploma or certificate of the North -Eastern Hill University, shall be permitted by the University, to 
complete his course for that degree, diploma or certificate, as the case may be, and the Nagaland 
University and such College, Institution, School or Department, shall provide for the instructions and 
examination of such student in accordance with the syllabus of studies of the North -Eastern Hill 
University . 
47. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament. —(1) Every Statute , Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette . 
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each Hous e of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised i n one session or in two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute , Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute , Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter ha ve 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation . 
(3) The po wer to make Statutes , Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect sh all be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicial ly affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable . 
48. [Amendment of Act  24 of 1973 .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act,  2001  (30 of 2001) , 
s. 2 and the First  Sch. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001) . 
  
  16 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section  28) 
THE STATUTES  OF THE  UNIVERSITY  
 The Chancellor  
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons 
recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the academic or public life 
of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons s o recommende d he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive Council . 
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for                    
re-appointment : 
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
 The Vice -Chancellor  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three 
persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does  not approve of any of the persons included in the panel, he may call 
for a fresh panel . 
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1), shall consist of three person s, none of whom shall be an 
employee of the University or a member of the Court, the Executiv e Council or the Academic Council or 
connected with an institution recognised by or associated with the University and out of the three person s, 
two shall be nominated by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor 
shall be the convenor of the Committee . 
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University . 
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the ag e of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for re -appointment : 
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he s hall continue in office  
until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him . 
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than the house rent 
allowance, as the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout hi s term of office and no 
charge  shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence . 
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Executive Council with the approval of the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a College or an Institution maintained by or 
affiliated t o it, or of any other University or any Institution maintained by or affiliated to such other 
University, is appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to c ontinue to contribute to any 
provi dent fund of which he is a member and the University shal l contribute to the account of such 17 
 person in that provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately 
before his appointment as the Vice -Chancellor : 
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pensi on scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme . 
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council . 
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the 1st day of January and July every year : 
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assu mes or relinquishes charge of the office of the                   
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the 
rate of two and -a-half days for each completed month of service . 
(v) In addition to the  leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service . This half pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate . When commuted leave 
is availed, twice the amount of half pay leave shall be debited against half pay leave due . 
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his d uties due to ill health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior  most Professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or the Vice -Chancellor attends 
to the duties of his office, as the case may be . 
Power s and duties of the Vice -Chancellor  
3. (1)  The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the Planning Board and the Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, 
preside at the convocations held for conferring degrees . 
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority or body . 
(3)  It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Sta tutes, the Ordinances and 
the Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the power s necessary to ensure such observance . 
(4)  The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the Unive rsity and shall give effect 
to the decision s of all the authorities of the University . 
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he may deem fit . 
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meeting of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council, the Planning Board and the Finance Committee . 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor  
4. (1) Every  Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor : 
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommende d by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another person to the Executive Council:  18 
 Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor . 
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of off ice of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier : 
Provided that a Pro -Vice-Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be eligible for 
reappointment : 
Provided further that, in any case, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five 
years : 
Provided  also that the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue in office notwithstanding the expiration of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until a new Vice -Chancellor or the Vice -Chancellor, as the case may be , assumes 
office : 
Provided also that when the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant and there is no                
Pro-Vice -Chancellor  to perform the functions of the Vice -Chancellor the Execu tive Council may appoint 
a Pro -Vice -Chancellor and the Pro -Vice -Chancellor so appointed shall cease to hold o ffice as such as 
soon as a Vice -Chancellor is appointed and enter s upon his office . 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of  a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances . 
(4) A Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf , from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor . 
Registrar  
5. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of a 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University . 
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as  may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years : 
Provided further that a Registrar shall,  notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, continue in 
office until his successor is appointed and enter s upon his office or until the expiry of a period of one 
year, whichever is earlier . 
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence, 
or any other cause, unable to perform the duties  of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose . 
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and academic  staff, as may be specified in the order   of the Executive Council and to 
suspend them pending inquiry, to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure or the withholding of increment : 
Provided that no such penalty shall be impos ed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to him . 19 
 (b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penaltie s specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along with 
his recommendat ions: 
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty . 
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic Council and 
the Planning Board, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these authorities and he shall be   
ex officio  Member -Secretary of the Court . 
(7)  It shall be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charges;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the  Planning Board and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council, the Planning   Board and of any Committee s appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to co nduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council and the Planning Board;  
(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in accordance with the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(f) to sup ply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued; and the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign     
power s-of-attorne y and verify pleadings or depute  his representative for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required from time to time, by the Executive Council o r the                   
Vice -Chancellor .  
The Finance Officer  
6. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendations of 
a  Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University . 
(2) He shall be appointed for a te rm of five years and shall  be eligible for reappointment . 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Ordinances : 
Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding  his attaining the age of sixty years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry  of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier . 
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vaca nt or when the Finance Officer is , by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause unable to perform the duties of his office, the  duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose . 20 
 (5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary  of the Finance  Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to be a Member of such Committee . 
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision  over the funds of the University and sha ll advice it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the E xecutive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances . 
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University includin g trust and  endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limit s fixed by the Executive Council for recurring   and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget o f the University and for 
their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank  balances and on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the me thods of collectio n 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other   consumable materia ls in all offices, 
Special Cent res, Specialise d Laboratories, Colleges and  Institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expend iture and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintain ed by the 
University any information or returns that he may consider necessary for the pe rformance of his 
duties . 
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf  by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money .  
Deans of Schools of Studies  
7. (1) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from among the 
Professors in the School for a period of three years and he shall be eligible for reappointment : 
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shall cease to hold office as such : 
Provided further that if  at any time the re is no Professor in a School, the Vice -Chancellor, or a Dean 
authorised by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, shall exercise the powers of the Dean of the School . 
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose . 
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the  conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances . 21 
 (4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of Studie s 
or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is a 
member thereof .  
Heads of Departments  
8. (1) Each Department shall have a Head who shall be a Professor and whose duties and functions 
and terms and conditions of appointment s shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that if there is more than one Professor in any Department, the Head of the Department shall 
be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor f rom among the 
Professors : 
Provided further that in the case of Departments where there is only one Professor, the Executive 
Council shall have the option to appoint, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, either the 
Professor or a Reader as the Head  of the Department : 
Provided further that in a D epartment where there is  no Prof essor, a Reader may be appointed as the 
Head of the Department by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor : 
Provided also that if there is no Professo r or Reader, in a Department, the Dean of School of Studies 
concerned shall act as the Head of the Department . 
(2) It shall be open to a Professor or a Reader to decline the offer of appointment as the Head of the 
Department . 
(3) A Professor appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office a s such for a period of 
three years and shall be eligible for reappointment . 
(4) A Head of a Department ma y resign his office at any time during his tenure of office . 
(5) A Head of a Department shall perform suc h functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances .  
Proctors  
9. (1) Every Proctor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the   
Vice -Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Vice -Chancellor . 
(2) Every Proctor shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be eligible for reappointment .  
Librarian  
10. (1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation s of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the  purpose and he shall be a whol e-time officer of the University . 
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Executive Council .  
Meetings of the Court  
11. (1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed by the Executive Council 
unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year . 
(2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working of the University during the previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet as audited, and the 
financial estimates for the next year shall be presented . 
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure, the balance -sheet and the financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2), shall be sent to every member of the Court at least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting . 22 
 (4) Twelve member s of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court . 
(5) Special  meeting s of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if there is no Pro -Vice -Chancellor, by the 
Registrar .  
Quorum for meetings of the Executive Council  
12. Five members of  the Executive Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Executive 
Council . 
Powers and functions of the Executive Council  
13. (1) The Executive Council shall have the power of management and administration of the revenue 
and property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise 
provided for . 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council shall, 
in addition to all other powers vested in it, ha ve the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to det ermine the number and emolument s of such posts 
and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other 
academic staff and Principals of College s and Institutions maintain ed by the University:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number, 
qualifications and the emoluments of teachers and academic staff otherwise than after consideration 
of the recommendations of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, 
and Principals of College s and Institutions maintained by the University on the recommendation of 
the Selection Comm ittee constituted for the purpose and to fill up  temporary vacanci es therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordan ce with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University, and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to invest  any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or s ecurities, from time to time, a s it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of t he 
University;  
(x) to provide  buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  23 
 (xii) to entertain, adjudic ate upon, and, if though t fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and stud ents of the University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the res idence and discipline of 
women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice-Chancellor, the Deans, 
the Registrar or the Finance Officer or such other employee or authority of the University or to a 
committee appointed by it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes; and  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors; Consultants 
and Scholars and determine the terms and condition s of such appointments;  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act, or the Statutes .  
Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council  
14. Nine members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Academic 
Council . 
Powers of the Academic Council  
15. Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all 
other power s vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instructions, co -operative teaching among College s and Institutions, 
evaluation or research or improvements in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -School   co-ordination, to establish or appoint committees or boards, for 
taking up projects on an inter -School basis;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference 
by a School or the E xecutive Council and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences, admissions, award of fellowsh ips 
and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance .  
The Planning Board  
16. (1) The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the University and shall be 
responsible for — 
(a) reviewing the educational programmes offered by the University;  
(b) organising the structure of education in the University so as to provide opportunities to 
students to offer different combinations of subjects appropriate for the development of personality 
and skills for useful work society;  
(c) creati ng an atmosphere and environment conducive to value -oriented education; and  
(d) developing new teaching -learning process es which will combine the lectures, tutorials, 
seminars, demonstrations, self -studies and collective practical projects . 24 
 (2) The Planning Board  shall have the power to advise on the development of the University and 
review the progr ess implementation of programmes  so as to ascertain whether they are on the lines 
recommended by it and shall also have the power to advise the Executive  Council and the Academic 
Council on any matter in connection therewith . 
(3) The Academic Council and the Executive Council shall be bound to consider the 
recommendations of the Planning Board and shall implement such of recommendations as are accepted 
by it. 
(4) Such of those recommendations of the Planning Board as have not been accepted by the Executive 
Council or the Academic Council under clause ( 3) shall be submitted by the Vice -Chancellor along with 
the recommendations of the Executive Council or the  Academic Council, to the Visitor for advice and the 
advice of the Visitor shall be implemented by the Executive Council or the Academic Council, as the case 
may be . 
(5) The Planning Board may constitute such committees as may be necessary for planning and  
monitoring the programmes of the University .  
Schools of Studies and Departments  
17. (1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as may be specified by the Ordinances . 
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and shall hold office for a period of three years . 
(3)  The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances . 
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quo rum required for such meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances . 
(5) (a) Each School shall consist of such Departments as may be a ssigned to it by the Ordinances.  
(b) No Department shall be established or abolished except by the Statutes:  
Provided tha t the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the A cademic Council, establish 
Cent res of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary . 
(c) Each Department shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Person s conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Depa rtment in accordance with the provisions of 
the Ordinances . 
Board of Studies  
18. (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies . 
(2) The constitution of a Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall be prescribed by 
the Ordinances . 
  25 
 (3) The functions of a Board of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees 
and other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned School Board in the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies  and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies sh all, during the period of three years 
immediately after t he commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department .  
Finance Committee  
19. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) three person s nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(iv) three person s nominated by the Visitor . 
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for  a meeting of the Finance 
Committee . 
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a 
term of three years . 
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee . 
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to exami ne the accounts and to 
scrutinis e proposals for expenditure . 
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items  which have not been included in the 
Budget, should be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by the Executive 
Council . 
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Office r 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval . 
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans) . 
Selection Committees  
20. (1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations to the Executive Council 
for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance Officer, Librarian and 
Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University . 
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of t he Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons 
specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said  Table :  
  26 
 TABLE  
 
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned if he is a Professor.  
 (ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Three pe rsons not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Executive Council , out of a panel names 
recommended by the Academic Council for their special 
knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with which the 
Professor will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department concerned.  
 (ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Two persons not in the s ervice of the University, 
nominated by the Executive Council , out of a panel  of 
names recommended by the Academic Council  for their 
special knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with which 
the Reader or a Lecturer will be concerned.  
Registrar, Finance  Officer  (i) Two members of the Executive Council nominated by it; 
and 
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University, nominated 
by the Executive Council.  
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University, who have 
special knowledge of the subject of the Library 
Science/Library Administration to be nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
 (ii) One person not in  the service of the University,  nominated 
by the Executive Council.  
Principal of College or Institution 
maintained by the Univer sity  Three persons not in the service of the University of whom 
two shall be nominated by the Executive Council and one 
by the Academic Council for their special knowledge of, 
or interest in, a subject in which instruction is being 
provided by the College  or Institution.  
NOTE:  1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
 2. The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned with the speciality for 
which the selection is being made and that the Vice -Chancellor shall consult the Head of 
the Department and the Dean of School before nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall preside at the meetings of a 
Selection Committee : 
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, 
and subjec t to the convenience of Visitor’ s nominee and the person s nominated by the Executive Council 
under clause ( 2): 27 
 Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor’ s nominee and the person s nominated by the Executive 
Council is four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor’ s nominee and the person s nominated by the Executive 
Council is three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting . 
(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee shall be convened  by the Vice -Chancellor or in his absence 
by the Pro -Vice -Chancellor . 
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations shall be laid 
down in the Ordinances . 
(6) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendat ions made by a Selectio n 
Committee, it shall record it s reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders . 
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for a  duration longer than one academic session, it shall b e filled 
on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indicated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to f ill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis by a local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a period not exceeding six months . 
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or any 
other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Hea d of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointment . 
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee of a regular Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be .  
Special  mode of appointment  
21. (1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in Statute 20 , the Executive Council may invite a person 
of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Reader or any 
other academic post in the Uni versity, as the case may be, on such terms and conditions as it deems fit, 
and on the person agreeing to do so appoint him to the post . 
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other 
University or organisat ion for undertaking    a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances . 
Appointment for a fixed tenure  
22. The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in accordance with the procedure laid down 
in Statute 20 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit .  28 
 Recognised teachers  
23. (1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances . 
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such man ner as may be laid down 
in the Ordinances . 
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the Ordinances . 
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that behalf . 
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than          
two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw recognition from a teacher:  
Provi ded that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections , if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them have been considered by the Academic Council . 
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause ( 5) may, within three months from 
the date of communicat ion to him of such order, app eal to the Executive Council which m ay pass such 
orders there on as it thinks fit .  
Committees  
24. (1) Any authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special Committees as it 
may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not members of such authority . 
(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject 
to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing .  
Terms and conditions of service and cod e of conduct of the teacher s, etc. 
25. (1) All the teacher s and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any 
agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes , the Ordinances and the Regulations . 
(2) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances . 
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause (2) shall be deposited with the Registrar . 
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees  
26. All the employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff of the 
University, shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions 
of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations . 
Seniority list  
27. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold a n office or be a member of 
an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined 
according to the length of continuo us service of such person in his grade, and in accordance with such 
other principles as the Executive Council may, from time to time, prescribe . 
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordan ce with 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 29 
 (3) If two or more person s have equal length of continuo us service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the  request of any such person, sub mit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final .  
Removal of employees of the University  
28. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the academic staff 
or other, employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or member of the 
academic staff, and the authority competent to appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) 
in  the case of other employee, may, by order i n writing place such teacher, member of the academic staff 
or other employee, as the case may be, under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Executive 
Council the circumstances in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, i f it is o f the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other  
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority, in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staf f, or as the case may be, other employee on grounds of 
misconduct . 
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months ’ notice or on payment of three months ’ salary in lieu thereof . 
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him . 
(5) The removal of a teacher,  member of the academic staff or  other employee shall  take effect from 
the date on which  the order of removal is made:  
Provided t hat where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which  he was placed under 
suspension . 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months ’ notice in writing to the 
Executive  Council or the appointing authority, as the c ase may be, or by paying three month ’s salary 
in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employ ee, only after giving one  month’s  notice in writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month’ s salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is accepted 
by the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be .  
Honorary degrees  
29. (1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council and by a 
resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of  the members present and voting , make 
proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  30 
 Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own motion, make such 
proposals . 
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of  the Visitor, any honor ary degree 
conferred by the University . 
Withdrawal of degrees, etc . 
30. The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than          
two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic distinction  conferred on, 
or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to sho w cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objection s, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered by the Executive Council .  
Maintenance of disci pline among students of the University  
31. (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of th e 
University shall vest in the V ice-Chancellor . 
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to a Proctor and to 
such other  officers as he may specify in this behalf . 
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of d iscipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled, or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or 
Department or a  School of the University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be 
specified in the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the 
University, College, Institution or Department or a School for on e or more years, or that the results of the 
student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be 
cancelled . 
(4) The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads o f teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary power s over the 
students in their respective College s, Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments in the University as 
may be necessary for th e proper co nduct of such  Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching in the 
Departments . 
(5)  Without prejudice to the power s of the Vice -Chancellor, the Principals and other persons 
specified in clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be m ade by the University . 
The Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching Departments 
in the University may also make the supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the aforesaid 
purposes . 
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authorities of the 
University .  
Maintenance of discipline among Students of Colleges, e tc. 
32. All power s relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to Students of a College or an 
Institution, not maintained by the University, shall vest in the Principal of the College or Institution, as 
the case may be, in accordance with the procedure prescr ibed by the Ordinances .    31 
 Admission of College s, etc., to the privileges of the University  
 33. (1) Colleges and other Institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the University may  be 
admitted to such privileges of the University as the Executive Council may decide on the following 
conditions, namely: — 
(i) Every such College or Institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing Body, 
consisting of not more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive Council and including among 
others , two teachers of the University to be nominated by the Executive Council and three 
representatives of the teaching staff of whom the Principal of the College or Institution shall be one . 
The procedure for appointment of members of the Governing Body and other m atters affecting the 
management of a College or an Institution shall be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the said condition shall not apply in the case of College s and Institutions 
maintained by Government which shall, however, have an Advisory Committee consisting of not 
more than fifteen persons which shall consist of among others, three teachers including the Principal 
of the College or Institution, and two teachers of the University nominated by the Executive Council . 
(ii) Every such College or Instituti on shall satisfy the Executive C ouncil on the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for teaching;  
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of their se rvice;  
(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipline and supervision of students;  
(d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance of the College or 
Institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of the standards of University 
education . 
(iii) No College or Institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the University except on the 
recommendation of the Academic Council made after considering the report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the purpose by the Academic Council . 
(iv) College s and I nstitutions desirous of admission to any privileges of the University shall be 
required to intimate their intention to do so in writin g so as to reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preceding the year from which permission applied for is to have effect . 
(v) A College or an Institution shall not, without the previous permission of the Executive 
Council and the Academic Coun cil, suspend instruction in any subject or course of study which it is 
authorised to teach and teaches . 
(2) Appointment to the teaching staff and Principals of Colleges or Institutions admitted to the 
privileges of the University shall be made in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to College s and Institutions maintained by 
Government . 
(3) The Service conditions of the administrative and other non -academic staff of every College or 
Institution referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may be laid down in the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to College s and Institutions maintained by 
Government . 
  32 
 (4) Every College or Institution admitted to the privilege of the University  shall be inspected at least 
once in every two academ ic years by a Committee appointed  by the Academic Council, and the report of 
the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic Council, which shall forward the same to the 
Executive Council with such recommen dations as it may deem fit to make . 
(5) The Executive Council, after considering the report and the recommendations, if any, of the 
Academic C ouncil, shall forward a copy of  the report of the Governing Body of the College or Institution 
with such remarks, if any, as it may deem fit for suitable action . 
(6) The Executive Council may, after consulting the Academic Council, withdraw any privileges 
granted to a College or an Inst itution, at any time it considers that the College or Institution does not 
satisfy any, of the conditions on the fulfilment of which the College or Institution was admitted to such 
privileges:  
Provided that before any privileges are so  withdrawn, the Gover ning B ody of the College or 
Institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the Executive Council why such action 
should not be taken . 
(7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as may be considered necessary;  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of College s and Institutions to the privileges of the University 
and for the withdrawal of those privileges . 
Convocations  
34. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes shall be held in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances . 
Acting Chairman of meetings  
35. Where no provision is made for a President of Chairman to preside over a meeting of any 
authority of the University or any  committee of such authority or when the President or Chairman so 
provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among themselves to preside at such 
meeting . 
Resignation  
36. Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Court, the Ex ecutive Council, the Academic 
Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such authority may resign by letter 
addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received by the 
Registrar .  
Disqualifications  
37. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of any of the 
authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he  is an undischarged  insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months . 
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected  to any of the 
disqualification s mentioned in clau se (1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision .  33 
 Residence condition for membership and office  
38. Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in 
India shall be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the University . 
Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies  
39. Notwithstanding any thing contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University 
or is a member of any authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular 
authority or  body or  as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only 
for so long as he continues to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that 
particular appointment, as the case may be . 
Alumni Association  
40. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University . 
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the 
Ordinances . 
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless h e has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a degree 
holder of the University of at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relatin g to the completion of one year’ s membership shall n ot apply in the 
case of the first  election . 
Students’ Council  
41. (1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students ’ Council for every academic year, 
consisting of:  
(i) the Dean of Students’  Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students’  Council;  
(ii) all students who have won prizes in the previous academic year in the fields  of studies, fine 
arts, sports  and extension work;  
(iii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports, activitie s and all -round development of personality:  
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the  
University before the Students’  Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration . 
(2) The functions of the Students ’ Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, student s’ welfare and other matters or 
importance in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion . 
(3) The Students ’ Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in the beginning of 
that year . 
Ordinances how made  
42. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 29 may be amended, repealed or 
added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified below . 
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in section 29, other than those enumerated in 
clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) thereof, shall be made by the Executive Council unless a draft of such 
Ordinance has be en proposed by the Academic Council . 34 
 (3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for re -consid eration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest . 
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider  the question afresh  and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Executiv e 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision   shall be final . 
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately . 
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to t he Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption . The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four 
weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as 
soon as possible, inform the Executive Council about his objection to the proposed Ordinance . The 
Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending the 
Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision shall be final . 
Regulations  
43. (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with  the Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matter s which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not  provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances . 
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meeti ngs and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings . 
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify, of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation .  
Delegation of Power s 
44. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of the University 
may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective 
control and subject to the condition that overall  responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated 
shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers . 
--------------------------The Railways Act, 1989--------------------------
1 
 THE RAILWAYS ACT, 1989  
____________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II 
RAILWAY  ADMINISTRATIONS  
3. Zonal Railways . 
4. Appointment of General Manager . 
 
CHAPTER II A 
RAIL LAND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY  
4A. Establishment of Railway Land Development Authority . 
4B. Composition of Authority . 
4C. Terms and conditions of appointment of Vice -Chairman and other Members . 
4D. Functions of Authority . 
4E. Powers of Authority to enter into agree ments and execute contracts . 
4F. Procedure of transaction of business of Authority . 
4G. Appointment of officers and other employees of Authority . 
4H. Salaries, allowances, etc., to be defrayed out of Consolidated Fund of India . 
4-I. Power of Authority to m ake regulations . 
 
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSIONERS OF  RAILWAY  SAFETY  
5. Appointment of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety and Commissioners of Railway Safety . 
6. Duties of Commissioner . 
7. Powers of Commissioner . 
8. Commissioner to be public servant . 
9. Facilities to be afforded to Commissioners . 
10. Annual report of Commissioners . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE OF WORKS  
11. Power of railway administrations to execute all necessary works . 
12. Power to alter the position  of pipe, electric supply line , drain or sewer, etc . 
13. Protection for Government property . 2 
 SECTIONS  
14. Temporary entry upon land to remove obstruction, to repair or to prevent accident . 
15. Payment of amount for damage or loss . 
16. Accommodation works . 
17. Power of owner, occupier, State Government or local authority to caus e additional accommodation 
works to be made . 
18. Fences, gates and bars . 
19. Overbridges and under bridges . 
20. Power of Central Government to give directions for safety . 
 
CHAPTER IVA  
LAND ACQUISITION FOR A SPECIAL RAILWAY PROJECT  
20A. Power  to acquire land, etc.  
20B. Power to enter for survey, etc.   
20C. Evaluation of damages during survey, measurement, etc.  
20D. Hearing of objections, etc.   
20E. Declaration of acquisition.  
20F. Determination of amount payable as compensation.  
20G. Criterion for determination of marke t-value of land .  
20H. Deposit and payment of amount.  
20-I. Power to take possession.  
20J. Right to enter into land where land has vested in Central Government.  
20K. Competent authority to have cert ain powers of civil court.  
20L. Utilisation of  land for the purpose it is acquired.  
20M. Sharing with landowners the difference in price of a land when transferred for a higher 
consideration . 
20N. Land Acquisition Act 1 of 1894 not to apply.  
20-O. Application of the National Rehabilitation and Resettl ement Policy, 2007 to persons  
          affected due to land acquisition.  
20P. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter.  
 
 
CHAPTER V  
OPENING OF RAILWAYS  
21. Sanction of the Central Government to the opening of railway . 
22. Formalities to be complied with before giving sanction to the opening of a railway . 
23. Sections 21 and 22 to apply to the opening of certain works . 
24. Temporary suspension of traffic . 
25. Power to close railway opened for the public carriage of passengers . 
26. Re-opening of closed railwa y. 
27. Use of rolling stock . 
28. Delegation of powers . 
29. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter . 
 
 3 
 CHAPTER VI  
FIXATION OF RATES  
SECTIONS  
30. Power to fix rates . 
31. Power to classify commodities or alter rates . 
32. Power of railway administration to charge certain rates . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
RAILWAY  RATES  TRIBUNAL  
33. Constitution of the Railway Rates Tribunal . 
34. [Omitted .] 
35. [Omitted .] 
36. Complaints against a railways administration.  
37. Matters not within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal . 
38. Powers of the Tribunal.  
39. Reference to the Tribunal . 
40. Assistance by the Central Government . 
41. Burden of proof, etc . 
42. Decision, etc., of the Tribunal . 
43. Bar of jurisdiction of courts . 
44. Reliefs which the Tribunal may grant . 
45. Revision of decisions given by the Tribunal . 
46. Execution of decisions or orders of  the Tribunal . 
47. Report to the Central Government . 
48. Power of the Tribunal to make regulations . 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
CARRIAGE OF PASSENGERS  
49. Exhibition of certain timings and tables of fares at stations . 
50. Supply of tickets on payment of fare . 
51. Provision for case in which ticket is issued for class or train not having accommodation for 
additional passengers . 
52. Cancellation of ticket and refund . 
53. Prohibition against transfer of certain tickets . 
54. Exhibition and surrender of passes and tickets . 
55. Prohibition against travelling  without pass or ticket . 
56. Power to refuse to carry persons suffering from infectious or contagious diseases . 
57. Maximum number of passengers for each compartment . 
58. Earmarking of compartment, etc., for ladies . 
59. Communications between passengers and railway servan t in charge of train . 
60. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter . 
 4 
 CHAPTER IX  
CARRIAGE OF GOODS  
SECTIONS  
61. Maintenance of rate -books, etc., for carriage of goods . 
62. Conditions for receiving, etc., of goods . 
63. Provision s of risk rates . 
64. Forwarding n ote. 
65. Railway receipt . 
66. Power to require statement relating to the description of goods . 
67. Carriage of dangerous or offensive goods . 
68. Carriage of animals suffering from infectious or contagious diseases . 
69. Deviation of route . 
70. Prohibition of undue preference . 
71. Power to give direction in regard to carriage of certain goods . 
72. Maximum carrying capacity for wagons and trucks . 
73. Punitive charge for overloading a wagon . 
74. Passing of property in the goods covered by railway receipt . 
75. Section 74 not to affect right of stoppag e in transit or claims for freight . 
76. Surrender of railway receipt . 
77. Power of railway administration to deliver goods or sale proceeds thereof in certain cases . 
78. Power to measure, weigh, etc.  
79. Weighment of consignment on request of the consignee or endorsee . 
80. Liability of railway administration for wrong delivery . 
81. Open delivery of consign ments . 
82. Partial delivery of consignments . 
83. Lien for freight or any other sum due . 
84. Unclaimed consignment . 
85. Disposal of perishable consignments in certain circumstances . 
86. Sales under  sections 83 to 85 not to affect the right to suit . 
87. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter . 
 
CHAPTER X  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS AS TO GOODS BOOKED TO NOTIFIED STATIONS  
88. Definitions . 
89. Power to declare notified stations . 
90. Disposal of unremoved good s at notified stations . 
91. Price to be paid to person entitled after deducting dues . 
92. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter . 
 
CHAPTER XI  
RESPONSIBILITIES OF RAILWAY ADMINISTRATIONS AS CARRIERS  
93. General responsibility of a railway administration as carrier of goods . 
94. Goods to be loaded or delivered at a siding not belonging to a railway administration . 
 5 
 SECTIONS  
95. Delay or retention in transit . 
96. Traffic passing over railways in India and railways in foreign countries . 
97. Goods carried at owner ’s risk rate . 
98. Goods in defective condition or defectively packed . 
99. Responsibility of a railway administration after termination of transit . 
100. Responsibility as carrier of luggage . 
101. Responsibility as a carrier of animals.  
102. Exoneration from liability in cert ain cases . 
103. Extent of monetary liability in respect of any consignment . 
104. Extent of liability in respect of goods carried in open wagon . 
105. Right of railway administration to check contents of certain consignment or luggage . 
106. Notice of claim for compensation and refund of overcharge . 
107. Applications for compensation for loss, etc., of goods . 
108. Person entitled to claim compensation . 
109. Railway administration against which application for compensation for personal injury is to        
be filed . 
110. Burden of proof . 
111. Extent of liability of railway administration in respect of accidents at sea . 
112. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter . 
 
CHAPTER XII  
ACCIDENTS  
113. Notice of railway accident . 
114. Inquiry by Commissioner . 
115. Inquiry by railway administration . 
116. Powers of Commissi oner in relation to inquiries . 
117. Statement made before Commissioner . 
118. Procedure, etc . 
119. No inquiry, investigation, etc., to be made if the Commission of Inquiry is appointed . 
120. Inquiry into accident not covered by section 113 . 
121. Returns . 
122. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter . 
 
CHAPTER XIII  
LIABILITY OF RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION FOR DEATH AND  
INJURY TO PASSENGERS DUE TO ACCIDENTS  
123. Definitions . 
124. Extent of liability . 
124A. Compensation on account of untoward incidents.  
125. Application for compensation . 
126. Interim relief by railway administration . 
127. Determination of compensation in respect of any injury or loss of goods . 
128. Saving as to certain rights . 
 6 
 SECTIONS  
129. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter . 
 
CHAPTER XIV  
REGULATION OF HOURS OF WORK AND PERIOD OF REST  
130. Definitions . 
131. Chapter not to apply to certain railway servants . 
132. Limitation of hours of work . 
133. Grant of periodical rest . 
134. Railway servant to remain on duty . 
135. Supervisors of railway labour . 
136. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Cha pter. 
 
CHAPTER XV  
PENALTIES AND OFFENCES  
137. Fraudulently travelling or attempting to travel without proper pass or ticket . 
138. Levy of excess charge and fare for travelling without proper pass or ticket or beyond authorised 
distance . 
139. Power to remove persons . 
140. Security for good behaviour in certain cases . 
141. Needlessly interfering with means of communication in a train . 
142. Penalty for transfer of tickets . 
143. Penalty for unauthorised carrying on of business of procuring and supplying of railway tickets . 
144. Prohibition on haw king, etc., and begging . 
145. Drunkenness or nuisance . 
146. Obstructing railway servant in his duties . 
147. Trespass and refusal to desist from trespass . 
148. Penalty for making a false statement in an application for compensation . 
149. Making a false claim for compensation . 
150. Maliciously wrecking or attempting to wreck a train . 
151. Damage to or destruction of certain railway properties . 
152. Maliciously hurting or attempting to hurt persons travelling by railway . 
153. Endangering safety of persons travelling by railway by wilful act or omiss ion. 
154. Endangering safety of persons travelling by railway by rash or negligent act or omission . 
155. Entering into a compartment reserved or resisting entry into a compartment  not reserved . 
156. Travelling on roof, step or engine of a train . 
157. Altering or defacing pass  or ticket . 
158. Penalty for contravention of any of the provisions of Chapter XIV . 
159. Disobedience of drivers or conductors of vehicles to directions of railway servant, etc . 
160. Opening or breaking a level crossing gate . 
161. Negligently crossing unmanned level crossing . 
162. Entering carriage or other place reserved for females . 
163. Giving false account of goods . 
 7 
 SECTIONS  
164. Unlawfully bringing dangerous goods on a railway . 
165. Unlawfully bringing offensive goods on a railway . 
166. Defacing public notice s. 
167. Smoking.  
168. Provision with respect to  commission of offence by the children of acts endangering safety of 
person travelling on railway.  
169. Levy of penalty on non -Government railway.  
170. Recovery of penalty.  
171. Section 169 or 170 not to preclude Central Government from taking any other action . 
172. Penalty f or intoxication . 
173. Abandoning train, etc., without authority . 
174. Obstructing running of train, etc . 
175. Endangering the safety of persons . 
176. Obstructing level crossing . 
177. False returns . 
178. Making a false report by a railway servant . 
179. Arrest for offences under certain secti ons. 
180. Arrest of persons likely to abscond, etc . 
180A. Inquiry by officer authori sed to ascertain commission of offence.  
180B. Powers of officer authori sed to inquire.  
180C. Disposal of persons arrested.  
180D. Inquiry how to be made against arrested person.  
180E. Search, seizure and arrest how to be made.  
180F. Cognizance by Court on a co mplaint made by officer authoris ed. 
180G. Punishment for certain offences in relation to inquiry.  
181. Magistrate having jurisdiction under the Act . 
182. Place of trial . 
 
CHAPTER XVI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
183. Power to provide other transport services . 
184. Taxation on railways by local authorities . 
185. Taxation on railways for advertisement . 
186. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
187. Restriction  on exec ution against railway property . 
188. Railway servants to be p ublic servants for the purposes of Chapter IX and section 409 of the  
Indian Penal Code . 
189. Railway servants not to engage in trade . 
190. Procedure for delivery to railway administration of property detained by a railway servant . 
191. Proof of entries in records and do cuments . 
192. Service of notice, etc., on railway administration . 
193. Service of notice, etc., by railway administration . 
194. Presumption where notice is served by post . 
195. Representation of railway administration . 
196. Power to exempt railway from Act . 8 
 SECTIONS  
197. Matters supple mental to the definitions of “railway” and “railway servant” . 
198. General power to make rules . 
199. Rules to be laid before Parliament . 
200. Repeal and saving . 
 
 
 
 
 
  9 
 THE RAILWAYS ACT, 1989  
ACT NO. 24 OF 1989  
[3rd June , 1989.]  
An Act to consolidate and amen d the law relating to Railways.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be  called the Railways Act, 1989.  
(2) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the comin g 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “authorised ” means authoris ed by a railway administration;  
2[(1A) “Authority ” means the Rail Land Development Authority  constituted under section 4A;]  
(2) “carriage ” means the carriage of passengers or goo ds by a railway administration;  
(3) “Claims Tribunal ” means the Railway Claims Tribunal established under section 3 of the 
Railw ay Claims T ribunal Act, 1987 (54 of 1987);  
(4) “classification ” means the classification of commodities made under section 31 for the 
purpose of determining the rates to be charged fo r carriage of such commodities;  
(5) “class rates ” means the rate fixed for a class of c ommodity in the classification;  
(6) “Commissioner ” means the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety or the Commissioner of 
Railway Sa fety appointed under section 5;  
(7) “commodity ” means a specific item of goods;  
3[(7A) “competent authority”  means any person authorised by the Central Government, by 
notification, to perform the functions of the competent authority for such area as may be specified in 
the notification; ] 
(8) “consignee ” means the person named as consignee in  a railway receipt;  
(9) “consignment ” means goods entrusted to a railw ay administration for carriage;  
(10) “consignor ” means the person, named in a railway receipt as consignor, by whom or on 
whose behalf goods covered by the railway receipt are entrusted to a railw ay administration for 
carriage;  
(11) “demurrage ” means the charge levied for the detention of any rolling st ock after the expiry 
of free time, if a ny, allowed for such detention;  
(12) “endorsee ” means the person in whose favour an endorsement is made, and in the case of 
successive endorsements, the person in whose favou r the last endorsement is made;  
(13) “endor sement ” means the signing by the consignee or the endorsee after adding a direction 
on a railway receipt to pass the property in the goods mentioned in such receipt to a specified person;  
                                                           
1. 1st July, 1990, vide Notification No. S.O. 475(E), dated 12th June, 1990, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 47 of  2005 , s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2006).  
3. Ins. by Act 11 of  2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -1-2008).  10 
 (14) “fare” means the charge levied for the carriage of passengers;  
(15) “ferry ” includes a bridge of boats, pontoons or rafts, a swing bridge, a fly -bridge and a 
temporary bridge and the approaches to, and landing places of, a ferry;  
(16) “forwarding note ” means the document  executed under section 64;  
(17) “freight ” means  the charge levied for the carriage of goods includin g transhipment charges, 
if any;  
(18) “General Manager ” means the General Manager of a Zonal Rai lway appointed under  
section 4;  
(19) “goods ” includes — 
(i) containers, pallets or similar articles of transport  used to consolidate goods; and  
(ii) animals;  
(20) “Government railway ” means a railway o wned by the Central Government;  
(21) “in transit ”, in relation to the carriage of goods by railway, means the period between the 
commencement and the terminat ion of transit of such goods, and unless ot herwise previously 
determined — 
(a) transit commences as soon as the railway receipt is issued or the consignment i s loaded, 
whichever is earlier;  
(b) transit terminates on the expiry of the free time allowed for u nloading of consignment 
from any rolling stock and where such unloading has been completed  within such free time, 
transit terminates on the expiry of the free time allowed, for the removal of the goods from t he 
railway premises;  
(22) “level crossing ” means  an inter -section of a road with lines of rails at the same level;  
(23) “luggage ” means the goods of a passenger either carried by him in his charge or entrusted to 
a railw ay administration for carriage;  
(24) “lump sum rate ” means the rate mutually agreed upon between a railway administration and 
a consignor for the carriage of goods and for any servic e in relation to such carriage;  
(25) “non-Government railway ” means a railway other than a Government railway;  
(26) “notificat ion” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
1[(26A) “officer authoris ed” means an officer authorised by the Central Government under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 179; ] 
(27) “parcel ” means goods entrusted to a railway administration for carriage by  a passenger or a 
parcel train;  
(28) “pass” means an authority given by the Central Government or a railway administration to a 
person allowing him to travel as a passenger,  but does not inc lude a ticket;  
(29) “passenger ” means a person travelli ng with a valid pass or ticket;  
2[(29A) “ person interested”  includes, — 
(i) all persons claiming an interest in compensation to be made on account of the acquisition 
of land unde r this Act;  
(ii) tribals and other traditional for est dwellers, who have lost any  traditional rights 
recognised under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of 
Forest Rights) Act, 2006 (2 of 2007);   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 51 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
2. Ins. by Act 11 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -1-2008).  11 
 (iii) a person interested in an easement affecting the land;  and 
(iv) persons having tenancy rights u nder the relevant State laws;]  
(30) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(31) “railway ” means a railway, or any portion of a railway, for the public carriage of pass engers 
or goods, and includes — 
(a) all lands within the fences or other boundary marks indicating the limits of the  land 
appurtenant to a railway;  
(b) all lines of rails, sidings, or yards, or branches used for the purposes of, or  in connection 
with, a railway;  
(c) all electric traction equipments, power supply and distribution installations used for the 
purposes of, or  in connection with, a railway;  
(d) all rolling stock, stations, offices, warehouses, wharves, workshops, manufactories, fixed 
plant and machinery,  roads and streets, running rooms, rest houses, institutes, hospitals, water 
works and water supply installations, staff dwellings and any other works constructed for the 
purpose of, or in connection with, railway;  
(e) all vehicles which are used on any ro ad for the purposes of traffic of a railway and owned, 
hired or worked by a railway; and  
(f) all ferries, ships, boats and rafts which are used on any canal, river, lake or other navigable  
inland waters for the pur poses of the traffic of a railway and owne d, hired or worked by a railway 
adminis tration,  
but does not include — 
(i) a tramway whol ly within a municipal area; and  
(ii) lines of rails built in any exhibition ground, fair, park, or any other place solely  for the 
purpose of recreation;  
(32) “railway  administration ”, in relation to — 
(a) a Government railway, means the General Manager of a Zonal Railway; and  
(b) a non -Government railway, means the person who is the owner or lessee of the railway or 
the person working the railway under an agreement;  
1[(32A) “railway land”  means any land in which a Government railway has  any right, title or 
interest;]  
(33) “railway receipt ” means the r eceipt issued under section 65;  
(34) “railway servant ” means any person employed by the Central Government or by a railway  
administration in connection  with the service of a railway 2[including member of the Railway 
Protection Force appointed under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Railway Protection 
Force Act, 1957  (23 of 1957) ]; 
(35) “rate” includes any fare, freight or any other charge for the carr iage of any passenger or 
goods;  
(36) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Railway  Rates Tribunal under this Act;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2006)  
2. Ins. by Act 51 of 2003, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  12 
 (37) “rolling stock ” includes locomotives, lenders, carriages, wagons,  rail-cars, containers, trucks, 
trolleys and vehicle s of all kinds moving on rails;  
1[(37A) “special railway project ” means a project notified as such by the Central Government from 
time to time, for providing national infrastructure for a public purpose in a specified time -frame, 
covering one or more S tates or the Union territories;]  
(38) “station to station rate ” means  a special reduced rate applicable to a specific commodity 
booked between spe cified stations;  
(39) “traffic ” includes rolling stock of every description, a s well as passengers and goods;  
 2[(40) “Tribunal ” means the Tribunal referred to in section 33;]  
(41) “wharfage ” means the charge levied on goods for not removing them from the railway after 
the expiry of the free time for such removal;  
(42) “Zonal Railway ” means a Zonal Railw ay constituted under section 3.  
CHAPTER II  
RAILWAY  ADMINISTRATIONS  
3. Zonal Railways .—(1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of the efficient 
administration of the Government railways, by notification constitute such railways into as many Zonal 
Railways as it may deem fit and specify in such notification the names and hea dquarters of such Zonal 
Railways and the areas in respect of which th ey shall exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) The Zonal Railway existing immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to 
be Zonal Railways con stituted under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, declare any unit of the railways engaged in 
research, development, designing, construction or production of rolling stock, its parts or other equipment 
used on a railway, to be a Zonal Railway.  
(4) The Central G overnment may, by notification, abolish any Zonal Railway or constitute any new 
Zonal Railway out of any existing Zonal Railway or Zonal Railways, change the name or headquarters of 
any Zonal Railway or determine the areas in respect of which a Zonal Railw ay shall exercise jurisdiction.  
4. Appointment of General Manager .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint 
a person to be the Gene ral Manager of a Zonal Railway.  
(2) The general superintendence and control of a Zonal Railway shall vest in the General Manager.  
3[CHAPTER IIA  
RAIL LAND DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY  
4A. Establishment of Rail way Land Development Authority .—The Central Government may, by 
notification, establish an authority to be called the Rail Land Development Authority to exercise the 
powers and discharge the functions conferred on it by or under this Act.  
4B. Composition of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall consist of a Chairman, Vice -Chairman and 
not more than four other members.  
(2) The Member Engineering, Railway Board shall be  the Chairman , ex officio , of the Authority.  
(3) The Vice -Chairman and three other members shall be appointed by the Central Government from 
amongst persons who are or have been working in the Civil Engineering, Finance and Traffic disciplines 
of any railw ay administration and having adequate experience in the relevant discipline as the Central 
Government may consider necessary.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 31 -1-2008).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 163 , for clause ( 40) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3.  Ins. by Act 47 of 2005, s. 3 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2006).  13 
 (4) The Central Government shall also appoint a member who shall be a person from outside the 
railway administration and having ad equate experience in such fiel d as it may consider necessary.  
4C. Terms and conditions of appointment of V ice-Chairman and other Members .—The terms 
and conditions of appointment of the Vice -Chairman and the other Members of the Authority, other than 
the Ch airman, and the manner of filling casual vacancies among them shall be such as may be prescribed.  
4D. Functions of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall discharge such functions and exercise such 
powers of the Central Government in relation to the development  of railway land and as are specifically 
assigned t o it by the Central Government.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central 
Government may assign to the Authority all or any of th e following functions, namely: — 
(i) to prepare scheme or schemes for use of railway land in conformity w ith the provisions of this 
Act; 
(ii) to develop railway land for commercial use as may be entrusted by the Central Government 
for the purpose of generating  revenue by non -tariff measures;  
(iii) to develop and provide consultancy, construction or management services and undertake 
operation in India in relation to the development of land and property;  
(iv) to carry out any other work or function as may be entrusted to it by the C entral Government, 
by order in writing.  
4E. Powers of Authority to enter into ag reements and execute contracts .—Subject to such 
directions as may be given to it by the Central Government, the Authority shall be empowered to enter 
into agreements on behalf  of the Central Go vernment and execute contracts.  
4F. Procedure of transa ction of business of Authority .—The Authority shall have power to 
regulate, by means of regulations made by it, its own procedure (including quorum at its meetings) and 
the conduct of  all business to be transacted by it, the constitution of Committees and Sub -Committees of 
Members and the delegation to them any of the powers (excluding the power to make regulations under 
this Chapter) and to p erform duties of the Authority.  
4G. Appoint ment of officers an d other employees of Authority .—(1) For the purpose of enabling 
it efficiently to discharge its functions under this Act, the Central Government shall provide the Authority 
with such officers and other employees, and the Authority shall,  subject to the rules as may be made by 
the Central Government in this behalf, appoint, whether on deputation or otherwise, such number of 
officers and other empl oyees as it may deem necessary.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other term s and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Authority, shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
4H. Salaries, allowances, etc., to be defrayed out  of Consolidated Fund of India .—The salaries 
and allowances payable to the Vice -Chairman and other Members of the Authority and the administrative 
expenses including the salaries, allowances and pensions payable to the officers and other employees of 
the Authority shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of I ndia.  
4-I. Power of  Authority to make regulations .—(1) The Authority may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, make regulations, consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, for 
carrying out the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Every regulation made by the Authority under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made , the regulation 
shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, 14 
 that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous ly 
done under that regulati on.] 
CHAPTER III  
COMMISSIONERS OF  RAILWAY  SAFETY  
5. Appointment of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety and C ommissioners of Railway 
Safety .—The Central Government may appoint a person to be the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
and such other person s as it may consider necessary to be the Commissioners of Railway Safety.  
6. Duties of Commissioner .—The Commissioner shall — 
(a) inspect any railway with a view to determine whether it is fit to be opened for the public 
carriage of passengers and report thereon to the Central Government as required by or under this Act;  
(b) make such periodical or other inspections of any railway or of any rolling stock used thereon 
as the  Central Government may direct;  
(c) make an inquiry under this Act into the cause of  any accident on a railway; and  
(d) discharge such other duties as are conferred on him by or under this Act.   
7. Powers of Commissioner .—Subject to the control of the Central Government, the Commissioner, 
whenever it is necessary so to do for any of the p urposes of this Act, may — 
(a) enter upon and inspect any railway or any rolling stock used thereon;  
(b) by order in writing addressed to a railway administration, require the attendance before him of 
any railway servant and to require answers or returns to  such inquiries as he thinks fit to make from 
such railway servant or from the railway administration; and  
(c) require the production of any book, document or material object belonging to or in the 
possession or control of any railway administration which appears to him to be necessary to inspect.  
8. Com missioner to be public servant .—The Commissioner shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
9. Facilities to  be afforded to Commissioners .—A railway administration shall afford to the 
Commissioner all reasonable facilities for the discharge of the duties or for the exercise of the powers 
imposed or conferr ed on him by or under this Act.  
10. Annual report of Commissioners .—The Chief Commission er of Railway Safety shall prepare in 
each financial year an annual report giving a full account of the activities of the Commissioners during 
the financial year immediately preceding the financial year in which such report is prepared and forward, 
before such date as may be specified by the Central Government, copies thereof to the Central 
Government, and that Government shall cause that report to be laid, as soon as may be, after its receipt 
before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONSTRUCTION AND MAI NTENANCE OF WORKS  
11. Power of railway administrations t o execute all necessary works .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, but subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
provisions of any law for the acquisition of land for a public purpose or for companies, and subject also, 
in the case of a non -Government railway, to the provisions of any contract between the non -Government 
railway and the Central Government, a railway administration may, for the pur poses of construc ting or 
maintaining a railway — 
(a) make or construct in or upon, across, under or over any lands, or any streets, hills, valleys, 
roads, railway, tramways, or any rivers, canals, brooks, streams or other waters, or any drains,  
water -pipes, gas -pipes, oil -pipes, sewers, electric supply lines, or telegraph lines, such temporary or 
permanent inclined -planes, bridges, tunnels, culverts, embankments, adequcts, bridges, roads, lines of 15 
 rail, ways, passages, conduits, drains, piers, cu ttings and fences, in -take wells, tube wells, dams, river 
training and protection  works as it thinks proper;  
(b) alter the course of any rivers, brooks, streams or other water courses, for the purpose of 
constructing and maintaining tunnels, bridges, passa ges or other works over or under them and divert 
or alter either temporarily or permanently, the course of any rivers, brooks, streams or other water 
courses or any roads, streets or ways, or raise or sink the level thereof, in order to carry them more 
conveniently over or under  or by the side of the railway;  
(c) make drains or conduits into, through or under any lands adjoining the railway for the purpose 
of conveyin g water from or to the railway;  
(d) erect and construct such houses, warehouses, offices an d other buildings, and such yards, 
stations, wharves, engines, machinery apparatus and other works and conveniences as the railwa y 
administration thinks proper;  
1[(da) developing any railway land for commercial use;]  
(e) alter, repair or discontinue such b uildings, works and conveniences as aforesaid or any of 
them and su bstitute others in their stead;  
(f) erect, operate, maintain or repair any telegraph and telephone lines in connection w ith the 
working of the railway;  
(g) erect, operate, maintain or repai r any electric traction equipment, power supply and 
distribution installation in connection with the working of the railway; an d 
(h) do all other acts necessary for making, maintaining, altering or r epairing and using the 
railway.  
12. Power to alter the position of pipe, electric supply line, drain or sewer, etc .—(1) A railway 
administration may, for the purpose of exercising the powers conferred on it by this Act, alter the position 
of any pipe for the supply of gas, water, oil or compressed air, or the position of any electr ic supply line, 
drain or sewer:  
Provided that before altering the position of any such pipe, electric supply line, drain or sewer, the 
railway administration shall give a notice indicating the time at which the work of such alteration shall 
commence, to the local authority or other person having control over the pipe, electr ic supply line, drain 
or sewer.  
(2) The railway administration shall execute the work referred to in sub -section ( 1) to the reasonable 
satisf action of the local authority or the person receiving the notice under the proviso to sub - section ( 1). 
13. Prote ction for Government property .—Nothing in secti ons 11 and 12 shall authorise — 
(a) a railway administration of the Government railway to do anyt hing on or to any works, lands 
or buildings vested in, or in the possession of, a State Government without the consent of that 
Government; and  
(b) a railway administration of a non -Government railway to do anything on or to any works, 
lands or buildings ve sted in, or in the possession of, the Central Government or a State Government, 
without the conse nt of the Government concerned.  
14. Temporary entry, upon land to remove obstruction, to repair  or to prevent accident .—(1) 
Where in the opinio n of a railway administration — 
(a) there is imminent danger that any tree, post or structure may fall on the railway so as to 
obstruct th e movement of rolling stock; or  
(b) any tree, post, structure or light obstructs the view of any signal provided fo r movement of 
rolling stock; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 47 of 2005, s. 4 (w.e.f. 30 -8-2006).  16 
 (c) any tree, post or structure obstructs any telephone or telegraph line maintained by it,  
it may take such steps as may be necessary to avert such danger or remove such obstruction and submit a 
report thereof to the Central Government in such manner and within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where in the opinio n of a railway administration — 
(a) a sl ip or accident has occurred; or  
(b) there is apprehension of any slip or accident to any cutting, embankment or other work on a 
railway,  
it may enter upon any lands adjoining the railway and do all such works as may be necessary for the 
purpose of repairing or preventing such slip or accident and submit a report thereof to the Central 
Government in such manner and within such time as may be p rescribed.  
(3) The Central Government may, after considering the report under sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 2), in the interest of public safety, by order, direct the railway administration that further 
action under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be stopped or the same shall be subject to such 
conditions as may be specified in that order.  
15. Payment  of amount for damage or loss .—(1) No suit shall lie against a railway administration 
to recover any amount for any damage or loss caused in the ex ercise of the powers conferred by any of 
the forego ing provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) A railway administration shall pay or tender payment for any damage or loss caused in the 
exercise of the powers conferred by any of the foregoing provisions of this Cha pter, and in case of a 
dispute as to the sufficiency of any amount so paid or tendered or as to the persons entitled to receive the 
amount, it shall immediately refer the dispute for the decision of the District Judge of the district and his 
decision there on shall be final:  
Provided that where the railway administration fails to make a reference within sixty days from the 
date of commencement of the dispute, the District Judge may, on an application made to him by the 
person concerned, direct the railway ad ministration to refe r the dispute for his decision.  
(3) The reference under sub -section ( 2) shall be treated as an appeal under section 96 of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and sh all be disposed of accordingly.  
(4) Where any amount has been paid as required by sub -section ( 2), the railway administration shall, 
notwithstanding anything in any other law for the time being in force, be discharged from all liabilities to 
any person whatsoever in  respect of any amount so paid.  
16. Accommodation wo rks.—(1) A railway administration shall make and maintain the following 
works for the accommodation of the owners and occupiers of lands a djoining the railway, namely: — 
(a) such crossings, bridges, culverts and passages over, under or by the sides of, or l eading to or 
from, the railway as may, in the opinion of the State Government, be necessary for the purpose of 
making good any interruptions caused by the railway to the use of the lands through  which the 
railway is made; and  
(b) all necessary bridges, tun nels, culverts, drains, water sources or other passages, over, under or 
by the sides of the railway, of such dimensions as will, in the opinion of the State Government, be 
sufficient at all times to convey water as freely from or to the lands lying near or  affected by the 
railway as it was before the making of the ra ilway or as nearly as possible.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the works specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be made at 
the cost of the railway administration during or immediat ely after the laying out or formation of the 
railway over the lands traversed and in such a manner as to cause as little damage or inconvenience as 
possible to persons interested in the lands or affecte d by the works:  
Provided that — 
(a) a railway administration shall not be required to make any administration shall be liable to 
execute any further or additional the working or using of the railway, or to make any accommodation 
works with respect to which the owners or occupiers of the lands have bee n paid compensation in 
consideration of their not requi ring the said works to be made;  17 
 (b) save as hereinafter, in this Chapter, provided, no railway administration shall be liable to 
execute any further or additional accommodation works for the use of the  owners or occupiers of the 
lands after the expiration of ten years from the date on which the railway passing through the lands 
was f irst opened for public traffic;  
(c) where a railway administration has provided suitable accommodation work for the crossi ng of 
a road or stream and the road or stream is afterwards diverted by the act or neglect of the person 
having the control thereof, the railway administration shall not be compelled to provide any other 
accommodation work for the c rossing of such road or stream.  
(3) The State Government may specify a date for the commencement of any work to be executed 
under sub -section ( 1) and, if within three months next after that date, the railway administration fails to 
commence the work or having commenced it, fails to proceed diligently to execute it, the Central 
Government shall, on such failure being brought to its notice by the State Government, issue such 
directions to the railway a dministration as it thinks fit.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the  expression “lands ” shall include public roads.  
17. Power of owner, occupier, State Government or local authority to cause additional 
accommodation works to be made .—(1) If an owner or occupier of any land affected by a railway 
considers the works made under section 16 to be insufficient for the use of the land, or if the State 
Government or a local authority desires to construct a public road or other work across, under or over a 
railway, such owner or occupier, or, as the case may be, the State Governm ent or the local authority may, 
at any time, require the railway administration to make at the expense of the owner or occupier or of the 
State Government or the local authority, as the case may be, such further accommodation works as are 
considered necess ary and are agreed to  by the railway administration.  
(2) The accommodation works made under sub -section ( 1) shall be maintained at the cost of the 
owner or occupier of the land, the State Government or the local authority, at who se request the works 
were m ade. 
(3) In the case of any difference of opinion between the railway administration and the owner or 
occupier, the State Government or the local authority, as th e case may be, in relation to — 
(i) the necessity of such further accommodation works; or  
(ii) the expenses to be incurred on the construction of such further accommodation works; or  
(iii) the quantum of expenses on the maintenance of such further accommodation works,  
it shall be referred to the Central Government whose d ecision thereon shall be fi nal. 
18. Fences, gates and bars .—The Central Government may, within such time as may be specified by 
it or within such further time, as it may grant, require that — 
(a) boundary  marks or fences be provided or renewed by a railway administration for a railway or 
any part thereof and for roads const ructed in connection therewith;  
(b) suitable gates, chains, bars, stiles or hand -rails be erected or renewed by a railway 
administratio n at level crossings;  
(c) persons be employed by a railway administration to open and shut gates, chains or bars.  
19. O verbridges and under bridges .—(1) Where a railway administration has constructed lines of 
rails across a public road at the same level, th e State Government or the local authority maintaining the 
road, may, at any time, in the interest of public safety, require the railway administration to take the road 
either under or over the railway by means of a bridge or arch with convenient ascents an d descents and 
other convenient approaches, instead of crossing the road on the level, or to execute such other works as 
may, in the circumstances of the case, appear to the State Government or the local authority maintaining 
the road to be best adapted fo r removing or diminishing the danger a rising from the level crossing.  
(2) The railway administration may require the State Government or the local authority, as the case 
may be, as a condition of executing any work under sub -section ( 1), to undertake to pa y the whole of the 18 
 cost of the work and the expense of maintaining the work, to the railway administration or such 
proportion of the cost and expenses as the Central Government  considers just and reasonable.  
(3) In the case of any difference of opinion bet ween the railway administration and the State 
Government or the local authority, as the case may be, over any of the matters mentioned in  
sub-section ( 1), it shall be referred to the Central Government, whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
20. Power of Central Government to give directions for safety .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law, the Central Government may, if it is of the opinion that any work undertaken 
or may be undertaken, is likely to alter or impede the natural course of water flow or cause an increase in 
the volume of such flow endangering any cutting, embankment or other work on a railway, issue 
directions in writing to any person, officer or authority responsible for such work to close, regulate or 
prohibit th at work.  
1[CHAPTER IVA  
LAND ACQUISITION FOR A SPECIAL RAILWAY PROJECT  
20A. Power  to acquire land , etc.—(1) Where the Central Government is satisfied that for a public 
purpose any land is required for execution of a special railway project , it may, by notification , declare its 
intention to acquire such land.  
(2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1), shall give a brief description of the land and of the 
special railway project for which the l and is intended to be acquired.  
(3) The State Government or  the Union territory, as the case may be , shall for the purposes of this 
section, provide the details of the land records to the competen t authority, whenever required.  
(4) The competent authority shall cause the substance of the notification to be publish ed in two local 
newspapers , one of which sha ll be in a vernacular language.  
20B. Power to enter for survey, etc .—On the issue of a notification under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 20A, it shall be lawful for any person, authorised by the competen t authority in this behalf, to — 
(a) make any inspection, survey, mea surement, valuation or enquiry;  
(b) take levels;  
(c) dig or bore into sub -soil; 
(d) set out boundar ies and intended lines of work;  
(e) mark such levels, boundaries and lines placing ma rks and cutting trenches; or  
(f) do such other acts or things as may be considered necessary by the competent authority.  
20C. Evaluation of damages during survey, measurement , etc.—The damages caused while 
carrying out works on land such as survey,  digging or boring sub -soil, marking boundaries or cutting 
trenches or clearing away any standing crop, fence or forest or doing such other acts or things which may 
cause damages while acting under section 20B particularly relating to land which is excluded  from 
acquisition proceeding, shall be evaluated and compensation shall be paid to the persons having interest in 
that land, within six months from the completion of the said works.  
20D. Hearing of objections, etc .—(1) Any person interested in the land ma y, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of publication of the notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 20A , object to 
the acquisition of land for the purpose  mentioned in that sub -section.  
(2) Every objection under sub -section, ( 1), shall be m ade to the competent authority in writing , and 
shall set out the grounds thereof and the competent authority shall give the objector an opportunity of 
being heard, either in person or by a legal practitioner , and may, after hearing all such objections and after 
making such further enquiry, if any , as the competent authority thinks necessary, by order, either al low or 
disallow the objections.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 11 of 2008, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -1-2008).  19 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “legal practitioner ” has the same meaning as in 
clause ( i) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Adv ocates Act, 1961(25 of 1961).  
(3) Any order made by the competent authority under sub-section ( 2) shall be final.  
20E. Declaration of acquisition .—(1) Where no objection under sub -section ( 1) of section 20D has 
been m ade to the competent authority within the period specified therein or where the competent 
authority has disallowed the objections under sub -section ( 2) of that section, the competent authority 
shall, as soon as may be, submit a report accordingly to the Ce ntral Government and on receipt of such 
report, the Central Government shall declare, by notification, that the land should be acquired for the 
purpose mentioned in sub-section ( 1) of section 20A.  
(2) On the publication of the declaration under sub -section  (1), the land shall vest absolutely in the 
Central Governm ent free from all encumbrances.  
(3) Where in respect of any land, a notification has been published under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 20A for its acquisition, but no declaration under sub -section ( 1) of this section has been published 
within a period of one year from the date of publication of that notification, the said notification shall 
cease to have any effect:  
Provided that in computing the said period of one year, the period during which any a ction or 
proceedings to be taken in pursuance of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 20A is 
stayed by an orde r of a court shall be excluded.  
(4) A declaration made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall not be called in 
question in any court or by any other authority.  
20F. Determination of amount payable as compensation .—(1) Where a ny land is acquired under 
this Act, there shall be paid an amount which shall be determined by an order of the competent authority.  
(2) The c ompetent authority shall make an award under this section within a period of one year from 
the date of the publication of the declaration and if no award is made within that period, the entire 
proceedings for the acqui sition of the land shall lapse:  
Provided that the competent authority may, after the expiry of the period of limitation, if he is 
satisfied that the delay has been caused due to unavoidable circumstances, and for the reasons to be 
recorded in writing, he may make the award within an exte nded period of six month s: 
Provided further that where an award is made within the extended period, the entitled person shall, in 
the interest of justice, be paid an additional compensation for the delay in making of the award, every 
month for the period s o extended, at the rate of not less than five per  cent. of the value of the award , for 
each month of such delay.  
(3) Where the right of user or any right in the nature of an easement on , any land is acquired under 
this Act, there shall be paid an amount to the owner and any other person whose right of enjoyment in that 
land has been affected in any manner whatsoever by reason of such acquisition, an amount calculated at 
ten per cent. of the amount determined under sub-section ( 1), for that land.  
(4) Before proceeding to determine the amount under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3), as the case 
may be, the competent authority shall give a public notice published in two local newspapers, on e of 
which shall be in a vernacular language inviting claims from all persons interested in the l and to be 
acquired.  
(5) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land and shall require all persons interested in such 
land to appear in person or by an agent or by a legal practitioner referred to in sub -section ( 2) of  
section 20D , before the competent authority, at a time and place and to state the nature of their re spective 
interest in such land.  
(6) If the amount determined by the competent authority under sub -section ( 1) or as the case may be, 
sub-section ( 3) is not acceptable to either of the parties, the amount shall, on an application by either of 
the parties, be determined by the arbitrator to be appointed by the Central Government in su ch manner as 
may be prescribed.  20 
 (7) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
(26 of 1996) shall apply to ev ery arbitration under this Act.  
(8) The comp etent authority or the arbitrator while determining the amount of compensation under 
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 6), as the case may be, shall take i nto consideration — 
(a) the market value of the land on the date of publication of the notification under section 20A;  
(b) the damage, if any sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the 
land, by reason of the severing of such land from other land;  
(c) the damage, if any , sustained by the person interested at the time of taking possession of the  
land, by reason of the acquisition injuriously affecting his other immovable property in any manner, 
or his earnings;  
(d) if, in consequences of the acquisition of the land, the person interested is compelled to change 
his residence or place of business, the reasonable expenses, if any, incidental to such change.  
(9) In addition to the market -value of the land as above provided, the competent authority or the 
arbitrator, as the case may be,  shall in every case award a sum of sixty per centum on such market -value, 
in consideration of the compulsory nature of the acquisition.  
20G. Criterion for determi nation of market -value of land .—(1) The competent authority shall 
adopt the following criteria in assessing and determinin g the market -value of the land ,— 
(i) the minimum land value, if any, specified  in the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) , for the 
registration of sale deeds in the area, where t he land is situated; or  
(ii) the average of the sale price for similar type of land situated in the village or vicin ity, 
ascertained from not less than fifty per  cent. of the sale deeds registered during the preceding three 
years, where higher price has been paid,  
whichever is higher.  
(2) Where the provisions of sub -section ( 1) are not applicable for the reason that: — 
(i) the land is situated in such area where the transactions in land are restricted by or under any 
other law for the time being in force in th at area; or  
(ii) the registered sale deeds for similar land as mentioned in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) are not  
available fo r the preceding three years; or  
(iii) the minimum land value has not been specified under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) 
by the appropriate authority ,  
the concerned State Government shall specify the floor price per unit area of the s aid land based on the 
average higher prices paid for similar type of land situated in the adjoining areas or vicinity, ascertained 
from not less than fifty per cent . of the sale deeds registered during the preceding three years where 
higher price has been paid, and the competent authority may calculate the  value of the land accordingly.  
(3) The competent authority shall, before assessing and determining the market -value of the land  
being acquired under this Act ,— 
(a) ascertain the intended land use category  of such land; and  
(b) take into account the value of the land of the intended category in t he adjoining areas or 
vicinity,  
for the purpose of determination of the market -value of the land being acquired.  
(4) In determining the market -value of the bu ilding  and other immovable prope rty or assets a ttached 
to the land or building  which are to be acquired, the competent authority may use the services of a 
competent engineer or any other specialist in the relevant field, as may be considered necess ary by the 
competent authority.  21 
 (5) The competent authority may, for the purpose of determ ining the value of trees and plants, use the 
services of experienced persons in the field of agriculture, forestry, horticulture, sericulture, or any other 
field, as may be conside red necessary by him.  
(6) For the purpose of assessing the value of the standing crops damaged during the process of land 
acquisition proceedings, the competent authority may utilise the services of experienced persons in the 
field of agricul ture as he con siders necessary.  
20H.  Deposit and payment of amount .—(1) The amount determined under section 20F shall be 
deposited by the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed by that Government, with the 
competent authority before  taking possession of the land.  
(2) As soon as may be after the amount has been deposited under sub -section ( 1), the competent 
authority shall on behalf of the Central Government pay the amount to the pers on or persons entitled 
thereto.  
(3) Where several p ersons claim to be interested in the amount deposited under sub -section ( 1), the 
competent authority shall determine the persons who in its opinion are entitled to receive the amount 
payable to each of them.  
(4) If any dispute arises as to the apportionmen t of the amount or any part thereof or to any person to 
whom the same or any part thereof is payable, the competent authority shall refer the dispute to the 
decision of the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the limits of whose ju risdict ion the land 
is situated.  
(5) Where the amount determined under section 20F by the arbitrator is in excess of the amount 
determined by the competent authority, the arbitrator may award interest at nine per  cent. per annum on 
such excess amount from the dat e of taking possession under section 20 -I till the date of actual deposit 
thereof.  
(6) Where the amount determined by the arbitrator is in excess of the amount determined by the 
competent authority, the excess amount together with interest, if any, awarded  under sub -section ( 5) shall 
be deposited by the Central Government, in such manner as may be prescribed by that Government, with 
the competent authority and the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) to ( 4) shall apply to such deposit.  
20-I Power to take possession .—(1) Where any land has vested in the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 20E, and the amount determined by the competent authority under section 20F 
with respect to such land has been deposited under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 H with the competent 
authority by the Central Government, the competent authority may, by notice in writing, direct the owner 
as well as any other person who may be in possession of such land to surrender or deliver possession 
thereof  to the competent auth ority or any person duly authorised by it in this behalf within a period of 
sixty day s of the service of the notice.  
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with any direction made under sub -section ( 1), the 
competent authority shall apply — 
(a) in cas e of any land situated in any area falling within the metropolitan area,  to the 
Commissioner of Police;  
(b) in case of any land situated in any area other than the area referred to in clause ( a), to the 
Collector of a district,  
and such Commissioner or Collector, as the case may be , shall enforce the surrender of the land, to the 
competent authority or to th e person duly authorised by it.  
20J. Right to enter into land where land has vested in  Central Government .—Where the land has 
vested in the Central Government under section 20E, it shall be lawful for any person authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf, to enter and do other act necessary upon the land for carrying out the 
building, maintenance, management or operation of the special r ailway project or part thereof or any other 
work connected therewith.  22 
 20K. Competent authority to have  certain powers of civil court .—The competent authority shall 
have, for the purposes of this Act, all the powers of a civil court while tr ying a suit under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) recep tion of evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public r ecord from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commission for examination of witnesses.  
20L. Utilisation of land for the purpose it is acquired .—(1) The land acquired under this Act shall 
not be transferred to any other purpose except for a public purpose, and after obtaining the prior appr oval 
of the Central Government.  
(2) When any land or part thereof , acquired under this Act remains unutilised for a period of five 
years from the date of  taking over the possession, the same shall return to the Central Government by 
reversion . 
20M. Sharing with landowners the difference in price of a land when transfer red for a higher 
consideration .—Whenever any land acquired under this Act is transferred to any person for a 
consideration, eighty per cent . of the difference in the acquisition cost and the consideration received , 
which in no case shall be less than the acquisition cost, shall be shared amongst the persons from whom 
the lands were acquired or  their heirs, in proportion to the value at which the lands were acquired , and for 
the purpose, a separate fund may be maintained which shall be administered by the competent authority in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
20N. Lan d Acquisit ion Act 1 of 1894 not to apply .—Nothing in the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 
shall apply to  an acquisition under this Act.  
20-O. Application of the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement Policy, 2007 to persons 
affected due to land acquisition .—The provisions of the National Rehabilitation and Resettlement 
Policy, 2007 for project affected families, notified by the Government of India in the Ministry of Rural 
Development  vide number F. 26011/4/2007 -LRD dated the 31st October,  2007, shall apply in  respect of 
acquisition of land by the Cen tral Government under this Act.  
20P. Power to make rules in res pect of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particul ar, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power , such rules may 
provide for all or any o f the following matters, namely: — 
 (a) the manner of appointment of arbitrator under sub-section ( 6) of section 20F;  
(b) the  manner in which the amount shall be deposited with the competent authority under  
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 6) of section 20H;  
(c) the manner of maintenance and administration of separate fund for the purposes of  
section 20M. ] 
CHAPTER V  
OPENING OF RAILWAYS  
21. Sanction of the Central Govern ment to the opening of railway .—No railway shall be opened 
for the public carriage of passengers until the Central Government has, by order, sanctioned the op ening 
thereof for that purpose.  
22. Formalities to be complied with before giving sanctio n to the opening of a railway .—(1) The 
Central Government shall, before giving its sanction to the opening of a railway under section 21, obtain a 
report from the Commissioner that — 
(a) he has made a careful inspection of the rail way and the rolling stock that may be used thereon;  23 
 (b) the moving and fixed dimensions as laid down by the Central Gove rnment have not been 
infringed;  
(c) the structure of lines of rails, strength of bridges, general structural character of the works and 
the size of, and maximum gross load upon, the axles of any rolling stock, comply with the 
requirements laid down  by the Central Government; and  
(d) in his opinion, the railway can be opened for the public carriage of passengers without any 
danger to the pu blic using it.  
(2) If the Commissioner is of the opinion that the railway cannot be opened without any danger to the 
public using it, he shall, in his report, state the grounds therefor, as also the requirements which, in his 
opinion, are to be complied wi th before sanction is g iven by the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Government, after considering the report of the Commissioner, may sanction the 
opening of a railway under section 21 as such or subject to such conditions as may be considered 
necessary  by it for the safety of the public.  
23. Sections 21 and 22 to apply to  the opening of certain works .—The provisions of sections 21 
and 22 shall apply to the opening of the following works if they form part of, or are directly connected 
with, a railway used for the public carriage of passengers and have been constructed subsequent to the 
giving of a report by the Commissio ner under section 22, namely: — 
(a) opening of additional lines of rail way and deviation lines;  
(b) opening of stations,  junctions and level crossings;  
(c) re-modelling of ya rds and re -building of bridges;  
(d) introdu ction of electric traction; and  
(e) any alteration or reconstruction materially affecting the structural character of any work to 
which the provisions of sections 21 and 22 a pply o r are extended by this section.  
24. Te mporary suspension of traffic .—When an accident has occurred on a railway resulting in a 
temporary suspension of traffic, and either the original lines of rails and works have been restored to their 
original stan dard or a temporary diversion has been laid for the purpose of restoring communication, the 
original lines of rails and works so restored, or the temporary diversion, as the case may be, may, without 
prior inspection by the Commissioner, be opened for the public carriage of passengers, subject to the 
following conditions, namely: — 
(a) the railway servant incharge  of the works undertaken by reason of the accident has certified in 
writing that the opening of the restored lines of rails and works, or of the temporary diversion will not 
in his opinion be attended  with danger to the public; and  
(b) a notice of the open ing of the lines of rails and works or the diversion shall be sent 
immediately to the Commissioner.  
25. Power to close railway opened for the  public carriage of passengers .—Where, after the 
inspection of any railway opened and used for the public carriage of passengers or any rolling stock used 
thereon, the Commissioner is of the opinion that the use of the railway or of any rolling stock will be 
attended with danger to the public using it, the Commissioner shall send a report to the Central 
Government who may thereupon direct that — 
(i) the railway be closed for the pu blic carriage of passengers; or  
(ii) the use of the ro lling stock be discontinued; or  
(iii) the railway or the rolling stock may be used for the public carriage of passengers subject to 
such conditions as it may consider necessary for the safety of the public.  
  24 
 26. Re-opening of closed railway .—When the Central Government has, under section 25, di rected 
the closure of a railway or the discontinuance of  the use of any rolling stock — 
(a) the railway shall not be re -opened for the public carriage of passengers until it has been 
inspected by the Commissioner and its re -opening is sanctioned in accordan ce with the provisions of 
this Chap ter; and  
(b) the rolling stock shall not be used until it has been inspected by the Commissioner and its  
re-use is sanctioned in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
27. Use of rolling stock .—A railway administration may use such rolling stock as it may consider 
necessary for the construction, oper ation and working of a railway:  
Provided that before using any rolling stock of a design or type different from that already running on 
any section of  the railway, the previous sanction of the Central Government shall be obtained for such 
use: 
Provided further that before giving any such sanction, the Central Government shall obtain a report 
from the Commissioner that he has made a careful inspection of  the rolling stock and, in his opinion, such 
rolling stock can be used.  
28. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of its 
powers or functions under this Chapter, except section 29, or the rules made thereunder s hall, in relation 
to such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised 
or dis charged also by a Commissioner.  
29. Power to make rules in resp ect of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the duties of a rail way administration and the Commissioner in regard to the opening of a 
railway for the  public carriage of passengers;  
(b) the arrangements to be made for and the formalities to be complied with before opening a 
railway for the  public carriage of passengers;  
(c) for regulating the mode in which, and the speed at which rolling stock used on railways i s to 
be moved or propelled; and  
(d) the cases in which and the extent to which the procedure provided in this Chapter may be 
dispensed with.  
CHAPTER VI  
FIXATION OF RATES  
30. Power to fix rates .—(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by general or special 
order fix, for the carriage of passengers and goods, rates for the whole or any part of the railway and 
different rates may be fixed for different cla sses of goods and specify in such order the conditions subject 
to which such rates shall apply.  
(2) The Central Government may, by a like order, fix the rates of any other charges incidental to or 
connected with such carriage including demurrage and wharfage for the whole or any part of the railway 
and specify in the order the conditions subject to which such rates shall apply.  
31. Power to classi fy commodities or alter rates .—The Central Government shall have power to —  
(a) classify  or reclassify any commodity for the purpose of determining the rates to be charged for 
the carriage of such c ommodities; and  
(b) increase or reduce the class rates and other charges.  25 
 32. Power of railway administr ation to charge certain rates .—Notwithstan ding anything 
contained in this Chapter, a railway administration may, in respect of the carriage of any commodity and 
subject to such co nditions as may be specified, — 
(a) quote a station to station rate;  
(b) increase or reduce or cancel, after due notice in the manner determined by the Central 
Government, a station to station rate, not being a station to station rate introduced in compliance with  
an order made by the Tribunal;  
(c) withdraw, alter or amend the conditions attached to a station to station rat e other than 
conditions introduced in compliance with an order made by the Tribunal; and  
(d) charge any lump sum rate.  
CHAPTER VII  
1[TRIBUNAL ] 
2[33. Tribunal .—The Railway Claims Tribunal established under section 3 of the Railway Claims 
Tribunal Act, 1987  (54 of 1987)  shall, on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the 
Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be the Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Tribunal shall 
exercise the jurisdiction, authority and powers conferred on it by or  under this Act.]  
34. [Staff of the Tribunal .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 163 ( w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
35. [Sittings of the Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 163, ibid. (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
36. Complaints aga inst a railway administration .—Any complaint that a railway administration — 
(a) is contravening t he provisions of section 70; or  
(b) is charging for the carriage of any commodity between two stations a  rate which is 
unreasonable; or  
(c) is levying any other charge which is unreasonable,  
may be made to the Tribunal, and the Tribunal shall hear and decide any such complaint in accordance 
with the provisions of this Chapter.  
37. Matters not within the  jurisdiction of the Tribunal .—Nothing in this Chapter shall confer 
jurisdiction on the Tribunal in respect of — 
(a) classification or re -classification of any commodity;  
(b) fixation of wharfage and demurrage charges (including conditions attached to such charges);  
(c) fixation of fares levied for the carriage of passengers and freight levied  for the carriage of 
luggage, parcels, railway mat erial and military traffic; and  
(d) fixation of lump sum rates.  
38. Powers of the Tribuna l.—(1) The Tribunal shall have the powers of a civil court under the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the purposes of taking evidence on oath, enforcing the attendance 
of witnesses, compelling the discovery and production of documents, issuing comm issions for the 
examination of witnesses and of review and shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXXV of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974) and any reference in such section or chapter to the pre siding officer of a court shall be deemed 
to include a reference to the Cha irman of the Tribunal.  
(2) The Tribunal shall also have power to pass such interim and final orders as the circumstances may 
require, including order s for the payment of costs.  
39. Reference to the Tribunal .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 37, the Central 
Government may make a reference to the Tribunal in respect of any of the matter specified in that section 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s . 163, for the Heading (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 163, ibid., for section 33 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  26 
 and where any such reference is made in respect of any such m atter, the Tribunal shall make an inquiry 
into that matter and submit its report the reon to the Central Government.  
40. Assista nce by the Central Government .—(1) The Central Government shall give to the 
Tribunal such assistance as it may require and shall also place at its disposal any information in the 
possession of the Central Government which that Government may think relevant to any matter before the 
Tribuna l. 
(2) Any person duly authorised in this behalf by the Central Government shall be entitled to appear 
and be heard in any p roceedings before the Tribunal.  
41. Burden of proof, etc .—In the case of any complaint un der clause ( a) of section 36, — 
(a) whenever  it is shown that a railway administration charges one trader or class of traders or the 
traders in any local area, lower rates for the same or similar goods or lower charges for the same or 
similar services than it charges to other traders in any other lo cal area, the burden of providing that 
such lower rate or charge does not amount to an undue preference, shall lie  on the railway 
administration;  
(b) in deciding whether a lower rate or charge does not amount to an undue preference, the 
Tribunal may, in ad dition to any other considerations affecting the case, take into consideration 
whether such lower rate or charge is necessary in the interests of the public.  
42. De cision, etc., of the Tribunal .—The decisions or orders of the Tribunal shall be by a majorit y 
of the members sitting a nd shall be final.  
43. Bar of jurisdiction of courts .—No suit shall be instituted or proceeding taken in respect of any 
matter which the Tribunal is empowered to deal with,  or decide, under this Chapter.  
44. Reliefs  which the Tribunal may grant .—In the case of any complaint made under clause ( b) or 
clause ( c) of section 36, the Tribunal may — 
(i) fix such rate or charge as it considers reasonable from any date as it may deem proper, not 
being a date earlier to the dat e of the filing of the complaint;  
(ii) direct a refund of amount, if any, as being the excess of the rate or charge fixed by  the 
Tribunal under clause ( i). 
45. Revision of de cisions given by the Tribunal .—Where a railway administration considers that 
since  the date of decision by the Tribunal, there has been a material change in the circumstances on which 
it was based, it may, after the expiry of one year from such date, make an application to the Tribunal and 
the Tribunal may, after making such inquiry as it considers necessar y, vary or revoke the decision.  
46. Execution of decisi ons or orders of the Tribunal .—The Tribunal may transmit any decision or 
order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the decision  or 
order as if it we re a decree made by that court.  
47. Report to the  Central Government .—The Tribunal shall present annually a report to the Central 
Government of all its proceedings under this Chapter.  
48. Power of the  Tribunal to make regulations .—(1) The Tribunal may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, make regulations consistent with this Act and rules generally to regulate its 
procedure for the effective discharge of it s functions under this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
1*   *   *   *  * 
(b) the award of costs by the Tribunal in any proceedings before it;  
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s.  163 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  27 
 (c) the reference of any question to a member or to an officer of the Tribunal or any other person 
appointed by the Tribunal, for report  after holding a local inquiry;  
(d) the right of audience before the Tribunal, provided that any party shall be entitled to be heard 
in person, or by a representative duly authorised in writi ng, or by a legal practitioner;  
(e) the disposal by the Tribunal of any proceedings before it, notwithstanding that in the course 
thereof there has been a change in the persons sitt ing as memb ers of the Tribunal;  
(f) a scale of fees for and in connection with the p roceedings before the Tribunal.  
CHAPTER VIII  
CARRIAGE OF PASSENGERS  
49. Exhibition of certain timings a nd tables of fares at stations .—(1) Every railway administration 
shall cause to be pasted in a conspicuous and accessible place at every station in Hindi and English and 
also in the regional language commonly in use in the area where the station is situated, — 
(i) a table of times of arrival and departure of trains which  carry passenger s and stop at that 
station; and 
(ii) list of fares from such station to such other station s as it may consider necessary.  
(2) At every station where tickets are issued to passengers, a copy of the time table in force shall be 
kept in th e office of the station master.  
50. Supply of tickets on payment of fare .—(1) Any person desirous of travelling on a railway shall, 
upon payment of the fare, be supplied with a ticket by a railway servant or an agent authorised  in this 
behalf and such ticket shall contain the f ollowing particulars, namely: — 
(i) the date of issue;  
(ii) the class of carriage;  
(iii) the place from and the p lace to which it is issued; and  
(iv) the amount of the fare.  
(2) Every railway administration  shall display the hours during which booking windows at a station 
shall be kept open for the issue of tickets to passengers.  
(3) The particulars required to be specified on a ticket under clauses ( ii) and ( iii) of sub -section ( 1) 
shall, — 
(a) if it is for the lowest class of carriage, be set forth in Hindi, English and the regional language 
commonly in use at the place of issue of the ticket; a nd 
(b) if it is for any other class of carriage, be set forth in Hindi and English:  
Provided that where it is not f easible to specify such particulars in any such language due to 
mechanisation or any other reason, the Central Government may exempt such particulars be ing specified 
in that language.  
51. Provision for case in which ticket is issued for class or train not having accommoda tion for 
additional passengers .—(1) A ticket shall be deemed to have been issued subject to the condition of 
availability of accommodation in the class of carriage and the train for which the ticket is issued.  
(2) If no accommodation is ava ilable in the class of carriage for which a ticket is issued, and the 
holder thereof travels in a carriage of a lower class, he shall, on returning such ticket, be entitled to a 
refund of the difference between the fare paid by him and the fare payable for  the class of  carriage in 
which he travels.  
52. Cancellation of ti cket and refund .—If a ticket is returned for cancellation, the railway 
administration shall cancel the same and refund such amount as may be prescribed.  28 
 53. Prohibition against transfer of certain ticke ts.—A ticket issued in the name of a person sha ll be 
used only by that person:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall prevent mutual transfer of a seat or berth by 
passengers travelling by the same train:  
Provided further that a railway servant authorised in this behalf may permit change of name of a 
passenger having reserved a seat or berth subject to such circ umstances as may be prescribed.  
54. Exhibition and surrender of passes and ticke ts.—Every passeng er shall, on demand by any 
railway servant authorised in this behalf, present his pass or ticket to such railway servant for examination 
during the journey or at the end of the jour ney and surrender such ticket — 
(a) at the end of the jou rney, or  
(b) if suc h ticket is issued for a specified period, on  the expiration of such period.  
55. Prohibition against trav elling without pass or ticket .—(1) No person shall enter or remain in 
any carriage on a railway for the purpose of travelling therein as a passenger un less he has with him a 
proper pass or ticket or obtained permission of a railway servant authorised in this behalf for such travel.  
(2) A person obtaining permission under sub -section ( 1) shall ordinarily get a certificate from the 
railway servant referred  to in that sub -section that he has been permitted to travel in such carriage on 
condition that he subsequently pays the fare payable fo r the distance to be travelled.  
56. Power to refuse to carry persons suffering from infe ctious or contagious diseases .—(1) A 
person suffering from such infectious or contagious diseases, as may be prescribed, shall not enter or 
remain in any carriage on a railway or travel in a train without the permission of a railway ser vant 
authorised in this behalf.  
(2) The railway servant giving permission under sub -section ( 1), shall arrange for the separation of 
the person suffering from such disease from other persons in the train and such person shall be carried in 
the train subject to such other c onditions as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any person who enters or remains in any carriage or travels in a train without permission as 
required under sub -section ( 1) or in contravention of any condition prescribed under sub -section ( 2), such 
person and a person accompanying him shall be liabl e to the forfeiture of their passes or tickets and 
removal from railway by any railway ser vant.  
57. Maximum number of p assengers for each compartment .—Subject to the approval of the 
Central Government, every railway administration shall fix the maximum num ber of passengers which 
may be carried in each compartment of every description of carriage, and shall exhibit the number so 
fixed in a conspicuous manner inside or outside each compartment in Hindi, English and also in one or 
more of the regional language s commonly in use in the areas serv ed by the railway.  
58. Earmarking of compartment, etc., for ladies .—Every railway administration shall, in every 
train carrying passengers, earmark for the exclusive use of females, one compartment or such number of 
berth s or seats, as the railwa y administration may think fit.  
59. Communications between passengers and railw ay servant in charge of train .—A railway 
administration shall provide and maintain in every train carrying passengers, such efficient means of 
communication between the passengers and the railway servant in charge of the train as may be appr oved 
by the Central Government:  
Provided that where the railway administration is satisfied that the means of communication provided 
in a train are being misu sed, it may cause such means to be disconnected in that train fo r such period as it 
thinks fit:  
Provided further that the Central Government may specify the circumstances under which a railway 
administration may be exempted from providing such means of communication in any train.  
60. Power to make rules in respe ct of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  29 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the convenience and accommodation (including the reservation of seats or berths in trains) to 
passengers ; 
(b) the amount of refund fo r the cancellation of a ticket;  
(c) the circumstances under which change of names of passengers, having reserved seats or 
berths, m ay be permitted;  
(d) the carriage of luggage and the conditions subject to which luggage may be kept in t he cloak 
rooms at the stations;  
(e) diseases  whic h are infectious or contagious;  
(f) the conditions subject to which a railway administration may carry passengers suffering from 
infectious or contagious diseases and the manner in which carriages used by such  passengers may be 
disinfected;  
(g) genera lly, for regulating the travelling upon, and the use, working and management of the 
railways.  
(3) Any rule made under this section may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable 
with fine which shall not exceed five hundred rupees.  
(4) Every railway administration shall keep at every station on its railway a copy of all the rules made 
under this section and shall also allow any perso n to inspect it free of charge.  
CHAPTER IX  
CARRIAGE OF GOODS  
61. Maintenance of rate -books , etc., for carriage o f goods .—Every railway administration shall 
maintain, at each station and at such other places where goods are received for carriage, the rate -books or 
other documents which shall contain the rate authorised for the carriage of goods from one station to 
another and make them available for the reference of any person during all reasonable ho urs without 
payment of any fee.  
62. Conditions for receiving, etc., of goods .—(1) A railway administration may impose conditions, 
not inconsistent with this Act or any rules made thereunder, with respect to the receiving, forwarding, 
carry ing or delivering of any goods.  
(2) A railway administration shall maintain, at each station and at such other places where goods are 
received for carriage, a copy of the conditions for  the time being in force under sub -section ( 1) and make 
them available for the reference of any person during all reasonable hours without payment of any fe e. 
63. Provision of risk rates .—(1) Where any goods are entrusted to a railway administration for 
carriage, such carriage shall, except where owner's risk rate is applicable in respect of such good s, be at 
railway risk rate.  
(2) Any goods, for which owner's risk rate and railway risk rate are in force, may be entrusted for 
carriage at either of the rates  and if no rate is opted, the goods shall be deemed to have been entrusted at 
owner's risk rate.  
64. Forwarding note .—(1) Every  person entrusting any goods to a railway administration for 
carriage shall execute a forwarding note in such form as may be specified by the Central Government:  
Provided that no forwarding note shall be executed in the case of s uch goods as may be prescri bed. 
(2) The consignor shall be responsible for the correctness of the particulars furnished  by him in the 
forwarding note.  
(3) The consignor shall indemnify the railway administration against any damage suffered by it by 
reason of the incorrectness or inc ompleteness of the particulars in the forwarding not e. 30 
 65. Railway receipt .—(1) A railway administration shall, — 
(a) in a case where the goods are to be loaded by a person entrusting such goods, on the  
completion of such loading; or  
(b) in any other case, on the acceptance of the goods by it, issue a railway receipt in such form as 
may be speci fied by the Central Government.  
(2) A railway receipt shall be prima facie  evidence of the weight and the num ber of packages stated 
therein:  
Provided that in the case of a consignment in wagon -load or train -load and the weight or the number 
of packages is not checked by a railway servant authorised in this behalf, and a statement to that effect is 
recorded in such railway receipt by him, the bu rden of proving the weight or, as the case may be, the 
number of packages stated therein, shall lie on the consignor,  the consignee or the endorsee.  
66. Power to require statement relatin g to the description of goods .—(1) The owner or a person 
having charg e of any goods which are brought upon a railway for the purposes of carriage by railway, and 
the consignee or the endorsee of any consignment shall, on the request of any railway servant authorised 
in this behalf, deliver to such railway servant a statemen t in writing signed by such owner or person or by 
such consignee or endorsee, as the case may be, containing such description of the goods as would enable 
the railway servant to determ ine the rate for such carriage.  
(2) If such owner or person refuses or n eglects to give the statement as required under sub -section ( 1) 
and refuses to open the package containing the goods, if so required by the railway servant, it shall be 
open to the railway administration to refuse to accept such goods for carriage unless s uch owner or person 
pays for such carriage the highe st rate for any class of goods.  
(3) If the consignee or endorsee refuses or neglects to give the statement as required under  
sub-section ( 1) and refuses to open the package containing the goods, if so re quired by the railway 
servant, it shall be open to the railway administration to charge in respect of the carriage of the goods  the 
highe st rate for any class of goods.  
(4) If the statement delivered under sub -section ( 1) is materially false with respect to the description 
of any goods to which it purports to relate, the railway administration may charge in respect of the 
carriage of such goods such rate, not exceeding double the highest rate for any class of goods as may be 
specified by t he Central Govern ment.  
(5) If any difference arises between a railway servant and such owner or person, the consignee or the 
endorsee, as the case may be, in respect of the description of the goods for which a statement has been 
delivered under sub -section ( 1), the railway  servant ma y detain and examine the goods.  
(6) Where any goods have been detained under sub -section ( 5) for examination and upon such 
examination it is found that the description of the goods is different from that given in the statement 
delivered under su b-section ( 1), the cost of such detention and examination shall be borne by such owner 
or person, the consignee or the endorsee, as the case may be, and the railway administration shall not be 
liable for any loss, damage or deterioration which may be cause d by such detention or examination.  
67. Carriage o f dangerous or offensive goods .—(1) No person shall take with him on a railway, or 
require a railway administration to carry such dangerous or offensive goods, as may be prescribed, except 
in accordance wi th the provisions of this section.  
(2) No person shall take with him on a railway the goods referred to in sub -section ( 1) unless he gives 
a notice in writing of their dangerous or offensive nature to the railway servant authorised in this behalf.  
(3) No p erson shall entrust the goods referred to in sub -section ( 1) to a railway servant authorised in 
this behalf for carriage unless he distinctly marks on the outside of the package containing such goods 
their dangerous or offensive nature and gives a notice i n writing of their dangerous or offensive nature to 
such railway servant.  
(4) If any railway servant has reason to believe that goods contained in a package are dangerous or 
offensive and notice as required under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, in respect of 31 
 such goods is not given, he may cause such package to be opened for the purpos e of ascertaining its 
contents.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, any railway servant may refuse to accept any 
dangerous or offen sive goods for carriage or stop, in transit, such goods or cause the same to be removed, 
as the case may be, if he has reason to believe that the provisions of this section for such carriage are  not 
complied with.  
(6) Nothing in this section shall be const rued to derogate from the provisions of the Indi an Explosives 
Act, 1884 (4 of 18 84), or any rule or order made under that Act, and nothing in sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5) 
shall be construed to apply to any goods entrusted for carriage by order or on behalf of the Government or 
to any goods which a soldier, sailor, airman or any other officer of the armed forces of the Union or a 
police officer or a member of the Territori al Army or of the National Cadet Corps may take with him on a 
railway in the course of his employment or duty as such.  
68. Carriage of animals suffering from infe ctious or contagious diseases .—A railway 
administration shall not be bound to carry any animal  suffering from such infectious or contagiou s disease 
as may be prescribed.  
69. Deviation of route .—Where due to any cause beyond the control of a railway administration or 
due to congestion in the yard or any other operational reasons, goods are carried o ver a route other than 
the route by which such goods are booked, the railway administration shall not be deemed to have 
committed a breach of the contract of carriage by reason only of the deviation of the route.  
70. Pr ohibition of undue preference .—A railway administration shall not make or give any undue 
or unreasonable preference or advantage to, or in favour of, any particular person or any particular 
description of tr affic in the carriage of goods.  
71. Power to give direction in regar d to carriag e of certain goods .—(1) The Central Government 
may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, by general or special order, 
direct any railway administration — 
(a) to give special facilities for, or preference to, the carr iage of such goods or class of goods 
consigned by or to the Central Government or the Government of any State or of such  other goods or 
class of goods;  
(b) to carry any goods or class of goods by such rou te or routes and at such rates;  
(c) to restrict or refuse acceptance of such goods or class of goods at or to such station for 
carriage,  
as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Any order made under sub -section ( 1) shall cease to have effect after the expiration of a period of 
one year from the date of such order, but may, by a like order, be renewed from time to time for such 
period not exceeding one year at a time as  may be specified in the order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, every railway administration shall be bound to  
comply with any order given under sub -section ( 1) and any action taken by a railway administration in 
pursuance of any such order shall not be deemed to be  a contravention of section 70.  
72. Maximum carrying c apacity for wagons and trucks .—(1) The gross w eight of every wagon or 
truck bearing on the axles when the wagon or truck is loaded to its maximum carrying capacity shall not 
exceed such limit as may be fixed by the Central Government for the class of axl e under the wagon or 
truck.  
(2) Subject to the l imit fixed under sub -section ( 1), every railway administration shall determine the 
normal carrying capacity for every wagon or truck in its possession and shall exhibit in words and figures 
the normal carrying capacity so determined in a conspicuous manner  on the outside of every such wagon 
or truck.  
(3) Every person owning a wagon or truck which passes over a railway shall determine and exhibit 
the normal carrying capacity for the wagon or truck in the manne r specified in sub -section ( 2). 32 
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), where a railway 
administration considers it necessary or expedient so to do in respect of any wagon or truck carrying any 
specified class of goods or any class of wagons or trucks of  any specified type, it may vary the normal 
carrying capacity for such wagon or truck or such class of wagons or trucks and subject to such conditions 
as it may think fit to impose, determine for the wagon or truck or class of wagons or trucks such carryin g 
capacity as may be specified in the notification and it shall not be necessary to exhibit the words and 
figures representing the carrying capacity so determined on the outside of such wagon or truck or such 
class of wagons or trucks.  
73. Punitive charge for o verloading a wagon .—Where a person loads goods in a wagon beyond its 
permissible carrying capacity as exhibited under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), or notified under  
sub-section ( 4), of section 72, a railway administration may, in addition to the freight and other charges, 
recover from the consignor, the consignee or the endorsee, as the case may be, charges by way of penalty 
at such rates, as may be prescribed, be fore the delivery of the goods:  
Provided that it shall be lawful for the railway administration to unload the goods loaded beyond the 
capacity of the wagon, if detected at the forwarding station or at any place before the destination station 
and to recover the cost of such unloading and any charge for the detention of any wagon on this  accou nt. 
74. Passing of property in the go ods covered by railway receipt .—The property in the 
consignment covered by a railway receipt shall pass to the consignee or the endorsee, as the case may be, 
on the delivery of such railway receipt to him and he s hall have all the rights an d liabilities of the 
consignor.  
75. Section 74 not to affect right of stoppage in transit or claims for freight .—Nothing contained 
in section  74 shall prejudice or affect — 
(a) any  right of the consignor for stoppage of goods in transit as an unpaid vendor (as defined 
under the Sale  of Goods Act, 1930 (3 of 1930) on his written request to the railway administration;  
(b) any right of the railway to claim  freight from the consignor; o r 
(c) any liability of the consignee or the endorsee, referred to in that section, by reason of his being 
such consignee or endorsee.  
76. Surrender of railway receipt .—The railway administration shall deliver the consignment under 
a railway receipt on the surrender of such railway receipt:  
Provided that in case the railway receipt is not forthcoming, the consignment may be delivered to the 
person, entitled in the opinion of the railway administration to receive the goods, in su ch manner as may 
be prescribed . 
77. Power of railway administration to deliver goods or sale pro ceeds thereof in certain cases .—
Where no railway receipt is forthcoming and any consignment or the sale proceeds of any consignment 
are claimed by two or more persons, the railway administration may withhold delivery of such 
consignment or sale proceeds, as the case may be, and shall deliver such consignment or sale proceeds in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
78. Power to measure, weigh, etc .—Notwithstanding  anything contained in the railway receipt, the 
railway administration may, before the delivery of the c onsignment, have the right to — 
(i) re-measure, re -weigh or re-classify any consignment;  
(ii) re-calculate the  freight and other charges; and  
(iii) correct any other error or collect any amount that may h ave been omitted to be charged.  
79. Weighment of consignment on request  of the consignee or endorsee .—A railway 
administration may, on the request made by the consignee or endorsee, allow weighment of  the 
consignment subject to such conditions and on payment of such charges as may be prescribed an d the 
demurrage charges if any:  33 
 Provided that except in cases where a railway servant authorised in this behalf considers it necessary 
so to do, no weighment shall be allowed of goods booked at owner ’s risk rate or goods which are 
perishable and are li kely to lose weight in transit:  
Provided further that no request for weighment of consignment in wagon -load or train -load shall be 
allowed if the weighment is not  feasible due to congestion in the yard or such other circ umstances as may 
be prescribed.  
80. Liability of railway adm inistration for wrong delivery .—Where a railway administration 
delivers the consignment to the person who produces the railway receipt, it  shall not be responsible for 
any wrong delivery on the ground that such person is not entitled thereto or that the endorsement on the 
railway receipt is forge d or otherwise defective  
81. Open delivery of consignments .—Where  the consignment arrives in a damaged condition or 
shows signs of having been tampered with and the consignee or the endorsee demands open delivery, the 
railway administration shall give open delivery in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
82. Part ial delive ry of consignments. —(1) The consignee or endorsee shall, as soon as the 
consignment or part thereof is ready for delivery, take delivery of such consignment or part thereof 
notwithstanding that such consign ment or part thereof is damaged . 
 (2) In the case of partial delivery under sub -section ( 1), the railway administration shall furnish a 
partial delivery certificate, in such form as may be prescribed.  
(3) If the consignee or endorsee refuses to take delivery under sub -section ( 1), the consignment or 
part thereof shall be subject to wharfage charges beyon d the time allowed for removal.  
83. Lien fo r freight or any other sum due .—(1) If the consignor, the consignee or the endorsee fails 
to pay on demand any freight or other charges due from him in respect of any consignment, the railway 
administration may detain such consignment or part thereof or, if such consignment is delivered, it may 
detain any other consignment of such person which is in, or thereaf ter comes into its possession.  
(2) The railway administr ation may, if the consignment deta ined under sub -section ( 1) is— 
(a) perisha ble in nature, sell at once; or  
(b) not perishable in n ature, sell, by public auction,  
such consignment or part thereof, as may be necessary to realise a sum equal t o the freight or other 
charges:  
Provided that where a railway administration for reasons to be recorded in writing is of the opinion 
that it is not expedient to hold the auction, such consignment or part thereof may be sold in su ch manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(3) The r ailway administration shall give a notice of not less than seven days of the public auction 
under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) in one or more local newspapers or where there are no such 
newspapers in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) The railway admin istration may, out of the sale proceeds received under sub -section ( 2), retain a 
sum equal to the freight and other charges including expenses for the sale due to it and the surplus of such 
proceeds and the part of the consignment, if any, shall be rendere d to the person entitled thereto.  
84. Unc laimed consignment .—(1) If any per son fails to take delivery of — 
(a) any consignment; or  
(b) the consignment released  from detention made under sub -section ( 1) of section 83; or  
(c) any  remaining part of the consignment under sub -section ( 2) of section 83, 
such consignment  shall be treated as unclaimed.  
(2) The railway administration may, — 34 
 (a) in the case of an unclaimed consignment which is perishable in nature, sell such consignment 
in the manner provided in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 83 ; or 
(b) in the case of an unclaimed consignment which is not perishable in nature, cause a notice to 
be served upon the consignee if his name and address are known, and upon the consignor if the name 
and address of the consignee are not known, requiring him to remove the goods within a period of 
seven days from the receipt thereof and if such notice  cannot be served or there is a failure to comply 
with the requisition in the notice, sell such consignment in the manner provided in clause ( b) of  
sub-section (2) of section 83.  
(3) The railway administration shall, out of the sale proceeds received under sub -section ( 2), retain a 
sum equal to the freight and other charges including expenses f or the sale due to it and the surplus, if any, 
of such sale proceeds shall be rendered to the person entitled thereto.  
85. Disposal of perishable consignm ents in certain circumstances. —(1) Where by reason of any 
flood, land -slip, breach of any lines of rails, collision between trains, derailment of, or other accident to a 
train or any other cause, traffic on any route is interrupted and there is no likelihood of early resumption 
of such traffic, nor is there any other reasonable route whereby traffic of perishable consignment may be 
diverted to prevent, loss or deterioration of, or damage to, such consignment, the railway administration 
may sell them in the manner provided in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2) of section 83.  
(2) The railway administration shall, out of the sale proceeds received under sub -section ( 1), retain a 
sum equal to the freight and other charges including expenses for the sale due to it and the surplus, if any, 
of such sale proceeds, shall be rendered to the person entitled thereto.  
86. Sales under sections 83 to 85 n ot to affect the right to suit .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Chapter, the right of sale under sections 83 to 85 shall be without prejudice to the right 
of the railway administration to recover by suit, any f reight, charge, amount or other expenses due to it.  
87. Power to make rules in respe ct of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) goods in respect of which no forwarding note shall be executed under proviso to  
sub-section ( 1) of section 64;  
(b) dangerous a nd offensive goods for the purposes of sub- section ( 1) of section 67;  
(c) infectious or contagious diseases for the purposes of section 6 8; 
(d) rates of pe nalty charges under section 73;  
(e) the manner in which the consignment may be delivered without a r ailway receipt under 
section 76;  
(f) the manner of delivery of consignment or the sale proceeds to the person entitled thereto under 
section 77;  
(g) the conditions subject to which and charges payable for allowing weighment  and 
circumstances for not allowing weighment of consignment in wagon -load or train -load under  
section 79;  
(h) the manner of giving open delivery under section 81;  
(i) the form of partial delivery certificate under sub-section ( 2) of section 82;  
(j) the m anner of sale of consignment or part thereof under the proviso to  sub-section ( 2) of 
section 83;  
(k) the manner in which a notice under sub -section ( 3) of section 83 m ay be given;  
(l) generally, for regulating the car riage of goods by the railways.  35 
 (3) Any  rule made under this section may provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend t o one hundred and fifty rupees.  
(4) Every railway administration shall keep at each station a copy of the rules for the time being in 
force under this section, and shall allow any person  to refer to it free of charge.  
CHAPTER X  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS AS TO GOODS BOOKED TO NOTIFIED STATIONS  
88. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “essential commodity ” means an essential commodity as defined in clause ( a) of section 2 of 
the Essential Comm odities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955);  
(b) “notified station ” means a station declared to be a not ified station under section 89;  
(c) “State Government ”, in relation to a not ified station, means the Government of the State in 
which such station is situated, or where such station is situated in a Union territory, the administrator 
of that Union territ ory appointed under article  239 of the Constitution.  
89. Power  to declare noti fied stations .—(1) The Central Government may, if it is satisfied that it is 
necessary that goods entrusted for carriage by train intended solely for the carriage of goods to any 
railway station should be removed without delay from such railway station, declare, by notification, such 
railway station to be a notified station for such period as may be  specified in the notification:  
Provided that before declaring any railway station to be a notified station under this sub -section, the 
Central Government shal l have regard to all or any of t he following factors, namely: — 
(a) the volume of traffic and the storage space availab le at such railway station;  
(b) the nature and quantities of goods generally booked to such ra ilway station;  
(c) the scope for causing sca rcity of such goods by not removing them for long periods from such 
railway station and the hardship which such scarc ity may cause to the community;  
(d) the number of wagons likely to be held up at such railway station if goods are not removed 
therefrom qu ickly and the need for quick movement a nd availability of such wagons;  
(e) such other factors (being relevant from the point of view of the interest of the genera l public) 
as may be prescribed:  
Provided further that the period specified in any notification  issued under this sub -section in respect 
of any railway station shall not exceed six months in the first instance, but such period may, by 
notification, be extended from time to time by a period not exceeding si x months on each occasion.  
(2) If any person  entrusting any goods to a railway administration to be carried to a notified station 
makes an application in such form and manner as may be prescribed and specifies therein the address of 
the person to whom intimation by registered post of the arrival of the goods at the notified station shall be 
given and pays the postage charges required for giving such intimation, the railway administration shall, 
as soon as may be after the arrival of the goods at the notified station, send such intimation accordingly.  
(3) There shall be exhibited at a conspicuous place at each notified station a statement in the 
prescribed form setting out the description of the goods which by reason of the fact that they have not 
been removed from the station within a period of seven days from the termination of transit thereof are 
liable to be sold, in accordance with the provision, of sub -section ( 1) of section 90 by public auction and 
the dates on which they would be so sold:  
Provided that different statements may be so exhibited i n respect of goods proposed  to be sold on 
different dates.  
(4) If the goods specified in any statement to be exhibited under sub -section ( 3) include essential 
commodities, the railway servant preparing the statement shall, as soon as may be after the prepa ration of 
such stateme nt, forward a copy thereof to — 
(a) the representa tive of the Central Government nominated by that Government in this behalf;  36 
 (b) the representative of the State Government nominated by that Government in this behalf; and  
(c) the Distr ict Magistrate within the local limits of whose jurisdiction t he railway station is 
situated.  
90. Disposal of unremo ved goods at notified stations .—(1) If any goods entrusted for carriage to 
any notified station by a train intended solely for the carriage of goods are not removed from such station 
by a person entitled to do so within a period of seven days after the termination of transit thereof at such 
station, the railway administration may, subject to the provisio ns of sub -section ( 2), sell such goods b y 
public auction and apart from exhibiting, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of             
section 89, a statement containing a description of such goods, it shall not be necessary to give any notice 
of such public auction, but the dat e on which such auction may be held under this sub -section may be 
notified in one or more local newspapers, or where there are no such newspapers, in su ch manner as may 
be prescribed:  
Provided that if at any time before the sale of such goods under this su b-section, the person entitled 
thereto pays the freight and other charges and the expenses due in respect thereof to the railway 
administration, he shall be allowed to remove such goods.  
(2) If any goods which may be so ld by public auction under sub -section ( 1) at a notified station, being 
essential commodities, are required by the Central Government or the State Government for its own use 
or if the Central Government or such State Government considers that it is necessary for securing the 
availabilit y of all or any such essential commodities at fair prices so to do, it may, by order in writing, 
direct the railway servant in -charge of such auction to transfer such goods to it or to such agency,  
co-operative society or other person (being an agency, co -operative society or other person subject to the 
control of the Government) engaged in the business of selling such essential commodities as may be 
specified in the direc tion. 
(3) Every direction issued under sub -section ( 2) in respect of any essential co mmodity shall be 
binding on the railway servant to whom it is issued and the railway administration and it shall be a 
sufficient defence against any claim by the person entitled to the goods that such essential commodities 
have been transferred in complian ce with such direction:  
Provided that — 
(a) such direction shall not be binding on such railway servant or the railway administration — 
(i) if it has not been received by the railway servant sufficiently in time to enable him to 
prevent the sale of the essen tial comm odities to which it relates; or  
(ii) if before the time appointed for such sale, the person entitled to such goods pays the 
freight and other charges and the expenses due in respect thereof and claims that he be allowed to 
remove the goods; or  
(iii) if the price payable for such goods (as estimated by the Central Government or, as the 
case may be, the State Government) is not credited to the railway administration in the prescribed 
manner and the railway administration is not indemnified against any additional amount which it 
may become liable to pay towards the price by reason of the price not having been computed in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section (4); 
(b) where directions are issued in respect of the same goods both by the Central  Government and 
the State Government, the directions received earlier shall prevail.  
(4) The price payable for any essential commodity transferred in compliance with a direction issued 
under sub -section ( 2) shall be the price calculated in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 195 5 (10 of 1955):  
Provided that — 
(a) in the case of any es sential commodity being a food -stuff in respect whereof a notification 
issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 3 of  the Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955) is in 
force in the locality in which the notified station is situated, the price payable shall be calculated in 
accordance with the provisions of clauses ( iii) and ( iv) of that sub -section;  37 
 (b) in the case of an essential commodity being any grade or variety of foodgrains, edible oil -
seeds or edible oils in respect were  of no notification issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 3 of the 
Essential Commodities Act, 1955 (10 of 1955), is in force in the locali ty in which the notified station 
is situated, the price payable shall be calculated in accordance with the provisions of su b-section ( 3B) 
of that section;  
(c) in the case of an essential commodity being any kind of sugar in respect whereof no 
notification issued under sub -section ( 3A) of section 3 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1955  
(10 of 1955), is in force in the locality in which the notified station is situated, the price payable shall, 
if such sugar has been booked by them producer to himself, be c alculated in accordance with the 
provisions of su b-section ( 3C) of that section.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the expressions “producer ” and “sugar ” shall have 
the meanings a signed to these expressions in the Explanation  to sub -section ( 3C) of section 3, and 
clause ( e) of section 2 of the Essential Commodities Act, 1 955 (10 of 1955), respectively.  
91. Price to be paid to person  entitled after deducting dues .—(1) Out of the proceeds of any sale 
of goods under sub -section ( 1) of section 90 or the price payable therefor under sub -section ( 4) of that 
section, the railway administration may retain a sum equal to the freight and other charges due in respect 
of such goods and the expenses incurred in respect of the goods and the auction thereof a nd render the 
surplus, if any, to the person entitled thereto.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the railway administration may recover by 
suit any such freight or charge or expenses referred  to therein or balance thereof.  
(3) Any goods sold under sub -section ( 1) of section 90 or transferred in compliance with the 
directions issued under sub -section ( 2) of that section shall vest in the buyer or the transferee free from all 
encumbrances but subject to a priority being given for the sum which may be retained by a ra ilway 
administration under sub -section ( 1), the person in whose favour such encumbrance subsits may have a 
claim in respect of such encumbrance against the surplus, if any, r eferred to in that sub -section.  
92. Power to make  rules in respect of matters in this  Chapter .—(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide f or all or any of the following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) the factors to which the Central Government shall have regard under clause ( e) of the first 
proviso to  sub-section ( 1) of section 89;  
(b) the form and manner in which an application may be made under  sub-section ( 2) of  
section 89;  
(c) the form in which a statement is required to be exhibited under sub -section ( 3) of section 89;  
(d) the manner in which the dates of public auctions may be notified under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 90;  
(e) the  manner of crediting to the railway administration the price of goods referred to in  
sub-clause ( iii) of clause ( a) of the proviso to  sub-section ( 3) of section 90.  
CHAPTER XI  
RESPONSIBILITIES OF RAILWAY ADMINISTRATIONS AS CARRIERS  
93. General responsibil ity of a railway admin istration as carrier of goods .—Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, a railway administration shall be responsible for the loss, destruction, damage or 
deterioration in transit, or non -delivery of any consignment, arising from any cause except the following, 
namely: — 
(a) act of God;  
(b) act of war;  
(c) act of public enemies;  38 
 (d) arrest, restraint or seizure under legal process;  
(e) orders or restrictions imposed by the Central Government or a State Government or by an 
officer or authority subordinate to the Central Government or a Stat e Government a uthorised by it in 
this behalf;  
(f) act or omission or negligence of the consignor or the consignee or the endorsee or the agent or 
servant of the consignor or  the consignee or the endorsee;  
(g) natural deterioration or wastage in bulk or wei ght due to inherent defect , quality or vice of the 
goods;  
(h) latent defects;  
(i) fire, ex plosion or any unforeseen risk:  
Provided that even where such loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery is proved to 
have arisen from any one or more of the aforesaid causes, the railway administration shall not be relieved 
of its responsibility for the loss, destructio n, damage, deterioration or non-delivery unless the railway 
administration further proves that it has used reasonable foresight and car e in the carriage of the goods.  
94. Goods to be loaded or delivered at a siding not belongi ng to a railway administration .— 
(1) Where goods are required to be loaded at a siding not belonging to a railway administration for 
carriage by railway, the railway administration shall not be responsible for any loss, destruction, damage 
or deterioration of such goods from whatever cause arising, until the wagon containing the goods has 
been placed at the specified point of interchange of wagons between the siding an d the railway 
administration and a railway servant authorised in this behalf has been informed in writing accordin gly by 
the owner of the siding.  
(2) Where any consignment is required to be delivered by a railway administration at a siding not 
belonging to  a railway administration, the railway administration shall not be responsible for any loss, 
destruction, damage or deterioration or non -delivery of such consignment from whatever cause arising 
after the wagon containing the consignment has been placed at the specified point of interchange of 
wagons between the railway and the siding and the owner of the siding has been informed in writing 
accordingly by a railway ser vant authorised in this behalf.  
95. Delay or retention in transit .—A railway administration  shall not be responsible for the loss, 
destruction, damage or deterioration of any consignment proved by the owner to have been caused by the 
delay or detention in their carriage if the railway administration proves that the delay or detention arose 
for reasons beyond its control or without negligence or misconduct on its part or on t he part of any of its 
servants.  
96. Traffic passing over railways in India and railways in foreign countries .—Where in the 
course of carriage of any consignment from a place i n India to a place outside India or from a place 
outside India to a place in India or from one place outside India to another place outside India or from one 
place in India to another place in India over any territory outside India, it is carried over the railways of 
any railway administration in India, the railway administration shall not be responsible under any of the 
provisions of this Chapter for the loss, destruction, damage or deterioration of the goods, from whatever 
cause arising, unless it is prov ed by the owner of the goods that such loss, destruction, damage or 
deterioration arose over the railway  of the railway administration.  
97. Goods  carried at owner ’s risk rate .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 93, a 
railway administration shall  not be responsible for any loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non - 
delivery in transit, of any consignment carried at owner ’s risk rate, from whatever cause arising, except 
upon proof, that such loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery was due to negligence or 
misconduct on its part or on t he part of any of its servants:  
Provided that, — 
(a) where the whole of such consignment or the whole of any package forming part of such 
consignment is not delivered to the consignee or th e endorsee and such non -delivery is not proved by 
the railway administration to have been due to fire or to any accident  to the train; or  39 
 (b) where in respect of any such consignment or of any package forming part of such 
consignment which had been so cove red or protected that the covering or protection was not readily 
removable by hand, it is pointed out to the railway administration on or before delivery that any part 
of that consignment or packag e had been pilfered in transit,  
the railway administration shall be bound to disclose to the consignor, the consignee or the endorsee how 
the consignment or the package was dealt with throughout the time it was in its possession or control, but 
if negligence or misconduct on the part of the railway administration or of any of its servants cannot be 
fairly inferred from such disclosure, the burden of proving such negligence or misconduct shall lie on the 
consignor,  the consignee or the endorsee.  
98. Goods in defective co ndition or defectively packed .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, when any goods entrusted to a railwa y administration for 
carriage — 
(a) are in a defective condition as a consequence of which they are liable to damage, 
deteri oration, leakage or wastage; or  
(b) are either defectively packed or not packed in such manner as may be prescribed and as a 
result of such defective or improper packing are liable to damage, deterioration, leakage or wastage,  
and the fact of such condition or defective or  improper packing has been recorded by the consignor or his 
agent in the forwarding note, the railway administration shall not be responsible for any damage, 
deterioration, leakage or wastage or for the condition in which such goods are availab le for deliv ery at 
destination:  
Provided that the railway administration shall be responsible for any such damage, deterioration, 
leakage or wastage or for the condition in which such goods are available for delivery at destination if 
negligence or misconduct on the part of the railway administration or of any of its servants is proved . 
(2) When any goods entrusted to a railway administration for carriage are found on arrival at the 
destination station to have been damaged or to have suffered deterioration, leakage or  wastage, the 
railway administration shall not be responsible for the damage, deterioration, leakage or wastage of the 
goods on pro of by railway administration, — 
(a) that the goods were, at the time of entrustment to the railway administration, in a defective 
condition, or were at that time either defectively packed or not packed in such manner as may be 
prescribed and as a result of which were liable to damage, deterio ration, leakage or wastage; and  
(b) that such defective condition or defective or i mproper packing was not brought to the notice 
of the railway administration or any of its servants at the time of entrustment of the goods to the 
railway administrati on for carriage by railway:  
Provided that the railway administration shall be responsible for any such damage, deterioration, 
leakage or wastage if negligence or misconduct on the part of the railway administration or of  any of its 
servants is proved.  
99. Responsibility of a railway administration  after termination of transit .—(1) A railway 
administration shall be responsible as a bailee under sections 151, 152 and 161 of the Indian Contract Act, 
1872 (9 of 1872), for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of any consignment up 
to a period of seven days after the term inatio n of transit:  
Provided that where the consignment is at owner ’s risk rate, the railway administration shall not be 
responsible as a bailee for such loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery except on proof of 
negligence or misconduct on the part of the railway administra tion or of any of its servants.  
(2) The railway administration shall not be responsible in any case for the loss, destruction, damage, 
deterioration or non -delivery of any consignment arising after the expiry of a period of se ven days af ter 
the termination of transit.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, a railway 
administration shall not be responsible for the loss, destruction , damage, deterioration or non -delivery of 40 
 perishable goods, animals, explosives and such dangerous or other goods as may be prescribed, af ter the 
termination of transit.  
(4) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this section shall affect the liability of any person to pay 
any demurrage or wharfage, as the c ase may be, for so long as the consignment is not unloaded from the 
railway wagons or rem oved from the railway premises.  
100. Respons ibility as carrier of luggage .—A railway administration shall not be responsible for the 
loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of any luggage unless a railway servant has 
booked the luggage and given a receipt therefor and in the case of luggage which is carried by the 
passenger in his charge, unless it is also proved that the loss, destruction, damag e or deterioration was due 
to the negligence or misconduct on its part or on t he part of any of its servants.  
101. Responsib ility as a carrier of animals .—A railway administration shall not be responsible for 
any loss or destruction of, or injuries to, any  animal carried by railway arising from freight or restiveness 
of the animal or from overload ing of wagons by the consignor.  
102. Exoneration f rom liability in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
foregoing provisions of this Chapter, a  railway administration shall not be responsible for the loss, 
destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of  any consignment, — 
(a) when such loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery is due to the fact that a 
materially false description of the consignment is given in the statement delivered under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 66; or  
(b) where a fraud has been practised  by the consignor or the consignee or the endorsee or by an 
agent of the consignor , consignee or the endorsee; or  
(c) where it is proved by the railway administration to have been caus ed by, or to have arisen 
from — 
(i) improper loading or unloading by the consignor or the consignee or the endorsee or by an 
agent of the consig nor, consignee or the endorsee;  
(ii) riot, civil commotion, strike, lock -out, stoppage or restraint of  labour from whatever 
cause arising whether partial or ge neral; or  
(d) for any indirect or consequential loss or damage or  for loss of particular market.  
103. Extent of monetary liability in respect of any consignment .—(1) Where any consignment is 
entrusted to a railway administration for carriage by railway and the value of such consignment has not 
been declared as required under sub -section ( 2) by the consignor, the amount of liability of the railway 
administration for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of the consignment shall in 
no case exceed suc h amount calculated with reference to the weight of the consignment as may be 
prescribed, and where such consignment consists of an animal, the liability shall not exceed such amount 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where the consignor declares the value of 
any consignment at the time of its entrustment to a railway administration for carriage by railway, and 
pays such percentage charge as may be prescribed on so much of the value of such consignment as is in 
excess of the liability of the railway administration as calculated or specified, as the case may be, under 
sub-section ( 1), the liability of the railway administration for the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration 
or non -delivery of such consignment sh all no t exceed the value so declared.  
(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification, direct that such goods as may be 
specified in the notification shall not be accepted for carriage by railway unless the value of such goods is 
declare d and percentage charge is paid as required under sub -section ( 2). 
104. Extent of liability in respect of go ods carried in open wagon .—Where any goods, which, 
under ordinary circumstances, would be carried in covered wagon and would be liable to damage, if 
carried otherwise, are with the consent of the consignor, recorded in the forwarding note, carried in open 
wagon, the responsibility o f railway administration for destruction, damage or deterioration which may 41 
 arise only by reason of the goods being so carried, shall be one -half of the amount of liability for such 
destruction, damage or deterioration determine d under this Chapter.  
105. R ight of railway administration to check contents of c ertain consignment or luggage .—
Where the value has been declared under section 103 in respect of any consignment a railway 
administration may make it a condition of carrying such consignment that a railw ay servant authorised by 
it in this behalf has been satisfied by examination or otherwise that the consignment tendered for carriage 
contain the articles declared.  
106. Notice of claim for compensa tion and refund of overcharge .—(1) A person shall not be 
entitled to claim compensation against a railway administration for the loss, destruction, damage, 
deterioration or non -delivery of goods carried by railway, unless a notice thereof is se rved by him or on 
his behalf, — 
(a) to the railway administration to which the goods  are entrusted for carriage; or  
(b) to the railway administration on whose railway the destination station lies, or the loss, 
destruction, damage or deterioration occurs,  
within a period of six months from the  date of entrustment of the goods.  
(2) Any information demanded or enquiry made in writing from, or any complaint made in writing to, 
any of the railway administrations mentioned in sub -section ( 1) by or on behalf of the person within the 
said period of six months regarding the non -delivery or delayed delivery of the goods with particulars 
sufficient to identify the goods shall, for the purpose of this section, be deemed to be a no tice of claim for 
compensation.  
(3) A person shall not be entitled to a ref und of an overcharge in respect of goods carried by railway 
unless a notice therefor has been served by him or on his behalf to the railway administration to which the 
overcharge has been paid within six months from the date of such payment or the date of delivery of such 
goods at the destinati on station, whichever is later.  
107. Applications for compens ation for loss, etc., of goods .—An application for compensation for 
loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of goods shall be filed against  the railway 
administration on whom a notice und er section 106 has been served.  
108. Person e ntitled to claim compensation .—(1) If a railway administration pays compensation for 
the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of goods entrusted to it for carriage, to the 
consignee or the endorsee producing the railway receipt, the railway administration shall be deemed to 
have discharged its liability and no application before the Claims Tribunal or any other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the railway administration on the ground that the consignee or the endorsee was not 
legally entitle d to receive such compensation.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right of any person having any interest in the goods to 
enforce the s ame against the consignee or the endorsee receivi ng compensation under that sub -section.  
109. Railway administration against which application for compensation for personal injury is 
to be filed .—An application before the Claims Tribunal for compensation f or the loss of life or personal 
injury to a passenge r, may be instituted against, — 
(a) the railway administration from which the passenger obtained his p ass or purchased his ticket, 
or 
(b) the railway administration on whose railway the destination station lies or the lo ss or personal 
injury occurred.  
110. Burden of proof .—In an application before the Claims Tribunal for compensation for loss, 
destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of any  goods, the burden of proving — 
(a) the monet ary loss actually sustained; or  
(b) where the value has been declared under sub -section ( 2) of section 103 in respect of any 
consignment that the value  so declared is its true value,  42 
 shall lie on the person  claiming compensation, but subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, it 
shall not be necessary for him to prove how the loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery 
was caused.  
111. Extent of liability of railway administration in respect of accidents at sea .—(1) When a 
railway administration contracts to carry passengers or goods partly by railway and partly by sea, a 
condition exempting the railway administration from responsibility for any loss of life, personal injury or 
loss of or damage to goods which may happen during the carriage by sea from act of God, public 
enemies, fire, accidents from machinery, boilers and steam and all and every other dangers and accidents 
of the seas, rivers and navigation of whatever nature and kin d shall, without being expressed, be deemed 
to be part of the contract, and, subject to that condition, the railway administration shall, irrespective of 
the nationality or ownership of the ship used for the carriage by sea, be responsible for any loss of life, 
personal injury or loss of or damage to goods which may happen during the carriage by sea, to the extent 
to which it would be responsible under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), if the ships were 
registered under that Act and the railway administration were owner of the ship  and not to any greater 
extent.  
(2) The burden of proving that any such loss, injury or damage as is mentioned in sub -section ( 1) 
happened during the carriage by sea shall lie  on the railway administration.  
112. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Cha pter.—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) the manner of packing of goods entrusted to a railway administration under clause ( b) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 98;  
(b) the goods for the purposes of sub -section ( 3) of section 99; and  
(c) the maximum amount payable by the railway administration for the loss, destruction, damage, 
deterioration or non -delivery of any consignment under sub-section ( 1) of section 103.  
CHAPTER XII  
ACCIDENTS  
113. Notice of railway accident .—(1) Where, in the  course of working a railway, — 
(a) any accident attended with loss of any human life, or with grievous hurt, as defined in the 
Indian  Penal  Code (45 of 1860), or with such serious injury to pr operty as may be prescribed; or  
(b) any  collision between trains of which one is a train carrying passengers; or  
(c) the derailment of any train carrying passengers, o r of any part of such train; or  
(d) any accident of a description usually attended with loss of human life or with such grievous  
hurt as aforesaid or with  serious injury to property; or  
(e) any accident of any other description which the Central Government may notify in this behalf 
in the Official Gazette,  
occurs, the station master of the station nearest to the place at which the  accident occurs or where there is 
no station master, the railway servant in charge of the section of the railway on which the accident occurs, 
shall, without delay, give notice of the accident to the District Magistrate and Superintendent of Police, 
withi n whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, the officer in charge of the police station within the local 
limits of which the accident occurs and to such other Magistrate or police officer as may be appointed in 
this be half by the Central Government.  
(2) The railway administration within whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, as also the railway 
administration to whom the train involved in the accident belongs, shall without delay, give notice of the 
accident to the State Government and the Commissioner havin g jurisdiction over the p lace of the 
accident.  43 
 114. Inquiry by Commissioner .—(1) On the receipt of a notice under section 113 of the occurrence 
of an accident to a train carrying passengers resulting in loss of human life or grievous hurt causing total 
or partial disablement of permanent nature to a passenger or serious damage to railway property, the 
Commissioner shall, as soon as may be, notify the railway administration in whose jurisdiction the 
accident occurred of his intention to hold an inquiry into the causes that led to the accident and shall at the 
same time fix and communicate the d ate, time and place of inquiry:  
Provided that it shall be open to the Commissioner to hold an inquiry into any other accident which, 
in his opinion, requires the holding of such an inquiry.  
(2) If for any reason, the Commissioner is not able to hold an inquiry as soon as may be after the 
occurrence of the accident, he shall notify the railway administration accordingly.  
115. Inq uiry by railway administration .—Where  no inquiry is held by the Commissioner under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 114 or where the Commissioner has informed the railway administration under 
sub-section ( 2) of that section that he is not able to hold an inquiry, the railway administration within 
whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, shall cause an inquiry to be made in accordance  with the 
prescribed procedure.  
116. Powers of Commissioner in relation to inquiries .—(1) For the purpose of conducting an 
inquiry under this Chapter into the causes of a ny accident on a railway, the Commissioner shall, in 
addition to the powers specified in section 7, have the powers as are vested in a civil court while trying a 
suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of pers ons and examining them on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) rece iving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies th ereof from any court  or office;  
(e) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) The Commissioner while conducting an inquiry under this Chapter shall be deemed to be a Civil 
Court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974).   
117. State ment made before Commissioner .—No statement made by a person in the course of 
giving evidence in an inquiry before the Commissioner shall subject him to, or be used against him in, 
any civil or criminal proceeding, except a prosecution for giving false evidence by such statement:  
Provided that the statement is — 
(a) made in reply to a question which is required by  the Commissioner to answer; or  
(b) relevant to the  subject -matter of the inquiry.  
118. Procedure, etc .—Any railway administration or the Commissioner conducting an inquiry under 
this Chapter may send notice of the inquiry to such persons, follow such procedure, and prepare the report 
in such manner as may be prescribed.  
119. No inquiry, investigation, etc. , to be made if the Commiss ion of Inquiry is appointed .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, where a Commission of 
Inquiry is appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 (3 of 1952), to inquire into an ac cident, 
any inquiry, investigation or other proceeding pending in relation to that accident shall not be proceeded 
with, and all records or other documents relating to such inquiry shall be forwarded to such authority as 
may be specified by the Central Gov ernment in this behalf.  
120. Inquiry into accide nt not covered by section 113 .—Where any accident of the nature not 
specified in section 113 occurs in the course of working a railway, the railway administration within 
whose jurisdiction the accident occur s, may cause such inquiry to be made into the causes of the accident, 
as may be prescribed.  44 
 121. Returns .—Every railway administration shall send to the Central Government, a return of 
accidents occurring on its railway, whether attended with injury to any  person or not, in such form and 
manner and at such intervals as may be prescribed.  
122. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapte r.—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, na mely: — 
(a) the injury to property which shall be considered serious under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 113;  
(b) the forms of notice of accidents to be given under section 113 and the particulars of the 
accid ent such notices shall contain;  
(c) the manner of sending the notices of accidents, including the class of accidents to be sent 
immediately after th e accident;  
(d) the duties of the Commissioner, railway administration, railway servants, police officers and 
Magistrates on the occurrence of a n accident;  
(e) the persons to whom notices in respect of any inquiry under this Chapter are to be sent, the 
procedure to be followed in such inquiry and the manner in which a report of such inquiry shall be 
prepared;  
(f) the nature of inquiry to be made by a railway administration into the causes of  an accident 
under section 120;  
(g) the form and manner of sending a return of accidents by a railway ad ministration under 
section 121.  
 
 
CHAPTER XIII  
LIABILITY OF RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION FOR DEATH AND INJURY TO PASSENGERS DUE TO ACCIDENTS  
123. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “accident ” means an accident of the nat ure described in section 124;  
(b) “dependant ” means any of the following relatives of a deceased passenger, namely: — 
(i) the wife, husband, son and daughter, and in case the deceased passenger is unmar ried or is 
a mino r, his parent;  
(ii) the parent, minor brother or unmarried sister, widowed sister, widowed daughter -in-law 
and a minor child of a pre -deceased son, if dependant wholly or pa rtly on the deceased passenger;  
(iii) a minor child of a pre -deceased daughter, if wholly dependant on the deceased passenger;  
(iv) the paternal grand  parent wholly depen dant on the deceased passenger;  
1[(c) “untow ard incident ” means — 
(1) (i) the commission of a t errorist act within the meaning  of sub -section ( 1) of section ( 3) of 
the Terrorist and Dis ruptive Acti vities (Prevention) Act, 1987  (28 of 1987) ; or 
(ii) the making of a violent attack or the commi ssion of robbery or dacoity; or  
(iii) the indulging in rioting, shoot -out or arso n, 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1994, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  45 
 by any person in or on any train carrying passengers, or in a waiting hall, cloak room or reservation or 
booking office or on any platform or in any other place within the precincts of a railway station; or  
(2) the accidental falling of any passenger fro m a train carrying passengers.]  
124. Extent of liability .—When in the course of working a railway, an accident occurs, being either a 
collision between trains of which one is a train carrying passengers or the derailment of or other accident 
to a train or a ny part of a train carrying passengers, then whether or not there has been any wrongful act, 
neglect or default on the part of the railway administration such as would entitle a passenger who has 
been injured or has suffered a loss to maintain an action an d recover damages in respect thereof, the 
railway administration shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, be liable to pay 
compensation to such extent as may be prescribed and to that extent only for loss occasioned by the death 
of a pas senger dying as a result of such accident, and for personal injury and loss, destruction, damage or 
deterioration of goods owned by the passenger and accompanying him in his compartment or on the train, 
sustaine d as a result of such accident.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section “passenger ” includes a railway servant on duty.  
 1[124A.  Compensation on account of untoward incidents .—When in the course of working a 
railway an untoward incident o ccurs, then whether or not there has been any wrongful act, negl ect or 
default on the part of the railway administration such as would entitle a passenger who ha s been injured or 
the dependant of a passenger who has been killed to maintain an action and recover dama ges in respect 
thereof, the railway administ ration shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any othe r law, be liable to 
pay compens ation to such extent as may be prescribed and to  that extent only for loss occas ioned by the 
death of, or injury to, a passenger as a re sult of such untoward incident : 
Provided that no compensation shall be pay able under this section by the railway administration if the 
passenger  dies or suffers injury due to — 
(a) suici de or attempted suicide by him;  
(b) self -inflicted  injury;  
(c) his own criminal act;  
(d) any act c ommitted by him in a sta te of intoxication or insanity;  
(e) any natural cause or di sease or medical or surgical treatment unless such treatment becomes 
necessary due to injury caused  by the said untoward incident.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, “passenger ” includes — 
(i) a railway servant on duty; and  
(ii) a person who has purchased a valid ticket for travelling, by a train carrying passengers, on any 
date or a valid platform ticket and becomes a victim of an unt oward incident.]  
125. Application for compensation .—(1) An application for c ompensation under section 124 2[or 
section 124A] may b e made to the Claims Tribunal — 
(a) by the person who has sustained the injury or suffered any loss, or  
(b) by any agent duly authorised by  such person in this behalf, or  
(c) where such person is a minor, by his guardian, or  
(d) where death has resulted fro m the accident 2[or the untowa rd incident] , by any dependant of 
the deceased or where such a dependa nt is a minor, by his gua rdian.  
(2) Every application by a dependant for compensation under this section shall be for the benefit of  
every other dependant.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 28 of 1994, s. 3 ( w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid.  (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  46 
 126. Interim re lief by railway administration .—(1) Where a person who has made an application 
for compensation under section 125 desires to be paid interim relief, he may apply to the railway 
administration for payment of interim relief along with a copy of the application made under that section.  
(2) Where, on the receipt of  an application made under sub -section ( 1) and after m aking such inquiry 
as it may deem fit, the railway administration is satisfied that circumstances exist which require relief to 
be afforded to the applicant immediately, it may, pending determination by the Claims Tribunal of the 
actual amount of compensat ion payable under section 124 1[or section 124 A] pay to any person who has 
sustained the injury or suffered any loss, or where death has resulted from the accident, to any dependant 
of the deceased, such sum as it considers reasonable for affording such re lief, so however, that the sum 
paid shall not exceed the amount of compensation payable at such rates as may be prescribed.  
(3) The railway administration shall, as soon as may be, after making an order regarding payment of 
interim relief under sub -sectio n (2), send a copy thereof to the Claims Tribunal.  
(4) Any sum paid by the railway administration under sub -section ( 2) shall be taken into account by 
the Claims Tribunal while determining the amount of compensation payable.  
127. Determination of compensat ion in respect of any injury or  loss of goods .—(1) Subject to 
such rules as may be made, the rates of compensation payable in respect of any injury shall be det ermined 
by the Claims Tribunal.  
(2) The compensation payable in respect of any loss of goods shall be such as the Claims Tribunal 
may, having regard to the circumstances of the ca se, determine to be reasonable.  
128. Saving as to certain rights .—(1) The right of any person to claim compensation under  
section 124 2[or section 124A] shall not affect  the right of any such person to recover compensation 
payable under the Workmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), or any other law for the time being in 
force; but no person shall be entitled to claim compensation more than once in respect of the same 
accident.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right of any person to claim compensation payable 
under any contract or scheme providing for payment of compensation for death or personal injury or for 
damage to property or any sum payable under  any policy of insurance.  
129. Power to make rules in respe ct of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter . 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the compensation payable for death;  
(b) the nature of the injuries for which compensation shall be paid and t he amount of such 
compensation.  
CHAPTER XIV  
REGULATION OF HOURS OF WORK AND PERIOD OF REST  
130. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) the employment of a railway servant is said to be “continuous ” except when it is excluded or 
has been declared to be essenti ally intermittent or intensive;  
(b) the employment of a railway servant is said to be “essentially intermittent ” when it has been 
declar ed to be so by the pres cribed authority on the ground that the daily hours of duty of the railway 
servant normally include pe riods of inaction aggregating to fifty per cent. or more (including at least 
one such period of not less than one hour or two such periods of not less than half an hour each) in a 
tour of twelve hours duty (on the average over seventy -two consecutive hours ), during which the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 1994, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -8-1994).  47 
 railway servant may be on duty, but is not called upon to display either physical a ctivity or sustained 
attention;  
(c) the employment of a railway servant is said to be “excluded ”, if he belongs to any one of the 
following categories,  namely: — 
(i) railway servants employed in a manag erial or confidential capacity;  
(ii) armed guards or other personnel subject to discipline similar to that of any of the armed 
police forces;  
(iii) staff of the railway schools imparting technical training  or academic education;  
(iv) such staff as may be specified as supervisory under the rules;  
(v) such other categories  of staff as may be prescribed;  
(d) the employment of a railway servant is said to be “intensive ” when it has been declared to be 
so by the prescribed authority on the ground that it is of a strenuous nature involving continued 
concentration or hard manual labour with lit tle or no period of relaxation.  
131. Chapter not to apply to certain  railway servants .—Nothing in this Chapter shall apply to any 
railway servant to whom the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948 ) or the Mines Act , 1952 (35 of 1952) or the 
Railway Protection Force Act, 1957 (23 of 1957) or the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), 
applies.  
132. Limitation of hours of work .—(1) A railway servant whose employment is essentially 
intermittent shall not be employed for more than seventy -five hours in any week.  
(2) A railway servant whose employment is continuous shall not be emplo yed for more than fifty -four 
hours  a week on an average in a two -weekly period of fourteen days.  
(3) A railway servant whose employment is intensive shall not be employed for more than forty -five 
hours  a week on an average in a two -weekly period of fourteen days.  
(4) Subject to such rules as may be prescribed, temporary exemptions of railway servants from the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) may be made by the prescribed 
authority if it is of opinion that such tempo rary exemptions are necessary to avoid serious interference 
with the ordinary working of the railway or in cases of accident, actual or threatened, or when urgent 
work is required to be done to the railway or to rolling stock or in any emergency which could not have 
been foreseen or prevented, or in other cases o f exceptional pressure of work:  
Provided that where such exemption results in the increase of hours of employment of a railway 
servant referred to in any of the sub -sections, he shall be paid overti me at not less than two times his 
ordinary rate of pa y for the excess hours of work.  
133. Grant of periodical rest .—(1) Subject to the provisions of th is section, a railway servant — 
(a) whose employment is intensive or continuous shall, for every week comm encing on a 
Sunday, be granted a rest of not less  than thirty consecutive hours;  
(b) whose employment is essentially intermittent shall, for every week commencing on a 
Sunday, be granted a rest of not less than twenty -four consecutiv e hours including a ful l night.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) any locomotive or traffic running staff shall be granted, each month, a rest of at least four 
periods of not less than thirty consecutive hours each or at least five periods of not less than  
twenty -two consecutive hour s each, including a full night;  
(ii) the Central Government may, by rules, specify the railway servants to whom periods of rest 
on scales less than those laid down under sub -section ( 1) may be g ranted and the periods thereof.  48 
 (3) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, if the p rescribed authority is of the opinion 
that such circumstances as are referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 132 are present, it may exempt any 
railway servant from the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2): 
Provided that a railway servant so exempted shall, in such circumstances as may be prescribed, be 
granted compensatory periods of rest for the periods he has foregone.  
134. Railw ay servant to remain on duty .—Nothing in this Chapter or the rules made thereu nder 
shall, where due provision has been made for the relief of a railway servant, authorise him to leave his 
duty until he has been relieved.  
135. Supervisors of railway labour .—(1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the 
Central Governme nt may appoint  supervisors of railway labour.  
(2) The duties of superviso rs of railway s labour shall be — 
(i) to inspect railways in order to determine whether the provisions of this Chapter or of the rules 
made th ereunder are duly observed; and  
(ii) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(3) A supervisor of railway labour shall be deemed to be a Commissioner for th e purposes of sections 
7 and 9.  
136. Power to make rules in respe ct of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification, make rules to carry ou t the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the authorities who may  declare the employment of any railway servant essenti ally 
intermittent or intensive;  
(b) the appeals against any such declaration and the manner in which, and the conditions subject 
to which any such  appeal may be filed and heard;  
(c) the  categories of staff that may be specified under sub -clauses ( iv) and ( v) of clause ( c) of 
section 130;  
(d) the authorities by whom exemptions under sub -section ( 4) of section 132 or sub -section (3) of 
section 133 may be made;  
(e) the delegation of power b y the authori ties referred to in clause ( d); 
(f) the railway servant to whom clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 2) of section 133 apply and the periods  
of rest to be granted to them;  
(g) the appointment of supervisors of railway labour and their functions.  
CHAPT ER XV  
PENALTIES AND OFFENCES  
137. Fraudulently travelling or attempting to travel without proper pass or ticket .—(1) If any 
person, with intent to defraud a r ailway administration, — 
(a) enters  or remains in any carriage on a railway or travels in a train in contravention of            
section 55, or  
(b) uses or attempts to use a single pass or a single ticket which has already been used on a 
previous journey, or in the case of a return ticket, a half thereof which has already been so used,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which 
may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate rea sons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such punishment shall not be less than  a fine of five hundred rupees.  49 
 (2) The person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall also be liable to pay the excess charge mentioned in 
sub-section ( 3) in addition to the ordinary single fare for the distance which he has travelled, or where 
there is any doubt as to the station from which he started, the ordinary single fare from the station from 
which the train originally started, or if the tickets of passengers travelling in the train have been examined 
since the original starting of the train, the ordinary single fare from the place where the tickets were so 
examined or, in case of their having been examined more than once, were  last examined.  
(3) The  excess charge referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be a sum equal to the ordinary single fare 
referred to in that sub -section or 1[two hundred and fifty rupees] , whichever is more.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 65 of the Indian Penal C ode (45 of 1 860), the court 
convicting an offender may direct that the person in default of payment of any fine inflicted by the court 
shall suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months.  
138. Levy of excess charge and fare for travelling w ithout proper pass or ticket  or beyond 
authorised distance .—(1) If any passenger, — 
(a) being in or having alighted from a train, fails or refuses to present for examination or to 
deliver up his pass or ticket immediately on a demand being mad e therefor under section 54, or  
(b) travels in a train in contravention of the provisions of section 55,  
he shall be liable to pay, on the demand of any railway servant authorised in this behalf, the excess charge 
mentioned in sub -section ( 3) in addition to the ordi nary single fare for the distance which he has travelled 
or, where there is any doubt as to the station from which he started, the ordinary single fare from the 
station from which the train originally started, or, if the tickets of passengers travelling in  the train have 
been examined since the original starting of the train, the ordinary single fare from the place where the 
tickets were so examined or in the case of their having been examined more  than once, were last 
examined.  
(2) If any passenger, — 
(a) travels or attempts to travel in or on a carriage, or by a train, of a higher class than that for 
which he has obtained a pass or purchased a ticket; or  
(b) travels in or on a carriage beyond the place au thorised by his pass or ticket,  
he shall be liable to pay, on the demand of any railway servant authorised in this behalf, any difference 
between the fare paid by him and the fare payable in respect of the journey he has made and the excess 
charge referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(3) The ex cess charge shall be a sum equal to the amount payable under sub -section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 2), as the case may be, or 1[two hundred and fifty rupees ], whichever is more:  
Provided that if the passenger has with him a certificate granted under sub -section  (2) of section 55, 
no excess charge shall be payable.  
(4) If any passenger liable to pay the excess charge and the fare mentioned in sub -section ( 1), or the 
excess charge and any difference of fare mentioned in sub -section ( 2), fails or refuses to pay the  same on 
a demand being made therefor u nder one or other of these sub -sections, as the case may be, any railway 
servant authorised by the railway administration in this behalf may apply to any Metropolitan Magistrate 
or a Judicial Magistrate of the first o r second class, as the case may be, for the recovery of the sum 
payable as if it were a fine, and the Magistrate if satisfied that the sum is payable shall order it to be so 
recovered, and may order that the person liable for the payment shall in default o f payment suffer 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to one month but not less than ten days.  
 (5) Any sum recovered under sub -section ( 4) shall, as and when it is recovered, be paid to the railway 
administration.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 56 of 2003, s. 2, for “fifty rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  50 
 139. Power to r emove persons .—Any person failing or refusing to pay the fare and the excess 
charge referred to in section 138 may be removed by any railway servant authorised in this behalf who 
may call to his aid any other  person to effect such removal:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude a person removed from a carriage of 
a higher class from continuing his journey in a carriage of a class for which he holds a pass or ticket:  
Provided further that a woman or a child if unaccompanied by a male passenger, shall not be so 
removed except either at the station from where she or he commences her or his journey or at a junction 
or terminal station or station at the headquarters of a civil district and such removal sha ll be made only 
during the da y. 
140. Security for go od behaviour in certain cases .—(1) When a court convicting a person of an 
offence under section 137 or section 138 finds that he has been habitually committing or attempting to 
commit that offence and the court is of the opinion that  it is necessary or desirable to require that person 
to execute a bond for good behaviour, such court may, at the time of passing the sentence on the person, 
order him to execute a bond with or without sureties, for such amount and for such period not exce eding 
three years as it deems fit.  
(2) An order under sub -section ( 1) may also be made by an appellate court or by the High Court when 
exercising its powers of revision.  
141. Needlessly interfering with mean s of communication in a train .—If any passenger o r any 
other person, without reasonable and sufficient cause, makes use of, or interferes with, any means 
provided by a railway administration in a train for communication between passengers and the railway 
servant in charge of the train, he shall be punish able with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, where a passenger, without reasonable and sufficient cause, makes use of the alarm 
chain provided by a railway administration, such puni shment shall not be less than — 
(a) a fine of five hundred rupees, in the case of conviction for the first offence; and  
(b) imprisonment for three months in case of conviction for the second or subsequent offence.  
142. P enalty for transfer of tickets .—(1) If any person not being a railway servant or an ag ent 
authorised in this behalf — 
(a) sells or attempts to sell any ticke t or any half of a return ticket; or  
(b) parts or attempts to part with the possession of a ticket against which reservation of a seat or 
berth has been made or any half of a return ticket or a season ticket,  
in order to enable any other person to travel therewith, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with 
both, and shall also forfeit the ticket which he sell s or attempts to sell or parts or attempts to part.  
(2) If any person purchases any ticket referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) or obtains the 
possession of any ticket referred to in clause ( b) of that sub -section from any person other than a rail way 
servant or an agent authorised in this behalf, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months and with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and if the purchaser 
or holder of any ticket aforesaid travels or attempts to travel therewith, he shall forfeit the ticket which he 
so purchased or obtained and shall be deemed to be travelling without a proper ticket and shall be liable to 
be dealt with under section 138:  
Provided that in the absence of special and ade quate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, the punishment under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not be less than a fine 
of two hundred and fifty rupees.  
143. Penalty for unauthorised carrying on of business of proc uring an d supplying of railway 
tickets .—(1) If any person, not being a railway servant or an age nt authorised in this behalf, — 51 
 (a) carries on the business of procuring and supplying tickets for travel on a railway or for reserved 
accommoda tion for journey in a train; or  
(b) purchases or sells or attempts to purchase or sell tickets with a view to carrying on any such 
business either by himself or by any other person,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or with  fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both, and shall also forfeit the tickets which he so procures, 
supplies, purchases, sells o r attempts to purchase or sell:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary t o be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such punishment shall not be less than imprisonment for a term of one month or a 
fine of five thousand rupees.  
(2) Whoever abets any offence punishable under this section shall, whether or not such offence is 
committed, be punishable with the same punishment as is provided for the offence.  
144. Prohibition  on hawking, etc., and begging .—(1) If any person canvasses for any custom or 
hawks or exposes for sale any article whatsoever in any railway carriage or upon a ny part of a railway, 
except under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence granted by the railway 
administration in this behalf, he shall be punishable with imprisonm ent for a term which may extend to 
one year, or with fine which may e xtend to two  thousand rupees, or with both:  
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such punishment shall not be less than  a fine of one thousand rupees.  
(2) If any person begs in any railway carriage or upon a railway station, he shall be liable for 
punishment as provided under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) may be removed from the railway 
carriage or any part of the railway or railway station, as the case may be, by any railway servant 
authorised in this behalf or by any other person whom such railway servant may call to his aid.  
145. Drunkenness or nuisan ce.—If any person in any railway carriage or upon any part of a 
railway — 
(a) is in a state of intoxication; or  
(b) commits any nuisance or act of indecency or uses ab usive or obscene language; or  
(c) wilfully or without excuse interferes with any amenity p rovided by the railway administration 
so as to affect the comfortable travel of any passenger,  
he may be removed from the railway by any railway servant and shall, in addition to the forfeiture of his 
pass or ticket, be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six months and with fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such puni shment shall not be less than — 
(a) a fine of  one hundred rupees in the case of conviction for the first offence; and  
(b) imprisonment of one month and a fine of two hundred and fifty rupees, in the case of 
conviction fo r second or subsequent offence.  
146. Obstructing railway servant in his duties .—If any person wilfully obstructs or prevents any 
railway servant in the discharge of his duties, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
147. Tr espass and re fusal to desist from trespass .—(1) If any person enters upon or into any part 
of a railway without lawful authority, or having lawfully entered upon or into such part misuses such 
property or refuses to leave, he shall be punishable with impri sonment for a term which may extend to six 
months, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both:  52 
 Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such punishment shall not be less than  a fine of five hundred rupees.  
(2) Any person referred to in sub -section ( 1) may be removed from the railway by any railway servant 
or by any other person whom such railw ay servant may call to his aid.  
148. Penalty for mak ing a false statement in an  application for compensation .—If in any 
application for compensation under section 125, any person makes a statement which is false or which he 
knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable  with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to three yea rs, or with fine, or with both.  
149. Making a  false claim for compensation .—If any person requiring compensation from a railway 
administration for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non -delivery of any consignment makes a 
claim which is false or which he knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three yea rs, or with fine, or with both.  
150. Malicious ly wrecking o r attempting to wreck a train .—(1) Subject to the provisions of  
sub-section ( 2), if any person unlawfully, — 
(a) puts or throws upon or across any railway, any wood, sto ne or other matter or thing; or  
(b) takes  up, removes, loosens or displaces any rail, sleeper or other matter or thin gs belonging to 
any railway; or  
(c) turns, moves, unlocks or diverts any points or other machinery belonging to any railway; or  
(d) makes or shows, or hides or removes, any signal or light upon or near to any railway; or  
(e) does or causes to be done or attempts to do any other act or thing in relation to any railway,  
with intent or with knowledge that he is likely to endanger the safety of any person travelling on or being 
upon the  railway, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to ten years:  
Provided that in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, where a person is punishable with rigorous imprisonment, such impris onment shall 
not be less than — 
(a) three years, in the case of a convic tion for the first offence; and  
(b) seven years, in the case of conviction for th e second or subsequent offence.  
(2) If any person unlawfully does any act or thing referred to in any of the clauses of  
sub-section ( 1)— 
(a) with intent to cause the death of any person and the doing of such act or thing cau ses the death 
of any person; or  
(b) with knowledge that such act or thing is so imminently dangerous that it must in all 
probability cause the death of any person or such bodily injury to any person as is likely to cause the 
death of such person,  
he shall be punishable with death or imprisonment for life.  
151. Damage to  or destruction of certain railway properties .—(1) If any person, with intent to 
cause, or knowing that he is likely to cause damage or destruction to any property of a railway referred to 
in sub -section ( 2), causes by fire, explosive substance or otherwise, damage to such property or 
destruction of such property, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five yea rs, or with fine, or with both.  
(2) The properties of a railway referred to in sub -section ( 1) are railway t rack, bridges, station 
buildings and installations, carriages or wagons, locomotives, signalling, telecommunications, electric 
traction and block equipments and such other properties as the Central Government being of the opinion 
that damage thereto or des truction thereof is likely to endanger the operation of a railway,  may, by 
notification, specify.  53 
 152. Maliciously hurting or attempting to hurt persons travelling by railway .—If any person 
unlawfully throws or causes to fall or strike at against, into or upon any rolling stock forming part of a 
train, any wood, stone or other matter or thing with intent, or with knowledge that he is likely to endanger 
the safety of any person being in or upon such rolling stock or in or upon any other rolling stock forming  
part of the same train, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment for a term  
which may extend to ten years.  
153. Endangering safety of persons travelling by railway by wilful act or omi ssion .—If any 
person by any unlawful act or by any wilful omission or neglect, endangers or causes to be endangered 
the safety of any person travelling on or being upon any railway, or obstructs or causes to be obstructed or 
attempts to obstruct any rolling stock  upon any railway, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years.  
154. Endangering safety of persons travelling by railway by rash  or negligent act or omission .—
If any person in a rash and negligent manner does any act,  or omits to do what he is legally bound to do, 
and the act or omission is likely to endanger the safety of any person travelling or being upon any railway, 
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one ye ar, or with fine, or with 
both.  
155. Entering into a compartment reserved or resisting entry into a compartment  not 
reserved .—(1) If any passenger — 
(a) having entered a compartment wherein no berth or seat has been reserved by a railway  
administration for his use, or  
(b) having unauthorisedly occupied a berth or seat reserved by a railway administration fo r the 
use of another passenger,  
refuses to leave it when required to do so by any railway servant authorised in this behalf, such railway 
servant may remove him or cause him to be removed, with the aid of any other person, from the 
compartment, berth or seat, as the case may be, and he shall also be punishable with fine which may  
extend to five hundred rupees.  
(2) If any passenger resists the lawful entry of another passen ger into a compartment not reserved for 
the use of the passenger resisting, he shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to two hundred 
rupees.  
156. Travelling on ro of, step or engine of a train .—If any passenger or any other person, after 
being warned by a railway servant to desist, persists in travelling on the roof, step or footboard of any 
carriage or on an engine, or in any other part of a train not intended for the use of passengers, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees, or with both and may be removed from the railway by any railway servant.  
157. Alteri ng or defacing pass or ticket .—If any passenger wilfully  alters or defaces his pass or 
ticket so as to render the date, number or any material portion thereof illegible, he shall be punishable 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, or  with both.  
158. Penalty for contravention of any of the provisions of Chapter XIV .—Any person under 
whose authority any railway servant is employed in contravention of any of the provisions of               
Chapter XIV or of the rules made thereunder, sha ll be punishable with fine which may  extend to five 
hundred rupees.  
159. Disobedience of drivers or conductors of vehicles to direc tions of railway servant, etc .—If 
any driver or conductor of any vehicle while upon the premises of a railway disobeys the re asonable 
directions of any railway servant or police officer, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
160. Opening or b reaking a level crossing g ate.—(1) If any person, other than a railway servant or 
a person authorised in this behalf, opens any gate or chain or barrier set up on either side of a level 
crossing which is closed to road traffic, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term w hich may 
extend to three years.  54 
 (2) If any person breaks any gate or chain or barrier set up on either side of a level crossing which is 
closed to road traffic, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five 
years.  
161. Neglig ently cro ssing unmanned level crossing .—If any person driving or leading a vehicle is 
negligent in crossing an unmanned level crossing, he shall be punishable with imprisonmen t which may 
extend to one year.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “negligence ” in relation to any person driving or 
leading a vehicle in crossing an unmanned level crossing means the crossing of such level crossing by 
such person — 
(a) without stopping or caring to stop the vehicle near such level crossing to observe wheth er any 
approachin g rolling stock is in sight, or  
(b) even while an approac hing rolling stock is in sight.  
162. Entering carriage or oth er place reserved for females .—If a male person knowing or having 
reason to believe that a carriage, compartment, berth o r seat in a train or room or other place is reserved 
by a railway administration for the exclusive use of fe males, without lawful excuse, — 
(a) enters such carriage, compartment, room or other place, or having entered such carriage, 
compartment, roo m or pla ce, remains therein; or  
(b) occupies any such berth or seat having been required by an y railway servant to vacate it,  
he shall, in addition to being liable to forfeiture of his pass or ticket, be punishable with fine which may 
extend to five hundred rupees  and may also be removed by any railway servant.  
163. Giving false account of goods .—If any person required to furnish an account of goods under 
section 66, gives an account which is materially false, he and, if he is not the owner of the goods, the 
owner also shall, without prejudice to his liability to pay any freight or other charge und er any provision 
of this Act, be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees for every quintal or part 
thereof of such goods.  
164. Unlawfully bringing  dangerous goods on a railway .—If any person, in contravention of 
section 67, takes with him any dangerous goods or entrusts such goods for carriage to the railway 
administration, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees or with both and shall also  be liable for any loss, 
injury or damage which may be caused by reason of brin ging such goods on the railway.  
165. Unlawfully bringing  offensive goods on a railway .—If any person, in contravention of          
section 67, takes with him any offensive goods  or entrusts such goods for carriage to the railway 
administration, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and shall also 
be liable for any loss, injury or damage which may be caused by reason of bringing such goods on the  
railway . 
166. Defacing public notices .—If any pe rson without lawful authority — 
(a) pulls down or wilfully damages any board or document set up or posted by the order of a 
railway administration on a r ailway or any rolling stock; or  
(b) obliterates or alte rs any letters or figures upon any such board or docu ment or upon any 
rolling stock,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which 
may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
167. Smoking .—(1) No  person in any compartment of a train shall, if objected to by any other 
passenger in t hat compartment, smoke therein.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a railway administration may prohibit 
smoking i n any train or part of a train.  55 
 (3) Whosoever contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be punishable 
with fine which ma y extend to one hundred rupees.  
168. Provision with respect to commission of offence by the children of acts endangering safety 
of person travelling on railway .—(1) If a person under the age of twelve years is guilty of any of the 
offences under sections 150 to 154, the court convicting him may require the father or guardian of such 
person to execute, within such time as the court may fix, a  bond for such amount and for such period as 
the court may direct for t he good conduct of such person.  
(2) The amount of the bond, if forfeited, shall be recoverable by the court as if it  were a fine imposed 
by itself.  
(3) If a father or guardian fai ls to execute a bond under sub -section ( 1) within the time fixed by the 
court, he shall be punishable with fine wh ich may extend to fifty rupees.  
169. Levy of pena lty on non -Government railway .—If a non -Government railway fails to comply 
with, any requisition made, decision or direction given, by the Central Government, under any of the 
provisions of this Act, or otherwise contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, it shall be open to the 
Central Government, by order, to levy a penalty not exceeding two hun dred and fifty rupees and a further 
penalty not exceeding one hundred and fifty rupees for every day during whi ch the contravention 
continues:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be levied except after giving a reasonable opportunity to the  
non-Government  railway to make such representation as it deems fit.  
170. Recovery of penalty .—Any penalty imposed by the Central Government under section 169, 
shall be recoverable by a suit in the District Court having jurisdiction in the place where the head office of 
the non -Government railway is situated.  
171. Section 169 or 170 not to preclude Central Governmen t from taking any other action .—
Nothing in section 169 or 170 shall preclude the Central Government from resorting to any other action to 
compel a non -Governme nt railway to discharge any obligation impose d upon it by or under this Act.  
172. Penalty for intoxicat ion.—If any railway servant is in a state of intoxication while on duty, he 
shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and when the performance of any 
duty in such state is likely to endanger the safety of any person travelling on or being upon a railway, 
such railway servant shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one ye ar, or 
with fine, or with b oth. 
173. Abandoning t rain, etc., without authority .—If any railway servant, when on duty, is entrusted 
with any responsibility connected with the running of a train, or of any other rolling stock from one 
station or place to another station or place, and he abandons his duty before reaching such station or place 
without authority or without properly handing over such train or rolling stock to another authorised 
railway servant, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rup ees, or with both.  
174. Obst ructing running of train, etc .—If any railway servant (whether on duty or otherwise) or 
any other person obstructs or causes to be obstructed or attempts to obstruct any train or other rolli ng 
stock upon a railway, — 
(a) by squatting or picketing or during any rail roko  agitation or bandh ; or 
(b) by keeping without authority any r olling stock on the railway; or  
(c) by tampering with, disconnecting or interfering in any other manner with its hose pipe or 
tampering  with signal  gear or otherwise,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to two  thousand rupees, or with both.  
175. Endange ring the safety of persons .—If any railway servant, when on duty, endan gers the 
safety of any person — 
(a) by disobeying a ny rule made under this Act; or  56 
 (b) by disobeying any instruction, direction or order under this Act or the rules made thereunder; 
or 
(c) by any rash or negligent act or omission,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which 
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
176. Obstructing leve l crossing .—If any railway servant unnecessarily — 
(a) allows any rolling stock to stan d across a place where the railway crosses  a public road on the 
level; or  
(b) keeps a level cros sing closed against the public,  
he shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to one hundred rupees.  
177. False returns .—If any railway servant required to furnish a return by or under this Act, signs 
and furnishes a return which is false in any material particular or which he knows or believes to be false, 
or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to one year, or 
with fine which may extend to fiv e hundred rupees, or with both.  
178. Making a false report by a  railway servant .—If any railway servant who is required by a 
railway administration to inquire into a claim for loss, destruction, damage, deterioration or non-delivery 
of any consignment makes a report which is false or which he knows or believes to be false or does not 
believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or 
with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
1[179. Arrest for of fences under certain sections .—(1) If any person commits any offence 
mentioned in sections 150 to 152, he may be arrested without warrant or other written authority by any 
railway servant or police officer  not below the rank of a head constable.  
(2) If any person commits any offence mentioned in sections 137 to 139, 141 to 147, 153 to 157, 159 
to 167 and 172 to 176, he may be arrested, without warrant or ot her written authority, by the officer 
authorised by a notified order of the Central Government.  
(3) The railway servant or the police officer or the officer authorised, as the case may be, may call to 
his aid any other person to effect the  arrest under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be.  
(4) Any person so arrested under this section shall be produced before the nearest Magist rate within  a 
period of twenty -four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of 
arrest t o the court of the Magistrate.]  
180. Arrest of persons likely to abscond, e tc.—(1) If any person who commits any offence under 
this Act, other than an offence mentioned in 2[sub-section  (2) of section  179], or is liable to pay any 
excess charge or other sum demanded under section 138, fails or refuses to give his name and address or 
there is reason to believe that the name and address given by him are fictitious or that he will abscond, 
3[the officer authoris ed] may arrest him withou t warrant or written authority.  
(2) 4[The officer authorised] may call to his aid any other person to eff ect th e arrest under  
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Any person arrested under this section shall be produced before the nearest Magistrate within a 
period of twenty -four hours of such arrest excluding the time necessary for the journey from the place of 
arrest to t he court of the Magistrate u nless he is released earlier on giving bail or if his true name and 
address are ascertained on executing a bond without sureties for his appearance before the Magistrate 
having jurisdict ion to try him for the offence.  
(4) The provisions of Chapter XXIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so 
far as may be, apply to the giving of bail and the execution of bonds under this se ction.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 51 of 2003, s.  3, for section 179 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “section 179” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for certain words (we.f. 1 -7-2004).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “The railway servant or the police officer” (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  57 
 1[180A. Inquiry by officer authorised to as certain commission of offence .—For ascertaining facts 
and circumstances of a case, the officer authorised may make an inquiry into the commission of an 
offence mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of section 179 and may file a complaint in the competent court if the 
offence i s found to have been committed.  
180B.  Powers of officer authorised  to inquire .—While making an inquiry, the officer authorised 
shall have power to, — 
(i) summon  and enforce the attendance of any person and record his statement;  
(ii) require the discovery and production of any document;  
(iii) requisition any public  record or copy thereof from any office, authority or person;  
(iv) enter and search any premises or person and seize any property or document which may be 
relevant to the subject -matter of the inquiry.  
180C.  Disposal of persons arrested .—Every person arrested for an offence punishable under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 179 shall, if the arrest was made by a person other than the officer authorised, 
be forwarded, without delay, to such officer.  
180D.  Inquiry how to b e made against arrested person .—(1) When any person is arrested by the 
officer authorised  for an offence punishable under this Act, such officer shall proceed to inquire into the 
charge against such person.  
(2) For this purpose, the officer authorised  may exercise the same powers and shall be subject to the 
same provisions as the officer in charge of a police station may exercise and is subject to the provisions of 
the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ), when investigating a cognizable case:  
Provided that — 
(a) if the officer authorised is of the opinion that there is sufficient evidence or reasonable ground 
of suspicion against the accused person, he shall either admit him to bail to appear b efore a 
Magistrate having jurisdiction in the case, or forward him in custody to such Magistrate;  
(b) if it appears to the officer authorised that there is not sufficient evidence or reasonable ground 
of su spicion against the accused person, he shall release the accused person on his executing a bond, 
with or without sureties as the officer authorised may direct, to appear, if and when so required, 
before the Magistrate having jurisdiction.  
180E.  Search, seiz ure and arrest how to be made .—All searches, seizures and arrests made under 
this Act shall be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974 ), relating respectively to searches and arrests made under that Code.  
180F.  Cognizance by Court on a complai nt made by officer authorised .—No court shall take 
cognizance of an offence mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of section 179 except on a complaint made by the 
officer authorised.  
180G.  Punishment for certain of fences in relation to inquiry .—Whoever intentionally insults or 
causes any interruption in the inquiry proceedings or deliberately makes a false statement before the 
inquiring officer shall be punished with simple imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, 
or with fine whic h may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.]  
181. Magistrate havi ng jurisdiction under the Act .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a 
Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall  try an offence under this Act.  
182. Place of trial .—(1) Any person committing an offence under this Act or any rule made 
thereunder shall be triable for such offence in any place in which he may be or which the State 
Government may notify in this behalf, as well as in any other place in which he is liable to be tried under 
any l aw for the time being in force.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 51 of 2003, s. 5 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  58 
 (2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall be published in the Official Gazette, and a copy 
thereof shall be exhibited for the information of the public in some conspicuous place at such railway 
stations as t he State Government may direct.  
CHAPTER XVI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
183. Power to pro vide other transport services .—(1) A railway administration may, for the 
purpose of facilitating the carriage of passengers or goods or to provide integrated service for such 
carriage, provi de any other mode of transport.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time b eing in force, the provisions of 
this Act shall apply to the carriage of passengers or goods by the mode of transport referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
184. Taxation on railways by local authorities .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in  any other law, a railway administration shall not be liable to pay any tax in aid of the funds 
of any local authority unless the Central Government, by notification, declares the railway administration 
to be liable to pay the tax specified in such notific ation.  
(2) While a notification of th e Central Government under sub -section ( 1) is in force, the railway 
administration shall be liable to pay to the local authority either the tax specified in the notification or, in 
lieu thereof, such sum, if any, as an officer appointed in this behalf by the Central Government may, 
having regard to all the circumstances of the case, from time to time, determine to be fair and reasonable.  
(3) The Central Government may at any time revoke or vary a notification issued unde r  
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent any railway administration from entering into 
a contract with any local authority for the supply of water or light, or for the scavenging of railway 
premises, or for any other service which the local authority may be rendering or be prepared to render  to 
the railway administration.  
185. Taxation  on railways for advertisement .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law, a railway administration shall not be liable to pay any tax to any local 
authority in respect of any advertisement made on any part of the railway unless the Central Government, 
by notification, declares the railway administration to be liable to pay the tax specified in such 
notificati on. 
(2) The Central Government may at any time revoke or vary a notification issued under  
sub-section ( 1). 
186. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, any railway administration, a railway servant or any other person for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any r ules or orders 
made thereunder.  
187. Restriction on exceu tion against railway property .—(1) No rolling st ock, machinery, plant, 
tools, fittings, materials or effects used or provided by a railway administration for the purpose of traffic 
on its railway, or of its stations or workshops, shall be liable to be taken in execution of any decree or 
order of any cou rt or of any local authority or person having by law the power to attach or distrain 
property or otherwise to cause property to be taken in execution, without the previous sanc tion of the 
Central Government.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construe d to affect the authority of any court to attach the 
earnings of a railway in execution of a decree or order.  
188. Railway servants to be public servants for the purposes of Chapter IX and section 409 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) .—(1) Any railway servant, who is not a public servant within the 
meaning of secti on 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) , shall be deemed to be a public servant for 
the purposes of Chapter I X and section 409 of that Code.  59 
 (2) In the definition of “legal remuneration ” in section 161 of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ), the 
word “Government ” shall, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), be deemed to include any employe r of a 
railway servant as such.  
189. Railway se rvants not to engage in trade .—A railway servant shall not — 
(a) purchase or bid for, either in person or by an agent, in his own name or in that of another, or 
jointly or in shares with others, any property put to auction under section 83 or section 84 or section 
85 or section 90; or  
(b) in contravention of any direction of the railway administration in this behalf, engage in trade.  
190. Procedure for delivery to railway administration of property  detained by a railway 
servant .—If a railway servant is discharged from service or is suspended, or dies or absconds or absents 
himself, and he or his wife or widow or any member of his family or his representative, refuses or 
neglects, after notice in writing for that purpose, to deliver up to the railway administration or to a person 
appo inted by the railway administration, in this behalf, any station, office or other building with its 
appurtenances, or any books, papers, keys, equipment or other matters, belonging to the railway 
administration and in the possession or custody of such rail way servant at the occurrence of any such 
event as aforesaid, any Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class may, on 
application made by or on behalf of the railway administration, order any police officer, with proper 
assistance, to  enter upon the station, office or other building and remove any person found therein and 
take possession thereof, or to take possession of the books, papers or other matters, and to deliver the 
same to the railway administration or to a person appointed b y the railway administration in that behalf.  
191. Proof of ent ries in records and documents .—Entries made in the records or other documents 
of a railway administration shall be admitted in evidence in all proceedings by or against the railway 
administratio n, and all such entries may be proved either by the production of the records or other 
documents of the railway administration containing such entries or by the production of a copy of the 
entries certified by the officer having custody of the records or o ther documents under his signature and 
stating that it is a true copy of the original entries and that such original entries are contained in the 
records or other documents of the railway administration in his possess ion. 
192. Service of notice, et c., on railway administration .—Any notice or other document required or 
authorised by this Act to be served on a railway administration may be served, in the case of a Zonal 
Railway, on the General Manager or any of the railway servant authorised by the General M anager, and 
in the case of any other railway, on the owner or lessee of the railway or the person working t he railway 
under an agreement — 
(a) by delivering it to him; or  
(b) by leaving it at his office; or  
(c) by registe red post to his office address.  
193. Service of notice, e tc., by railway administration .—Unless otherwise provided in this Act or 
the rules framed thereunder, any notice or other document required or authorised by this Act to be served 
on any person by a railway  administration may be served — 
(a) by delivering it to the person; or  
(b) by leaving it at the usual or last known place of abode o f the person; or  
(c) by registered post addressed to the person at his usua l or last known place of abode.  
194. Presumption where notice is served by post .—Where a notice or other document is served by 
post, it shall be deemed to have been served at the time when the letter containing it would be delivered in 
the ordinary course of post, and in proving such service, it shall be sufficient to prove that the l etter 
containing the notice or other document was pro perly addressed and registered.  
195. Representat ion of railway administration .—(1) A railway administration may, by order in 
writing, authorise any railway servant or other person to act for, or represen t it, as the case may be, in any 
proceeding before any civil, criminal or other court.  60 
 (2) A person authorised  by a railway administration to conduct prosecutions on its behalf shall, 
notwithstanding anything in section 302 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be entitled 
to conduct such prosecutions without th e permission of the Magistrate.  
196. P ower to exempt railway from Act .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, 
exempt any railway from all or any  of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every notification issued under sub-section ( 1) shall be laid as soon as may be after it is issued 
before each House of Parliament.  
197. Matters supplemental to the definitions of “railway” and “railway servant ”.—(1) For the 
purposes of sections 67, 113, 121, 123, 147, 151 to 154, 160, 164, 166, 168, 170, 171, 173 to 176, 179, 
180, 182, 184, 185, 187 to 190, 192, 193, 195 and of this section, the word “railway ” whether it occurs 
alone or as a prefix to another word, has reference to a railway or portion of a railway under construction 
and to a railway or portion of a railway not used for the public carriage of passengers, animals or goods as 
well as to a railway falling within the definition of that word in clause  (31) of section 2.  
(2) For the purposes of sections 7, 24, 113, 146, 172 to 176 and 188 to 190, the expression “railway 
servant ” includes a person employed under a railway in connection with the service thereof by a person 
fulfilling a contract with the r ailway administration.  
198. General power to make rules .—Without prejudice to any power to make rules contained 
elsewhere in this Act, the Central Government may make rules generally to carry out the purposes of this 
Act. 
199. Rules  to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or m ore successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.  
200. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Indian Railways Act, 1890 (9 of 1890) (hereinafter referred to 
as the repealed Act) — 
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken (including any 
rule, notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued, or any appointment or declaration made 
or any licence, permission, authorisation or exemption granted or any document or instrument 
executed or any direction given or any proceedings taken or any penalty or f ine imposed) under the 
repealed Act shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corres ponding provisions of this Act;  
(b) any complaint made to the Railway Rates Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of section 41 of the 
repealed Act but not disposed of   before the commencement of this Act and any complaint that may 
be made to the said Tribunal against any act or omission of a railway a dministration under the 
repealed Act shall be heard and decided by the Tribunal constituted under this Act in accordance with 
the provisi ons of Chapter VII of this Act.  
(3) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 2) shall not be held to prejudice  or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with regard to the effect of 
repeal.  
--------------------------The Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1989--------------------------
1 
 THE REPRESENTATION OF THE PEOPLE (AMENDMENT)  
ACT, 1989  
ACT NO. 21 OF 1989  
[22nd May, 1989.]  
 
An Act further to amend the Representation of the People Act, 1950.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title.— This Act may be called the Representation of the People (Amendment) Act, 1989.  
1*   *   *   *   * 
6. Validation. — All things done and all steps taken, before the commencement of this section, in 
relation to the preparation or revision of elect oral rolls under Part III of the principal Act in the year 1989 
shall, in so far as they are in conformity with the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by sections 3 
and 4 of this  Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act a s amended by those 
sections as if the principal Act as so amended was in force at the time such things were done or such steps 
were taken.  
 
                                                           
1. Sections 2 to 5, o mitted by Act 30 of 2001, s. 2 and the First Sch edule (w.e.f  3 -9-2001) . 
--------------------------The Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989--------------------------
1 
 THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES  
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES) ACT, 1989  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
OFFENCES OF ATROCITIES  
3. Punishments for offences atrocities.  
4. Punishment for neglect of duties.  
5. Enhanced punishment subsequent conviction.  
6. Application of certain provisions of the Indian Penal Code.  
7. Forfeiture of property of certain persons.  
8. Presumption as to offences.  
9. Conferment of powers.  
CHAPTER III  
EXTERNMENT  
10. Removal of person likely to commit offence . 
11. Procedure on failure of person to remove himself from area and enter  thereon after removal.  
12. Taking measurements and photographs, etc., of persons against whom order under  section 10 is 
made.  
13. Penalty for  noncompliance of order under section 10 . 
CHAPTER IV  
SPECIAL  COURTS  
14. Special Court and Exclusive Special Court.  
 14A. Appeals . 
15. Special Public Prosecutor and Exclusive Public Prosecutor . 
CHAPTER IVA  
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS AND WITNESSES  
15A. Rights of victims and witnesses . 
16. Power of State Government  to impose  collective fine . 
17. Preventive action to be taken by the law and order machinery . 
18. Section 438 of the Code not to apply to persons committing an offence under the Act . 
18A. No enquiry or approval required.  
19. Section 360 of the Code or the provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act not to apply to 
persons guilty of an offence under the Act . 
20.  Act to override  other laws . 
21. Duty of Governme nt to ensure effective implementation  of the Act.  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
23. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE  2 
 THE SCHEDULED CASTES AND THE SCHEDULED TRIBES  
(PREVENTION OF ATROCITIES)  ACT, 1989  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1989  
[11th September , 1989.]  
An Act to prevent the commission of offences of atrocities against the members of the Scheduled 
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes, to provide for 1[Special Courts  and the Exclusive Special 
Courts]  for the trial of such offences and for the relief and rehabil itation of the victims of 
such offences and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of Ind ia as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Scheduled Castes and 
the Scheduled Tribes (Preve ntion of Atrocities) Act, 1989.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu & Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act , unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “atrocity ” means an offence punishable under sec tion 3;  
(b) “Code ” means the Code of Crimin al Pro cedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
3[(bb)“dependent ” means the spouse, children, parents, brother and sister  of the victim, who are 
dependent wholly or mainly on such victim for his support  and maintenance;  
(bc) “economic boycott ” means – 
(i) a refusal to deal with,  work for hire or do business with other  person; or  
(ii) to deny opportunities including access to services or contractual  opportunities for 
rendering service for consideration; or  
(iii) to refuse to do anything on the terms on which things would be  common ly done in the 
ordinary course of business; or  
(iv) to abstain from the professional or business relations that one  would maintain with other 
person;  
(bd) “Exclusive Special Court ” means the Exclusive Special Court established  under sub -section 
(1) of section 14 exclusively to try the offences under  this Act;  
(be) “forest rights ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in sub -section( 1) of section 3 of the 
Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers(Recognition of Forest Rights) Act, 2006              
(2 of 2007 ); 
(bf) “manual scavenger ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause( g) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Prohibition of Employment as Manual  Scavengers and their Rehabilitation Act, 2013  
(25 of 2013) ; 
(bg) “public servant ” means a public servant as defined under section 21of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) , as well as any other person deemed to be a public  servant under any other law for the 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2016, s. 2 , for “Special Courts ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
2. 30th January, 1990, vide notification No. S.O. 106(E), dated 29th January, 1990, See Gazette of India, Extraordinary,              
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  3 
 time being in force and includes any person  acting in his official capacity under  the Central 
Government or the State  Government, as the case may be; ] 
(c) “Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes ” shall have the meanings assigned to them 
respectively under clause (24) and clause (25) of a rticle  366 of the Constitution;  
(d) “Special Court ” means a Court of Session specified as  a Special Court in section 14;  
(e) “Special Public Prosecutor ” means a Public Prosecutor specified as a Special Public 
Prosecutor or an advo cate referred to in section 15;  
1[(ea) “Schedule ” means the Schedule appende d to this Act;  
(eb) “social boycott ” means a refusal to permit a person to render to other  person or receive from 
him any customary service or to abstain from social  relations that one would maintain with other 
person or to isolate him from  others;  
(ec) “victim ” means any individual who falls within the definition of the  “Schedu led Castes and 
Scheduled Tribes ” under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, and who has suffered or 
experienced physical, mental, psychological,  emotional or monetary harm o r harm to his property as a 
result of the commission  of any offence under this Act and includes his relatives, legal guardian and 
legal  heirs;  
(ed) “witness ” means any person who is acquainted with the facts and  circumstances, or is in 
possession of any in formation or has knowledge necessary  for the purpose of investigation, inquiry or 
trial of any crime involving an offence  under this Act, and who is or may be required to give 
information or make a  statement or produce any document during investigation, in quiry or trial of 
such case and includes a victim of such offence; ] 
2[(f) the words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined  in the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860) , the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872)  or the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 
1973  (2 of 1974 ), as the case may be, shall be deemed to have the meanings  respectively assigned to 
them in those enactments. ] 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall , in relation to an area in 
which such en actment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law, i f any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER II  
OFFENCES OF ATROCITIES  
3. Punishment s for offences atrocities .—3[(1) Whoever, not being a member of a Scheduled Caste  
or a Scheduled  Tribe, — 
(a) puts any inedible or obnoxious substance into the mouth of a  member of a Scheduled Caste or 
a Scheduled Tribe or forces such member  to drink or eat such inedible or obnoxious substance;  
(b) dumps excreta, sewage, carcasses or an y other obnoxious  substance in premises, or at the 
entrance of the premises, occupied by a  member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe;  
(c) with intent to cause injury, insult or annoyance to any member of  a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe, dumps  excreta, waste matter,  carcasses or any other obnoxious substance in his 
neighbourhood;  
(d) garlands with footwear or parades naked or semi -naked a member  of a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe;  
                                                             
1. Ins.  by Act 1 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 4 , ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  4 
 (e) forcibly commits on a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled  Tribe any act, such as 
removing clothes from the person, forcible tonsuring  of head, removing moustaches, painting face or 
body or any other similar  act, which is derogatory to human dignity;  
(f) wrongfully occupies or cultivates any land, owne d by, or in the  possession of or allotted to, or 
notified by any competent authority to be  allotted to, a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled 
Tribe, or gets  such land transferred;  
(g) wrongfully dispossesses a member of a Scheduled Caste or a  Schedu led Tribe from his land or 
premises or interferes with the enjoyment  of his rights, including forest rights, over any land or 
premises or water or  irrigation facilities or destroys the crops or takes away the produce  therefrom.  
Explanation .––For the purpos es of clause ( f) and this clause, the  expression “wrongfully ” 
includes — 
(A) against the person ’s will;  
(B) without the person ’s consent;  
(C) with the person ’s consent, where such consent has been  obtained by putting the person, or 
any other person in whom the person is interested in fear of death or of hurt; or  
(D) fabricating records of such land;  
(h) makes a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to do  “begar ” or other forms of 
forced or bonded labour other than any  compulsory service for public  purposes imposed by the 
Government;  
(i) compels a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to  dispose or carry human or 
animal carcasses, or to dig graves;  
(j) makes a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to do  manual scavenging or 
employs or permits the employment of such member  for such purpose;  
(k) performs, or promotes dedicating a Scheduled Caste or a  Scheduled Tribe woman to a deity, 
idol, object of worship, temple, or other  religious institution as a deva dasi or any other sim ilar 
practice or permits aforementioned  acts; 
(l) forces or intimidates or prevents a member of a Scheduled Caste  or a Scheduled Tribe — 
(A) not to vote or to vote for a particular candidate or to vote  in a manner other than that 
provided by law;  
(B) not to  file a nomination as a candidate or to withdraw such  nomination; or  
(C) not to propose or second the nomination of a member of a  Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe as a candidate in any election;  
(m) forces or intimidates or obstructs a member of a Sche duled Caste  or a Scheduled Tribe, who 
is a member or a Chairperson or a holder of any  other office of a Panchayat under Part IX of the 
Constitution or a  Municipality under Part IXA of the Constitution, from performing their  normal 
duties and functions;  
(n) after the poll, causes hurt or grievous hurt or assault or imposes  or threatens to impose social 
or economic boycott upon a member of a  Schedule d Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or prevents from 
availing benefits of  any public service which is due to him;  
(o) commits any offence under this Act against a member of a  Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled 
Tribe for having voted or not having  voted for a particular candidate or for having voted in a manner 
provided  by law;  
(p) institutes false, malicious or vexatious suit  or criminal or other  legal proceedings against a 
member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled  Tribe;  5 
 (q) gives any false or frivolous information to any public servant  and thereby causes such public 
servant to use his lawful power to the  injury or annoyance  of a member of a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled  Tribe;  
(r) intentionally insults or intimidates with intent to humiliate a  member of a Scheduled Caste or a 
Scheduled Tribe in any place within  public view;  
(s) abuses any member of a Scheduled Caste or a Sc heduled Tribe  by caste name in any place 
within public view;  
(t) destroys, damages or defiles any object generally known to be  held sacred or in high esteem by 
members of the Scheduled Castes or the  Scheduled Tribes.  
Explanation. ––For the purposes of this clause, the expression  “object ” means and includes statue, 
photograph and portrait;  
(u) by words either written or spoken or by signs or by visible  representation or otherwise 
promotes or attempts to promote feelings of  enmity, hatred or ill -will against m embers of the 
Scheduled Castes or the  Scheduled Tribes;  
(v) by words either written or spoken or by any other means  disrespects any late person held in 
high esteem by members of the  Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes;  
(w) (i) intentionally touches a woman belonging to a Scheduled  Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, 
knowing that she belongs to a Scheduled  Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, when such act of touching is of 
a sexual  nature and is without the recipient ’s consent;  
(ii) uses words, acts or gestures of a se xual nature towards a woman belonging  to a Scheduled 
Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, knowing that she belongs to a Scheduled  Caste or a Scheduled Tribe.  
Explanation .––For the purposes of sub -clause ( i), the expression “consent ” means an unequivocal 
voluntary a greement when the person by words, gestures, or  any form of non -verbal communication, 
communicates willingness to participate in the  specific act:  
Provided that a woman belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe  who does not offer 
physical resistance to any act of a sexual nature is not by reason  only of that fact, is to be regarded as 
consenting to the sexual activity:  
Provided further that a woman ’s sexual history, including with the offender shall  not imply 
consent or mitigate the offence ; 
(x) corrupts or fouls the water of any spring, reservoir or any other  source ordinarily used by 
members of the Scheduled Castes or the  Scheduled Tribes so as to render it less fit for the purpose for 
which it is  ordinarily used;  
(y) denies a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe any  customary right of passage to 
a place of public resort or obstructs such  member so as to prevent him from using or having access to 
a place of  public resort to which other members of public or any other section ther eof have a right to 
use or access to;  
(z) forces or causes a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled  Tribe to leave his house, 
village or other place of residence:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall apply to any  action taken in dischar ge of a 
public duty;  
(za) obstructs or prevents a member of a Scheduled Caste or a  Scheduled Tribe in any manner 
with regard to — 
(A) using common property resources of an area, or burial or  cremation ground equally with 
others or using any river, stream,  spring, well, tank, cistern, water -tap or other watering place, or 
any bathing ghat, any public conveyance, any road, or passage;  6 
 (B) mounting or riding bicycles or motor cycles or wearing  footwear or new clothes in public 
places or taking out wedding  procession, or mounting a horse or any other vehicle during 
wedding  processions;  
(C) entering any place of worship which is open to the public  or other persons professing the 
same religion or taking part in, or  taking out, any religious, social or cultural pro cessions 
including  jatras;  
(D) entering any educational institution, hospital, dispensary,  primary health centre, shop or 
place of public entertainment or any  other public place; or using any utensils or articles meant for 
public  use in any place open to t he public; or  
(E) practicing any profession or the carrying on of any  occupation, trade or business or 
employment in any job which other  members of the public, or any section thereof, have a right to 
use or  have access to;  
(zb) causes physical harm or ment al agony of a member of a Scheduled  Caste or a Scheduled 
Tribe on the allegation of practicing witchcraft or  being a witch; or  
(zc) imposes or threatens a social or economic boycott of any person  or a family or a group 
belonging to a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled  Tribe,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six  months but which may 
exten d to five years and with fine. ] 
(2) Whoever, not being a member of a Schedul ed Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, — 
(i) gives or fabricates  false evidence intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he 
will thereby cause, any member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to be convicted of an 
offence which is capital by the law for the time being in force shall be punished with imprisonment 
for life and with fine; and if an innocent member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe be 
convicted and executed in consequence of such false or fabricated evidence, the person who gives or 
fabricates such false evidence , shall be pu nished with death;  
(ii) gives or fabricates false evidence intending thereby to cause, or knowing it to be likely that he 
will thereby cause, any member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe to be convicted of an 
offence which is not capital but punish able with imprisonment for a term of seven years or upwards, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which 
may extend to seven years or upwards and with fine;  
(iii) commits mischief by fire or any explos ive substance intending to cause or knowing it to be 
likely that he will thereby cause damage to any property belonging to a member of a Scheduled Caste 
or a Scheduled Tribe, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than 
six months but which may exten d to seven years and with fine;  
(iv) commits mischief by fire or any explosive substance intending to cause or knowing it to be 
likely that he will thereby cause destruction of any building which is ordinarily used as a place of 
worship or as a place for human dwelling or as a place for custody of the property by a member of a 
Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, shall be punishable with imprisonment for life and with fine;  
(v) commits any offence under the Indian Penal Code (45  of 1860) punishable with imprisonment 
for a term of ten years or more against a person or property 1[knowing that such person is a member 
of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs to such member] , shall be 
punishable with impri sonment for life and with fine;  
2[(va) commits any offence specified in the Schedule, against a person  or property, knowing that 
such person is a member of a Scheduled Caste  or a Scheduled Tribe or such property belongs to such 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2016, s. 4 , for “on the ground that such person is a member of a Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe or 
such property belongs to such member ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  7 
 member, shall be  punishable with such punishment as specified under the Indian Penal  Code                
(45 of 1860) for such offences and shall also be liable to fine;]  
(vi) knowingly or having reason to believe that an offence has been committed under this 
Chapter, causes any evide nce of the commission of that  offence to disappear with the intention of 
screening the offender from legal punishment, or with that intention gives any information respecting 
the offence which he knows or believes to be false, shall be punishable with the punishmen t provided 
for that offence; or  
(vii) being a public servant, commits any offence under this section, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to the 
punish ment provided for that o ffence.  
1[4. Punishment  for neglect of duties .—(1) Whoever, being a public servant but not being a member 
of a Scheduled  Caste or a Scheduled Tribe, wilfully neglects his duties required to be performed by  him 
under this Act and the rules made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment  for a term which 
shall not be less than six months but which may extend to one year.  
(2) The duties of public servant referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall include –– 
(a) to read out to an informant the information given  orally, and reduced to  writing by the officer 
in charge of the police station, before taking the signature  of the informant;  
(b) to register a complaint or a First Information Report under this Act and  other relevant 
provisions and to register it under appropriate sections of this  Act; 
(c) to furnish a copy of the information so recorded forthwith to the  in formant;  
(d) to record the statement of the victims or witnesses;  
(e) to conduct the investigation and file charge sheet in the Special Court  or the Exclusive Special 
Court within a period of sixty days, and to explain the  delay if any, in writing;  
(f) to correctly prepare, frame and translate any document or electronic  record;  
(g) to perform any other duty specified in this Act or the rules made  there under:  
Provided that the charges in this regard against the public servant shall be  booked on the 
recommendation of an administrative enquiry.  
(3) The cognizance in respect of any dereliction of duty referred to in  sub-section ( 2) by a public 
servant shall  be taken by the Special Court or the Exclusive  Special Court and shall give direction for 
penal proceedings against such public servant. ] 
5. Enhanced punishment  subsequent conviction .—Whoever, having already been convicted of an 
offence under this Chapter  is convicted for the second offence or any offence subsequent to the second 
offence, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less  than one year but 
which may extend to the punish ment provided for that offence.  
6. Application  of certain provisions of the India n Penal Code .—Subject to the other provisions of 
this Act, the provisions of section 34, Chapter III, Chapter IV, Chapter V, Chapter VA, section 149 and 
Chapter XXIII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), shall, so far as may be, apply for the purposes of 
this Act as they apply for the purposes of the Indian Penal Code.  
 7. Forfeiture of property of certain persons. —(1) Where a person has b een convicted of any 
offence punishable under this Chapter, the Special Court may, in addition to awarding any punishment, 
by order in writing, declare that any property, movable or immovable or both, belonging to the person, 
which has been used for the co mmission of that offence, shall  stand forfeited to Government.  
(2) Where any person is accused of any offence under this Chapter, it shall be open to the Special 
Court trying him to pass an order that all or any of the properties, movable or immovable or b oth,  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2016, s. 5 , for section 4 (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  8 
 belonging to him, shall, during the period of such trial, be attached, and where such trial ends in 
conviction, the property so attached shall be liable to forfeiture to the extent it is required for the purpose 
of realisation of any f ine imposed un der this Chapter.  
8. Presumption as to offences .—In a prosecution for an offence under this Chapter, if it is proved 
that— 
(a) the accused rendered 1[any financial assistance in relation to the offences committed by a 
person accused of ], or reasonably suspected of , committing, an offence under this Chapter, the 
Special Court shall presume, unless the contrary is proved, that such person had abetted the offence;  
(b) a group of persons committed an offence under this Chapter and if it is proved that the o ffence 
committed was a sequel to any existing dispute regarding land or any other matter, it shall be 
presumed that the offence was committed in furtherance of the common intention or in prosecution of 
the common object ; 
2[(c) the accused was having personal knowledge of the victim or his  family, the Court shall 
presume that the accused was aware of the caste or tribal identity  of the victim, unless the contrary is 
proved. ] 
9. Conferment  of powers .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code or  in any other 
provision of this Act, the State Government may, if it consider s it necessary or expedient so to do, — 
(a) for the prevention of and for coping with  any offence under this Act, or  
(b) for any case or class or  group of cases under this Act,  
in any district or part thereof, confer, by notification in the Official Gazette, on any officer of the State 
Government, the powers exercisable by a police officer under the Code in such district or part thereof or, 
as the case may be, for such case or class  or group of cases, and in particular, the powers of arrest, 
investigation and prosecution of persons before any Special Court.  
(2) All officer s of police and all other officers of Government shall assist the officer referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) in the e xecution of the provisions of this Act or any rule, scheme or or der made 
thereunder.  
(3) The provisions of the Code shall, so far as may be, apply to the exercise of the powers by an  
officer under sub -section ( 1). 
CHAPTER III  
EXTERNMENT  
10. Removal of pers on likely to commit offence .—(1) Where the Special Court is satisfied, upon a 
complaint or a police report that a person is  likely to commit an offence  under Chapter II of this Act in 
any area included in ‘Scheduled Areas ’ or ‘tribal areas ’, as referred to in  article 244 of the Constitution, 
3[or any area identified under the provisions of clause ( vii) of sub -section ( 2) of section 21] , it may, by 
order in writing, direct  such person to remove himself beyond the limits of such area, by such route and 
within such time as may be specified in the order, and not to return to that area from which he was 
directed to remove himself for such period, not exceeding  4[three  years ], as may be specified in the order.  
(2) The Special Court shall, along with the order under sub -section ( 1), communicate to the person 
directed under that sub -section the grounds on which such order has been made.  
(3) The Special Court may revoke or modify the order made under sub -section ( 1), for the reasons to 
be recorded in writing, on the representation made by the person against whom such order has been made 
or by any other person on his behalf within thirty d ays from the date of the or der. 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2016, s. 6 , for “any financial assistance to a person accused of ” (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “two years ” (w.e.f. 26-1-2016).  9 
 11. Procedure on failure of person to remove himself from area and enter  thereon after 
removal .—(1) If a person to whom a direction has been issued under section 10 to remove himself from 
any area— 
(a) fails to  remove himself as directed; or  
(b) having so removed himself enters such area within the period specified in the order,  
otherwise than with the permission in writing of the Special Court under sub -section ( 2), the Special 
Court may cause him to be arrested and removed in police custody t o such place outside such area as the 
Special Court may specify.  
(2) The Special Court may, by order in writing, permit any person in respect of whom an order under 
section 10 has been made, to return to the area from which he was directed to remove himsel f for such 
temporary period and subject to such conditions as may be specified in such order and may require him to 
execute a bond with or without surety for the due observa tion of the conditions imposed.  
(3) The Special Court may at any t ime revoke any su ch permission.  
(4) Any person who, with such permission, returns to the area from which he was directed to remove 
himself shall observe the conditions imposed, and at the expiry of the temporary period for which he was 
permitted to return, or on the revoca tion of such permission before the expiry of such temporary period, 
shall remove himself outside such area and shall not return thereto within the unexpired portion specified 
under section  10 without a fresh permission.  
(5) If a person fails to observe any  of the conditions imposed or to remove himself accordingly or 
having so removed himself enters or returns to such area without fresh permission the Special Court may 
cause him to be arrested and removed in police custody to such place outside such area as  the Special 
Court m ay specify.  
12. Taking measurements and photo graphs, etc.,  of persons against whom order under  section 
10 is made. —(1) Every person against whom an order has been made under section 10 shall, if so 
required by the Special Court, allow his measurements and photographs t o be taken by a police officer.  
(2) If any person referred to in sub -section ( 1), when required to allow his measurements or 
photographs to be taken , resists or refuses to allow the taking of such measurements or photograp hs, it 
shall be lawful to use all necessary means to secure the taking thereof.  
(3) Resistance to or refusal to allow the taking of measurements or photographs under sub -section ( 2) 
shall be deemed to be an offence under section 186 of the Indian Penal Cod e (45 of 1860).  
(4) Where an order under section 10 is revoked, all measurements and photographs (including 
negatives) taken under sub -section ( 2) shall be destroyed or made over to the person a gainst whom such 
order is made.  
13. Penalty for  noncompliance of order under section 10 .—Any person contravening an order of 
the Special Court made under section 10 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to one year and with fine.  
CHAPTER IV  
SPECIAL  COURTS  
1[14. Special  Court  and Exclusive Special Court .—(1) For the purpose of providing for speedy 
trial, the State Government  shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court, by 
notification in  the Official Gazette, establish an Exclusive Special Court for one or more Districts:  
Provided that in Districts where less number of cases under this Act is recorded,  the State 
Government shall, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High  Court, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify for such District s, the Court of  Session to be a Special Court to try the offences 
under this Act:  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2016, s. 8 ,for section 14 (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016 ). 10 
 Provided further that the Courts so established or specified shall have power  to directly take 
cogniz ance of offences under this Act.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the State Go vernment to establish adequate number of  Courts to ensure that 
cases under this Act are disposed of within a period of two  months, as far as possible.  
(3) In every trial in the Special Court or the Exclusive Special Court, the  proceedings shall be 
continued from day -to-day until all the witnesses in attendance  have been examined, unless the Special 
Court or the Exclusive Special Court finds the  adjournment of the same beyond the following day to be 
necessary for reasons to be  recorded in writing:  
Provided that when the trial relates to an offence under this Act, the trial shall, as  far as possible, be 
completed within a period of two months from the date of filing of  the charge sheet.]  
1[14A. Appeals .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the C ode of Criminal  Procedure,1973  
(2 of 1974) , an appeal shall lie, from any judgment, sentence or order, not being an interlocutory  order, of 
a Special Court or an Exclusive Special Court, to the High Court  both on facts and on law.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3) of section 378 of the  Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , an appeal shall lie to the High Court against an order  of the Special Court or 
the Exclusive Special Court granting or refusing bail.  
(3) Notwithstand ing anything contained in any other law for the time being in  force, every appeal 
under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days  from the date of the judgment, 
sentence or order appealed from:  
Provided that the High Court may entertai n an appeal after the expiry of the said  period of ninety days 
if it is satisfied that the appellant had sufficient cause for not  preferring the appeal within the period of 
ninety days:  
Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained after the expiry of the period  of one hundred and 
eighty days.  
(4) Every appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1) shall, as far as possible, be  disposed of within a 
period of three months from the date of admission of the appeal .] 
2[15. Special Public Prosecutor and Exclusive Public Prosecutor .—(1) For every Special Court, 
the State Government shall, by notification in  the Official Gazette, specify a Public Prosecutor or appoint 
an advocate who has been  in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, as a Sp ecial Public 
Prosecutor  for the purpose of conducting cases in that Court.  
(2) For every Exclusive Special Court, the State Government shall, by notification  in the Official 
Gazette, specify an Exclusive Special Public Prosecutor or appoint an  advocate who  has been in practice 
as an advocate for not less than seven years, as an  Exclusive Special Public Prosecutor for the purpose of 
conducting cases in that Court.]  
3[CHAPTER IVA  
RIGHTS OF VICTIMS AND WITNESSES  
15A. Rights of victim s and witness es.—(1) It shall be the duty and responsibility of the State to 
make arrangements  for the protection of victims, their dependents, and witnesses against any kind of  
intimidation or coercion or inducement or violence or threats of violence.  
(2) A victim shall be treat ed with fairness, respect and dignity and with due  regard to any special need 
that arises because of the victim ’s age or gender or  educational disadvantage or poverty.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act1 of 2016, s. 9 (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
2. Subs. by s.10, ibid., for section 15 (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
3. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  
 11 
 (3) A victim or his dependent shall have the right to reasonable, accurate, and  timely notice of any 
Court proceeding including any bail proceeding and the Special  Public Prosecutor or the State 
Government shall inform the victim about any proceedings  under this Act.  
(4) A victim or his dependent shall have the right to apply to the Special Court or  the Exclusive 
Special Court, as the case may be, to summon parties for production of  any documents or material, 
witnesses or examine the persons present.  
(5) A victim or his dependent shall be entitled to be heard at any proceeding  under this Act in respect 
of bail, discharge , release, parole, conviction or sentence of  an accused or any connected proceedings or 
arguments and file written submission  on conviction, acquittal or sentencing.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crimina l Procedure,1973  (2 of 197 4), the 
Special Court or the Exclusive Special Court trying a case under this Act shall  provide to a victim, his 
dependent, informant or witnesses –– 
(a) the complete protection to secure the ends of justice;  
(b) the travelling and  maintenance expenses during investigation, inquiry  and trial;  
(c) the social -economic rehabilitation during investigation, inquiry and  trial; and  
(d) relocation.  
(7) The State shall inform the concerned Special Court or the Exclusive Special  Court about t he 
protection provided to any victim or his dependent, informant or  witnesses and such Court shall 
periodically review the protection being offered and  pass appropriate orders.  
(8) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 6), the concerned Special 
Court or the Exclusive Special Court may, on an application made by  a victim or his dependent, 
informant or witness in any proceedings before it or by the  Special Public Prosecutor in relation to such 
victim, informant or witness or o n its own  motion, take such measures including –– 
(a) concealing the names and addresses of the witnesses in its orders or  judgments or in any 
records of the case accessible to the public;  
(b) issuing directions for non -disclosure of the identity and addres ses of  the witnesses;  
(c) take immediate action in respect of any complaint relating to harassment  of a victim, 
informant or witness and on the same day, if necessary, pass appropriate  orders for protection:  
Provided that inquiry or investigation into the complaint received under  clause ( c) shall be tried 
separately from the main case by such Court and  concluded within a period of two months from the 
date of receipt of the complaint:  
Provided further that where the complaint under clause ( c) is against any  public servant, the Court 
shall restrain such public servant from interfering with  the victim, informant or witness, as the case 
may be, in any matter related or  unrelated to the pending case, except with the permission of the 
Court.  
(9) It shall be the duty of the Investigating Officer and the Station House Officer  to record the 
complaint of victim, informant or witnesses against any kind of intimidation,  coercion or inducement or 
violence or threats of violence, whether given orally or in  writing, and a  photocopy of the First 
Information Report shall be immediately given to  them at free of cost.  
(10) All proceedings relating to offences under this Act shall be video recorded.  
(11) It shall be the duty of the concerned State to specify an appropriate scheme  to ensure 
implementation of the following rights and entitlements of victims and  witnesses in accessing justice so 
as–– 
(a) to provide a copy of the recorded First Information Report at free of  cost;  
(b) to provide immediate relief in cash or in kin d to atrocity victims or their  dependents;  12 
 (c) to provide necessary protection to the atrocity victims or their  dependents, and witnesses;  
(d) to provide relief in respect of death or injury or damage to property;  
(e) to arrange food or water or clothing o r shelter or medical aid or transport  facilities or daily 
allowances to victims;  
(f) to provide the maintenance expenses to the atrocity victims and their  dependents;  
(g) to provide the information about the rights of atrocity victims at the  time of making  
complaints and registering the First Information Report;  
(h) to provide the protection to atrocity victims or their dependents and  witnesses from 
intimidation and harassment;  
(i) to provide the information to atrocity victims or their dependents or  associ ated organisations or 
individuals, on the status of investigation and charge   sheet and to provide copy of the charge sheet at 
free of cost;  
(j) to take necessary precautions at the time of medical examination;  
(k) to provide information to atrocity victim s or their dependents or  associated organisations or 
individuals, regarding the relief amount;  
(l) to provide information to atrocity victims or their dependents or  associated organisations or 
individuals, in advance about the dates and place of  investigat ion and trial;  
(m) to give adequate briefing on the case and preparation for trial to atrocity  victims or their 
dependents or associated organisations or individuals and to  provide the legal aid for the said purpose;  
(n) to execute the rights of atrocity victims or their dependents or  associated organisations or 
individuals at every stage of the proceedings under  this Act and to provide the necessary assistance 
for the execution of the rights.  
(12) It shall be the right of the atrocity victims or their dep endents, to take  assistance from the           
Non-Government Organisations , social workers or advocates.]  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Power of State Government  to impose  collective fine .—The provisions of section 10A of the 
Prote ction of Civil Rights Act, 1955 (22 of 1955) shall, so far as may be, apply for the purposes of 
imposition and realisation of collective fine and for all other matters connected therewith under this Act.  
17. Preventive action to be taken by the law and or der machinery .—(1) A District Magistrate or a 
Sub-divisional Magistrate or any other Executive Magistrate or any police officer not below the rank of a 
Deputy Superintendent of Police may, on receiving information and after such inquiry as he may think 
necessary, has reason to believe that a person or a group of persons not belonging to the Scheduled Castes 
or the Scheduled Tribes, residing in or  frequenting  any place within the local limits of his jurisdiction is 
likely to commit an offence or has threaten ed to commit any offence under this Act and is of the opinion 
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding, declare such an area to be an area prone to atrocities and 
take necessary action for keeping the peace and good behaviour and maintenance of publi c order and 
tranquil ity and may take preventive a ction.  
(2) The provisions of Chapters VIII, X and XI of the Code shall, so far as may be, apply for the 
purposes of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make one or more schemes 
specifying the manner in which the officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall take appropriate action 
specified in such scheme or schemes to prevent atrocities and to restore the feeling of security amongst 
the members of the Sc heduled C astes and the Scheduled Tribes.  13 
 18. Section 438 of the Code not to apply to persons committing an offence under the Act. —
Nothing in section 438 of the Code shall apply in relation to any case involving the arrest of any person 
on an accusation of having committed an offence under this Act.  
1[18A. No enquiry or approval required. —(1) For the purposes of this Act, —  
(a) preliminary enquiry shall not be required for registration of a First Information Report against 
any person; or  
(b) the investigating officer shall not require approval for the arrest, if necessary, of any person,  
against whom an accusation of having committed an offence under this Act has been made and no 
procedure other than that provided under this Act or the Code shall apply.  
(2) The provisions of section 438 of the Code shall not apply to a case under this Act, 
notwithstanding any judgment or o rder or direction of any Court.]  
19. Section 360 of the Code or the p rovisions of the Probation of Offenders Act not to apply to 
persons g uilty of an offence under the Act.—The provisions of section 360 of the Code and the 
provisions of the Probation of Offenders Act , 1958 (20 of 1958) shall not apply to any person above the 
age of eighteen years who is found guilty of having committed an offence under this Act.  
20. Act to override  other laws .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act 
shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent t herewith contained in any other law for the time 
being in force or any custom or usage or any instrument having effect by virtue of an y such law.  
21. Duty of Government  to ensure effective implementation  of the Act .—(1) Subject to such rules 
as the Central Government may make in this behalf, the State Government shall take such measures as 
may be necessary  for the effective implementation of this Act . 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the fo regoing provisio ns, such measures 
may include, — 
(i) the provision for adequate facilities, including legal aid , to the persons subjected to atrocities 
to enable them to avail themselves of justice;  
(ii) the provision for travelling and maintenance expenses  to witnesses, including the victims of 
atrocities, during investigation and tr ial of offences under this Act;  
(iii) the provision for the economic and social rehabilitation of  the victims of the atrocities;  
(iv) the appointment of officers for initiating or exercising supervision over prosecutions for the 
contravention  of the provisions of this Act;  
(v) the setting up of committees at such appropriate levels as the State Government may think fit 
to assist that Government in formulation or implementation of  such mea sures;  
(vi) provision for a periodic survey of the working of the provisions of this Act with a view to 
suggesting measures for the better implementatio n of the provision of this Act;  
(vii) the identification of the areas where the members of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled 
Tribes are likely to be subjected to atrocities and adoption of such measures so as to ensure safety for 
such members.  
(3) The Central Government shall take such steps as may be necessary to co -ordinate the measures 
taken  by the State Governments under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) The Central Government shall, every year, place on the table of each House of Parliament a report 
on the measures taken by itself and by the State Governments in pursuance of the provisions of this 
section. 
22. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or against the State Government or any officer or authority of 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2018, s. 2 (w.e.f. 20 -8-2018).  14 
 Government or any other person for anything which is in good faith done or inte nded to be done under 
this Act.  
23. Power to  make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and i f, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made , the rule shall thereafter have effec t only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
  15 
 1[THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 2)(va)] 
 
Section under the  
Indian Penal Code  Name of offence and punishment  
120A  Definition of criminal conspiracy.  
120B  Punishment of criminal conspiracy.   
141 Unlawful assembly.  
142 Being member of unlawful assembly.  
143 Punishment for unlawful assembly.  
144 Joining unlawful assembly armed with deadly weapon.  
145 Joining or continuing in unlawful assembly, knowing it has been  commanded to 
disperse . 
146 Rioting.  
147 Punishment for rioting.  
148  Rioting, armed with deadly weapon.  
217  Public servant disobeying direction of law with intent to save person  from 
punishment or property from forfeiture . 
319  Hurt.  
320  Grievous hurt.  
323 Punishme nt for voluntarily causing hurt.  
324  Voluntarily causing hurt  by dangerous weapons or means.  
325 Punishment  for voluntarily causing gri evous hurt.  
326B  Voluntarily throwi ng or attempting to throw acid.  
332  Voluntarily causing hurt to dete r public servant from his duty.  
341  Punishment for wrongful restraint.  
354 Assault or criminal force to woman with intent to outrage her  modesty.  
354A  Sexual harassment and punishment for sexual harassment.  
354B  Assault or use of criminal force to woman with intent to disrobe . 
354C  Voyeurism.  
354D  Stalking.  
359 Kidnapping.  
363  Punishment for kidnapping  
365  Kidnapping or abducting with intent secretly and wrongfully to  confine person.  
  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2016, s. 12 (w.e.f. 26 -1-2016).  16 
 Section under the  
Indian Penal Code  Name of offence and punishment  
376B  Sexual intercourse by husband upon his wife during separation.  
376C  Sexual intercourse by a person  in authority.  
447  Punishment for criminal trespass.  
506  Punishment for criminal intimidation.  
509  
 Word, gesture or act intended to insult the modesty of a woman.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Small Industries Development Bank of India Act, 1989--------------------------
1 
 THE SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK  OF INDIA ACT, 1989  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SMALL  INDUSTRIES  DEVELOPMENT  BANK OF  
INDIA AND CAPITAL THEREOF  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Small Industries D evelopment  Bank of India.  
4. Authorised capital.   
4A. Conversion of equity shares into redeemable preference shares . 
4B. Transfer of capital.  
4C. Issued capital.  
4D. Reduction of share capital.  
4E. Restriction on exercising of voting right . 
5. Management.  
6. Constitution of Board.  
7. [Omitted .] 
8. Disqual ification of directors.   
9. Vacatio n and resignation of office by d irector s. 
10. [Omitted .] 
11. [Omitted .] 
12. Executive Committee  and other committees . 
12A. Fees  and allowances of d irectors and members of committees . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
BUSINESS OF THE SMALL  INDUST RIES BANK  
13. Business of Small Industries Bank.  
14. Loans by Central Government.  
15. Borrowings and acceptance of deposits by the Small Industries Bank.  
16. Investment.  
17. Power to transfer rights.  
18. Power to acquire rights.  
19. Loan in foreign currency.  
20. Grants, donations, etc., to the Small Industries Bank.  
 
CHAPTER IVA  
SHARES  
20A. Free transferability of shares.  
20B. Register of shareholders.  
20C. Trust not to be entered on the register of shareholders.  
20D. Board’s right to refuse registration of transfer of shares.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20E. Shares to be securities under the Indian Trusts Act, 1882.  
 
CHAPTER IVB  
MEETING S AND PROCEEDING S 
20F. Annual general meeting . 
20G. Matters to be discussed and procedure in annual general meeting . 
 
CHAPTER V  
SMALL INDUTRIES DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE FUND  
21. Small Industries Development Assistance Fund.  
22. Credits to Small Industries Development Assistance Fund . 
23. Utilisation of Small Industries D evelopment Assistance Fund.  
24. Debits to Small Industries Development Assistance Fund.  
25. Accounts and audit of Small Industries Development Assistance Fund.  
26. Liquidation of Small Industrie s Development  Assistance Fund.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
SMALL INDUSTRIES GENERAL, FUND,  ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
27. Small Industries General Fund.  
28. Preparation of accounts and balance -sheet.  
29. Disposal of profits accruing to Small Industries General Fund.  
30. Audit.  
31. Saving . 
 
CHAPTE R VII  
TRANSFER OF PART OF BUSINESS OF DEVELOPMENT  BANK 
32. Transfer of part of business of Development Bank.  
 
CHAPTER VII I 
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Staff of Small Industries Bank.  
34. Delegation of powers.  
35. Returns.  
36. Obligations as to fidelity and secrecy.   
37. Defects in  appointment not to invalidate  acts, etc.  
37A. Amounts and securities to be held in trust.  
38. Rights of Small Industries Bank in case of default.  
39. Power to seek assistance of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate.  
40. Power to call for repayment before agreed period.  
41. Special provisions for enforcement of claims by Small Industries Bank.  
42. Small Industries Bank to have access to records.  
43. Validity of loan  or advance not to be questioned.  
44. Indemnity of Directors.  
45. Protection of action taken under this Act.  3 
 SECTIONS  
46. Nomination by depositors or holders of bonds or other securities.  
47. Arrangement with Small Ind ustries Bank on appointment of d irector s to prevail.  
48. Act 18 of 1891  to apply in relation to Small Industries Bank.  
49. Act 10 of 1949 not to apply to Small Industries Bank.  
50. [Omitted .] 
51. Liquidation of Small Industries Bank.  
51A. Power to make rules by Central Government.  
52. Power to make regulations.  
53. [Repeale d]. 
54. Power to remove difficultie s. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . [REPEALED .] 
 
 
 
 
  4 
 THE SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1989  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1989 
[25th October , 1989 .] 
An Act to establish the Small Industries Development Bank of India as the principal financial 
institution for the promotion, financing and development of industry in the small -scale sector 
and to co -ordinate the functions of the institutions engag ed in the promotion, financing or 
developing industry in the small -scale sector and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fortieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short  title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Small Industries 
Development Bank of India Act, 1989.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint a nd 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Board of directors of the Small Industries Development Bank of India 
referred to in section  5; 
2[(b) “chairman and m anaging director ” means the chairman and m anaging d irector referred to in 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6;]  
(c)  “Court ” means the High Court with in the local  limits of whose jurisdiction, — 
(i) the defendant or respondent or, where there is more than one defendant or respondent, any 
one of them — 
(1) has his registered office, or  
(2) carries on the whole or part of his business,  
at the time of commencement of any legal proceedings against him under t his Act, or  
(ii) the cause of action for such legal proceedings, wholly or in part, arises;  
(d)  “Development Bank ” means the Industrial Development Bank of India established under 
section 3 of the Industrial Development Bank of India  Act,1964 (18 of 1964);  
(e)  “Director ” means a Director nominated under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 and includes 
the 3[chairman and m anaging director and whole -time d irector];  
(f)  “export ” means export from India of products or services of any industrial concern in              
small -scale sector;  
4[(fa)  “General Insurance Corporation ” means the General Insurance Corporation of India 
formed under section 9 of the General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (57 of 1972);]  
                                                           
1.7th March, 1990, vide notification No. S.O. 197(E), dated 7th March, 1990, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                      
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs by Act 7 of 2000, s. 2 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs , by s. 2, ibid.,  for “Managing Director”  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  5 
 (g) “import ” means import into India of services or goods including all materials, commodities 
and articles in a solid, liquid or gaseous state and all forms of energy for the use of any industrial 
concern in the small -scale sector;  
 1[(h) “industrial co ncern in the small scale sector ” means any concern engaged or to be engaged 
in,— 
(i) the manufacture, preservation or processing of goods;  
(ii) shipping;  
(iii) mining including development of mines;  
(iv) the hotel industry;  
(v) the transport of passengers or goods by road or by water or by air or by ropeway or by lift;  
(vi) the generation, storage or distribution of electricity or any other form of energy;  
(vii) the maintenance, repair, testing or servicing of machinery or equipment  of any 
description or vehicles or vessels or motor boats or trailers or tractors;  
(viii) assembling, repairing or packing any article with the aid of machinery or power;  
(ix) the setting up of, or development of, an industrial area or an industrial estate ; 
(x) fishing or providing shore facilities for fishing or maintenance thereof;  
(xi) providing special or technical knowledge or other services for the promotion of industrial 
growth;  
(xii) providing  engineering, technical, financial, management, marketing or other services or 
facilities for industry;  
(xiii) service industry such as altering, ornamenting, polishing, finishing, oiling, washing, 
cleaning or otherwise treating or adapting any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, 
transport, delivery or disposal;  
(xiv) providing medical, health or other allied services;  
(xv) providing services relating to information technology, telecommunication or electronics;  
(xvi) leasing, sub -leasing or g iving on hire -purchase of industrial plants, equipments, 
machinery or other assets including vehicles, ships and aircraft;  
(xvii) such other activity as the Central Government may, having regard to the objects of this 
Act, by notification, specify in this behalf; or  
(xviii) the research and development of any concept, technology, design, process or product 
whether in relation to any of the matters afore said, including any activities specified under             
sub-clause ( xvii), or any other matter and whi ch is regarded as a small -scale undertaking under 
section 11B of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951(65 of 1951);  
Explanation .—The expression “processing of goods ” includes any art or pro cess for producing, 
preparing or making an article  by subjecting any material to a manual , mechanical, chemical, electrical or 
any other like operation.]  
2[(ha) “Life Insurance Corporation” means the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under 
section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 195 6 (31 of 1956);]  
3*    *  *   *   *  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 53 of 2003, s. 2, and The Schedule (w.e.f. 2 -7-2004).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Clause ( i) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  6 
 (j) “Nation al Small Industries Corporation ” means the National Small Industries Corporation Limited 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(k)  “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations made under this Act;  
1[(la) “public sector bank ” means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India 
Act, 1955 (23 of 1955), a subsidiary bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 
1959 (38 of 1959), a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1970 (5 of 1970) or under section 3 of the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980);]  
2(lb) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constitu ted under the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934  (2 of 1934);  
(lc) “scheduled bank ” means a bank for the time being included in the Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934);]  
(m) “Small Industries Bank ” means the Small Industries Dev elopment Bank of India established 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(n) “State Small Industries Corporation ” means a State Corporation, registered under the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1  of 1956), for small industries in a State;  
(o) “State Financial Corporation ” means a financial corporation established under section 3 or section 
3A or an institution notified under section 46 of the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951);  
(p) “State Industrial Development Corporation ” means a State Corpor ation registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) for the development of industries in a State;  
3*   *   *   *   * 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SMALL  INDUSTRIES  DEVELOPMENT  BANK OF  
INDIA AND CAPITAL THEREOF  
 3. Establishment and incorporation of Small Industries Development Bank of India .—(1) With 
effect from such date  as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be established, 
for the purposes of this Act, a corporation to be known as the Small Industries Development Bank of 
India.  
(2) The Small Industries Bank shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property and to contract, and ma y, by that name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Small Industries Bank shall be at Lucknow or at such other place as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify.  
(4) The Small Industries Bank shall establish offices, branches or agencie s at any place in or outside 
India.  
4[4. Authorised capital .—The authorised capital of the Small Industries Bank shall be one thousand 
crores of rupees divided into seventy -five crores fully paid -up equity shares of rupees ten each and 
twenty -five crores o f fully paid -up redeemable preference shares of rupees ten  each: 
Provided that the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Board, by notification, 
increase the authorised capital to an amount not exceeding two thousand crores of rupees consist ing of 
such number of equity shares and redeemable prefer ence shares as it may deem fit.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2.  Ins. by Act 53 of 2003,  s. 12  and The Schedule  (w.e.f. 2 -7-2004).  
3. Clause ( q) omitted by s. 12 and The Schedule, ibid. (2-7-2004).  
4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 3, for section s 4 to 6 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  7 
 4A. Conversion of equity shares into redeemable preference shares .—(1) The Central 
Government may, at any time after the commencement of the  Small Industries Development Bank of 
India (Amendment) Act, 2000, by  notification, convert such number of equity shares held by the 
Development Bank,  the public sector banks, the General Insurance Corporation, the Life Insurance  
Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central  Government, not exceeding twenty -
five crores, as it may decide, into redeemable  preference shares:  
Provided  that such conversion shall in no case reduce the equity shares held in aggregate  by the 
Development Bank, the public secto r banks, the General Insurance  Corporation, the Life Insurance 
Corporation and other institutions owned or  controlled by the Central Government to less than fifty -one 
per cent.  
(2) The redeemable preference shares referred t o in sub -section ( 1) shall — 
(a) carry such fixed rate of dividend as the Central Government may specify  at the time of such 
conversion, and  
(b) neither be transferable nor carry any voting rights.  
(3) The redeemable preference shares referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be  redeemed by the Small 
Industries Bank within three years from the date of such  conversion in such instalments and in such 
manner as the Board may determine.  
4B. Transfer of capital .—On such date as the Central Government may, in consultation with the 
Development Bank,  by notification, specify (hereinafter referred to as “the specified date ”), not less than 
fifty-one per cent. of the issued capital of the Small Industries Bank which has been subscribed by the 
Development Bank as on the date immediately preceding the spe cified date shall, stand transferred to, and 
vested in, the public sector banks, the General Insurance Corporation, the Life Insurance Corporation and 
other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government in such proportion, manner and on such 
terms and conditions as may be  determined by that Government.  
4C. Issued capital .—(1) The issued capital, of the Small Industries Bank, of four hundred and fifty 
crores  of rupees, immediately before the commencement of the Small Industries Development Bank of 
India (Amendment) Act, 2000, shall, on such commencement, stand divided into forty -five crores equity 
shares of rupees ten each.  
(2) The Board may, from time to tim e, increase the issued equity share capital or redeemable 
preference share capital of the Small Industries Bank by allotment of shares to such persons and on such 
terms and conditions as the Board may determine:  
Provided that no increase in the issued equi ty capital shall be made in such a manner that the 
Development Bank, the public sector banks, the General Insurance Corporation, the Life Insurance 
Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government, hold in aggregate at 
any t ime, less than fifty -one per cent. of the issued equity share capita l of the Small Industries Bank.  
4D. Reduction of share capital .—(1) The Small Industries Bank may, with the prior approval of the 
Central Government, by a resolution passed in a general meeting of the shareholders, reduce its share 
capital in any way.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the s hare capital may be reduced by — 
(a) extinguishing or reducing the liability on any of its equity shares in respect of the  share capital 
not paid -up; 
(b) either with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its equity shares, 
cancelling any paid -up share capital which is lost, or is unrepresented by available assets; or  
(c) either  with or without extinguishing or reducing liability on any of its equity shares, paying 
off any paid -up share capital which is in excess of the wants of the Small Industries Bank.  
(3) In any general meeting referred to in sub -section ( 1), the resolution f or reduction of share capital 
shall be passed by shareholders entitled to vote, voting in person, or, where proxies are allowed, by proxy, 8 
 and the votes cast in favour of the resolution are not less than three times the number of the votes, if any, 
cast ag ainst the resolution by share holders so entitled and voting.  
4E. Restriction on exercising of voting right .—Every shareholder of the Small Industries Bank 
holding equity shares shall have a right to vote in respect of such shares on every resolution and hi s 
voting right on a poll shall be in proportion to his share of the paid -up equity share capital of the Small 
Industries Bank:  
Provided, however, that no shareholder, other than the Development Bank, the public sector banks, 
the General Insurance Corporati on, the Life Insurance Corporation and other institutions owned or 
controlled by the Central Government, shall be entitled to exercise voting rights in respect of any equity 
shares held by him in excess of ten per cent. of t he issued equity share capital.  
5. Management .—(1) The general superintendence, direction and management of affairs and 
business of  the Small Industries Bank shall vest in a Board of Directors which may exercise  all powers 
and do all such acts and things as may be exercised or done by the Small Industries Bank and are not by 
this Act expressly directed or required to  be done by the Small Industries Bank in general meeting.  
(2) The Board may direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall also  be exercisable in 
such cases an d subject to such conditions, if any, as may be  specified by it, by the chairman and managing 
director or the whole -time director s. 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board in discharging its functions  shall act on 
business principles with  due regard to public interest.  
6. Constitution of Board .—(1) The Board shall con sist of the following, namely: — 
(a) a chairman and managing d irector appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) two  whole -time d irectors appointed by the Central Government;  
(c) two d irectors who shall be offi cials of the Central Government nominated by the Central 
Government;  
(d) three d irectors to be nominated in the pres cribed manner by the Development Bank, the publi c 
sector banks, the General Insuran ce Corporation, the Life  Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions 
owned or controlled by the Central Government;  
(e) three d irectors, in cluding one Dire ctor from the offi cials of the State Finan cial Corporations, 
nominated by the Central Government from amongst the persons ha ving spe cial knowledge of, or 
professional experien ce in, s cience, te chnology, e conomi cs, industry, banking, industrial co-
operatives, law, industrial finan ce, investment , accountan cy, marketing or any other matter, the 
special knowledge of, or professiona l experien ce in, whi ch would, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, be useful to the Small Industries Bank;  
(f) such number of d irectors not ex ceeding four ele cted in the pres cribed manner, by shareholders, 
other than the Development Bank, the publi c sector banks, the General Insuran ce Corporation, the 
Life Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government, 
whose names are entered in the register of shareholders of the Small Industries Bank ninety days 
before t he date of the meeting in whi ch such ele ction takes pla ce on the following basis, na mely:— 
(i) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to su ch shareholders is ten per cent. 
or less of the total issued equity share capital, two d irectors; 
(ii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to su ch shareholders is more than ten 
per cent. but less than twenty -five per cent. of the total issued equity share capital, three directors; 
and 
(iii) where the total amount of equity share capital issued to su ch shareholders is twenty -five 
per cent. or more of the total issued equity share capital, four d irectors: 
  9 
 Provided that if the per centage of holding of issued equity share capital with the shareholders, other 
than the Development Bank, the p ublic sector banks, the General Insuran ce Corporation, the Life 
Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the Central Government, does not 
permit ele ction of four d irectors or until the assumption of charge by the ele cted d irectors, the Board may 
at any time co-opt su ch number of d irectors, not ex ceeding four, from amongst the persons having spe cial 
knowledge of, or professional experien ce in, s cience, technology, e conomi cs, industry, banking, industrial 
co-operatives, law, indu strial finan ce, investment, a ccountan cy, marketing or any other matter, the spe cial 
knowledge of, or professional experien ce in, whi ch would, in the opinion of the Board, be useful to the 
Small Industries Bank for carrying out its fun ctions, who shall hold  office until the assumption of charge 
by the ele cted d irectors and an equal number of su ch co-opted d irectors shall retire in the order of                 
co-option.  
(2) The chairman and managing d irector and the whole -time d irectors shall hold offi ce for  such term 
not ex ceeding five years as the Central Government may spe cify in this behalf and any person so 
appointed shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall have the 
right to terminate the term of offi ce of the chairman and managing director or the whole -time director , as 
the case may be, at any time before the expiry of the term spe cified under sub -section ( 2) by giving him 
notice of not less than three months in writing or three months ’ salary and allowan ces in lieu of su ch 
notice and the chairman and managing director or the whole -time director , as the case may be, shall also 
have the right to relinquish his offi ce at any time before the expiry of the term spe cified under                      
sub-section ( 2) by giving, the Central Government, noti ce of not less than three months in writing.  
(4) The chairman and managing d irector and the whole -time d irectors shall re ceive su ch salary and 
allowan ces, as may be det ermined by the Central Government.  
(5) The Central Government may, at any time, remove the chairman and managing director or the 
whole -time director , as the case may be, from offi ce: 
Provided that no person shall be removed from his offi ce, under this sub-section, unless he has been 
given an opportunity of showing cause against his removal.  
(6) Every Dire ctor nominated under clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1), shall hold offi ce during 
the pleasure of the authority nominating him.  
(7) Subje ct to the provisions of sub -section ( 6),— 
(a) every Dire ctor nominated under clauses ( d) and ( e) of sub -section ( 1) shall hold offi ce for 
such term not ex ceeding three years as the Central Government, or the authority nominating him, as 
the case may be, may spe cify in this behalf and thereafter until his su ccessor assumes offi ce, and shall 
be eligible for re -nomination:  
Provided that no su ch Dire ctor shall hold offi ce continuously for a period ex ceeding six years; and  
(b) every Dire ctor ele cted under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) shall hold offi ce for three years and 
thereafter until his su ccessor assumes offi ce and shall be eligible for re -election: 
Provided that no su ch director shall hold offi ce continuously for a period ex ceeding six years.  
(8) The shareholders, other than the Development Bank, the publi c sector banks, the General 
Insuran ce Corporation, the Life Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions owned or controlled by the 
Central Go vernment may, after giving the d irector a reasonable oppor tunity of being heard in the manner 
as may be pres cribed, by resolution passed by majority of the votes of su ch shareholders holding in the 
aggregate not less than one -half of the equity share capital held by su ch shareholders, remove any d irector 
elected under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) and ele ct another d irector in his pla ce to fill the va cancy so 
caused.  
(9) (i) A meeting of the Board shall be held at least on ce in every three months and at least four 
meetings shall be held every year and the meet ings may be held at su ch pla ces as may be pres cribed.  10 
 (ii) Noti ce of every meeting of the Board shall be given in writing to every Dire ctor for the time being 
in India, and at his usual address in India to every other Dire ctor. 
(10) Subje ct to the provisions contained in this Chapter, the Board may meet at su ch times and pla ces 
and shall observe su ch rules of pro cedure in regard to transa ction of its business in cluding the manner of 
adoption of resolutions as may be pres cribed.  
(11) The chairman and managing d irector, if for any reason, is unable to attend a meeting of the 
Board, any other Dire ctor nominated by the chairman and managing d irector in this behalf and in the 
absen ce of su ch nomination, any d irector ele cted by the d irectors prese nt from among themselves, shall 
preside at the meeting.  
(12) All questions whi ch come up before any meeting of the Board shall be de cided by a majority of 
votes of the d irectors present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the chairman and  
managing d irector, or in his absen ce, the person presiding, shall have a se cond or casting vote.  
(13) Save as provided in sub -section ( 12), every Dire ctor of the Board shall have one vote.]  
7. [Managing Director .]—Omitted by the Small Industries Development Bank of India (Amendment) 
Act, 2000 (7 of 2000) s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).     
1[8. Disqualifi cations of d irectors.—A person shall not be e ligible for being ele cted as a d irector 
under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of se ction 6, if he — 
(a) has been found to be of unsound mind by a court of competent jurisdi ction and the finding is 
in for ce; 
(b) is an undis charged insolvent;  
(c) has applied to be adjudi cated as an insolvent and his appli cation is pending;  
(d) has been convicted by a court of competent jurisdi ction, of any offen ce involving moral 
turpitude and senten ced in respe ct thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months and a period 
of five years has not elapsed from the date of expiry of the senten ce; or 
(e) has not paid any call in respe ct of shares of the Small Industries Bank held by him, whether 
alone or jointly with others, and six months have elapsed from the last day fixed for the payment of 
the call. 
9. Vacation and resignation of offi ce by d irectors.—(1) The offi ce of a d irector shall be come 
vacant if he— 
(a) becomes subje ct to any of the disqualifi cations mentioned in se ction 8; or  
(b) resigns his offi ce by giving noti ce in writing under his hand and the resignation is a ccepted; or  
(c) absents himself from three consecutive meetings of the Board without obtaining leave of 
absen ce from the Board.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), the disqualifi cations referred 
to in tha t clause shall not take effe ct— 
(a) for thirty days from the date of the adjudi cation, senten ce or order;  
(b) where any appeal or petition is preferred within thirty days aforesaid against the adjudi cation, 
senten ce or conviction resulting in the senten ce or order until the expiry of seven days from the date 
on whi ch such appeal or petition is disposed of; or  
(c) where within the seven days aforesaid, any further appeal or petition is preferred in respe ct of 
the adjudi cation, senten ce, conviction or order and the appeal or petition, if  allowed, would result in 
the removal of the disqualifi cation, until su ch further appeal or petition is disposed of.]  
10. [Causal Vacancies in office of Managing Director .]—Omitted by the Small Industries 
Development Bank of India (Amendment) Act, 2000 (7of 2000) s. 6 (w.e.f. 27-3-2000 ). 
11.  [Meeting s of the Board .]—Omitted by  s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 5, for sections 8 and 9 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  11 
 1[12. Executive Committee and other committees .—(1) The Board shall constitute an Exe cutive 
Committee consisting of the chairman and managing d irector, the whole -time d irectors and su ch other 
directors as it may deem fit.  
(2) The Exe cutive Committee shall dis charge su ch fun ctions as may be pres cribed or a s may, without 
prejudi ce to the provisions contained in se ction 34, be delegated to it by the Board.  
(3) The Board may constitute su ch other committees whether consisting wholly of d irectors or wholly  
of other persons or partly of d irectors and partly of other persons for su ch purpose or purposes as it may 
think fit.  
(4) The Exe cutive Committee or any other committee constituted under this se ction shall meet at su ch 
times and pla ces and shall observe su ch rules of pro cedure in regard to the transa ction of business at its 
meetings as may be pres cribed.  
12A. Fees and allowan ces of d irectors and members of committees .—The directors and the 
members of a committee shall be paid su ch fees and allowan ces as may be pres cribed for attending the 
meetings of the Board or of any committee constituted in pursuan ce of this A ct and for attending to any 
other work of the Small Industries Bank:  
Provided that no fees shall be payable to the chairman and managing d irector or to the whole -time 
directors or to any other d irector who is an offi cial of the Government. ] 
CHAPTER IV  
BUSINESS OF THE  SMALL  INDU STRIES BANK  
13. Business of Small Industries Bank .—(1) The Small Industries Bank shall fun ction as the 
principal finan cial institution  for the promotion, finan cing and development of industrial concerns in the 
small -scale se ctor and shall also coordinate the fun ctions of institutions engaged in promoting, finan cing 
and developing the industrial concerns in the small -scale se ctor and may carry on and transa ct any of t he 
following business, namely: — 
2[(i) granting loans and advan ces to any State Finan cial Corporation, State Industrial 
Development Corporation, State Small Industries Corporation, s cheduled bank, State Cooperative 
Bank or su ch other finan cial institutions, approved by the Board in this behalf, by way of refinan ce on 
such terms and conditions as it may deem fit to impose, of any loans or advan ces granted to industrial 
concerns in the small -scale se ctor by su ch corporation, bank,  or institution or, of any loans or 
advan ces granted by the State Finan cial Corporation or State Industrial Development Corporation to 
any other industrial concern, whi ch are repayable within a period not ex ceeding twenty -five years; ] 
(ii) accepting, dis counting or redis counting bills of ex change and promissory notes made, drawn, 
accepted or endorsed by industrial concerns in the small -scale se ctor or by any person selling 
produ cts manufa ctured by an industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(iii) subscribing to, or pur chasing sto cks, shares bonds or debentures of, any State Finan cial 
Corporation, State Industrial Development Corporation, State Small Industries Corporation, National 
Small Industries Corporation or  3[such other finan cial institutions as m ay be approved by the Board in 
this behalf];  
(iv) granting lines of credit or loans and advan ces to any State Finan cial Corporation, State 
Industrial Development Corporation, State Small Industries Corporation, National Small Industries 
Corporation or  3[such other finan cial institutions as may be appro ved by the Board in this behalf] ; 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 7 of 2000,  s. 7, for section 12 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Subs. by  s. 8, ibid.,  for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “such other financial institutions, as the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the 
Development Bank, specify” (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  12 
 (v) granting loans and advan ces to any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor or subs cribing 
to, or pur chasing, or under -writing the issue of sto cks, shares, bonds or debentures of, any su ch 
concern: 
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to pre clude the Small Industries 
Bank from granting loans or advan ces to, or subs cribing to the debentures of, an industrial concern in 
the small -scale se ctor, the amounts outstanding thereon may be convertible at the option of the Small 
Industries Bank into sto cks or shares of that concern within the period of loan, advan ce or debenture 
is repayable.  
Explanation .—In this clause, the expression “the amounts out standing thereon ” used in relation to 
any loan or advan ce, shall mean the prin cipal, interest and other charges payable on su ch loan or 
advan ce as at the time when the amounts are sought to be converted into sto cks or shares;  
(vi) granting loans and advan ces— 
(a) to any person exporting; or  
(b) to any person outside India, in conne ction with the export; or  
(c) for the exe cution of turn -key proje cts outside India by any industrial concern in the small -
scale se ctor; 
(vii) granting loans and advan ces to a s cheduled bank or any other bank or su ch finan cial 
institutions  1[approved by the Board in this behalf], by way of refinan ce of loans and advan ces 
granted by it for purposes of export;  
(viii) accepting, collecting, dis counting, redis counting, pur chasing, sel ling or negotiating in or 
outside India, bills of ex change or promissory notes arising out of transa ctions, relating to export or 
import and granting of loans and advan ces in or outside India against su ch bills or promissory notes;  
(ix) granting, opening, issuing, confirming or endorsing letters of credit and negotiating or 
collecting bills or other do cuments drawn thereunder;  
(x) granting lines of credit to the Government of any foreign State or any finan cial institution or 
person outside India for the purpose of export or import;  
(xi) finan cing export from or import into India of ma chinery, equipment or other assets in cluding 
vehicles, ships and air crafts on lease, sub -lease or hire pur chase basis by or for any industrial concern 
in small -scale se ctor; 
(xii) buying or selling of, or entering into su ch other dealings in, foreign ex change, as may be 
necessary for the dis charge of the fun ctions of the Small Industries Bank;  
(xiii) opening of any a ccount in any bank in or outside India or making of any agen cy 
arrangements with, or a cting as an agent or correspondent of, any bank or other institution in or 
outside India;  
(xiv) transferring for consideration any instrument relating to loans and advan ces granted by it to 
any industrial concern in the small -scale sector; 
(xv) granting loans and advan ces to any person for purposes of investment in any industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xvi) guaranteeing loans raised from, or credit arrangements made with, any bank, finan cial 
institution or other lending  agen cy in any country outside India in foreign curren cy, with the approval 
of the Central Government, by industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xvii) guaranteeing deferred payments due from any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 8, for “as the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Developmen t Bank, specify” 
(w.e.f. 27 -3-2000 ). 13 
 (xviii) guaranteeing — 
(a) loans raised by industrial concerns in the small -scale se ctor whi ch are floated in the publi c 
market, or  
(b) loans raised by any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor from any s cheduled bank 
or State Co-operative Bank or State Finan cial Corporation or State Industrial Corporation or su ch 
other finan cial institutions 1[as approved by the Board in this behalf];  
(xix) guaranteeing the obligations of any s cheduled bank or State Co-operative Bank or State 
Finan cial Corporation or State Industrial Development Corporation or State Small Industries 
Corporation or su ch other finan cial institutions  1[as approved by the Board in this behalf], arising out 
of, or in conne ction with, underwriting the issue of sto cks, shares, bonds or debentures of any 
industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xx) providing fa ctoring servi ces to any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxi) providing te chnical and finan cial consultan cy, mer chant banking and extension servi ces; 
(xxii) undertaking a ctivities for promotion of industry in the small -scale se ctor in cluding 
entrepreneur al development programmes, raw material pur chase, marketing support and promotion 
of, or finan cial support to, agen cies engaged in su ch activities; 
(xxiii) acquiring, with the approval of   2[the Central Government], the undertaking in cluding the 
business, assets and liabilities of any institution the prin cipal object of whi ch is the promotion or 
development of industry in the small -scale se ctor in India, or the grant of finan cial assistan ce for su ch 
promotion or development;  
(xxiv) leasing, sub -leasing or giving on hire or hire -purchase any movable or immovable assets to 
any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxv) undertaking resear ch and surveys for evaluating or dealing with marketing or investments 
and undertaking and carrying on te chno-economi c studies in conne ction with the development of 
industry in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxvi) providing te chnical, legal, marketing and adminis trative assistan ce to any industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor or any person for promotion, management or expansion of any 
industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxvii ) planning, promoting and developing industries in the small -scale se ctor; 
(xxviii ) promoting, forming or condu cting or asso ciating in the promotion, formation or condu ct 
of companies, subsidiaries, so cieties, trusts or su ch other asso ciation of persons as it may deem fit;  
(xxix) acting as agent of — 
(a) the Central Government or of the Reserve Bank or of the Development Bank, or  
(b) such other Government or person as 3[the Board] may authorise;  
(xxx) doing any other kind of business whi ch the Central Government may, on the 
recommendation of  3[the Board], authorise;  
(xxxi) generally doing su ch other a cts and things as may be in cidental to, or consequential upon, 
the exer cise of its powers or the dis charge of its duties under this A ct or any other law for the time 
being in for ce including sale or transfer of any of its assets.  
(2) The Small Industries Bank may re ceive in consideration of any of the servi ces mentioned in             
sub-section ( 1) such commission, brokerage, interest, remuneration or fees as may be agreed upon.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 8, for “ as the Central Government may, on the recommendation of the Development Bank, specify” 
(w.e.f. 27 -3-2000 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “the Central Government on the recommendation  of the Development  Bank” (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “the Development Bank” (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  14 
 (3) The Small Industries Bank shall not grant any loan or advan ce or other finan cial accommodation 
on the se curity of its own bonds or debentures.  
14. Loans by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after the due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, advan ce to the Small Industries B ank— 
(a) an interest free loan of su ch amount and repayable in su ch instalments and in su ch other 
manner as may be determined by the Central Government; and  
(b) such further sums of money by way of loan on su ch terms and conditions as may  be agreed 
upon:  
Provided that the Central Government may, on a request being made to it by the Small Industries 
Bank, in crease the number of instalments or alter the amount of any instalment or vary the date on whi ch 
any instalment is payable under clause  (a). 
15. Borrowings and a cceptan ce of deposits by the Small Industries Bank .—(1) The Small 
Industries Bank may, for the purpose of carrying ou t its fun ctions under this A ct,— 
(a) issue and sell bonds and debentures with or without the guarantee of the Central Government;  
(b) borrow money from the Reserve Bank — 
(i) repayable on demand or on the expiry of the fixed periods not ex ceeding ninety days from 
the date on whi ch the money is so borrowed against the se curity of sto cks, funds and se curities 
(other than immovable property) in whi ch a trustee is authorised to invest trust money by any law 
for the time being in for ce in India;  
(ii) against bills of ex change or promissory notes arising out of bona fide  commer cial or trade 
transa ctions, bearing two or mo re good signatures and maturing within five years from the date of 
the borrowing;  
(iii) out of the National Industrial Credit (Long Term Operations) Fund established under 
section 46 C of the Reserve Bank of India A ct, 1934 (2 of 1934), for any of the purpo ses spe cified 
in that se ction; 
(c) borrow money from the Development Bank or su ch other authority, organisation or institution 
as may be generally or spe cially 1[approved by the Board] ; 
(d) accept deposits repayable after the expiry of su ch period and on such terms as may be 
generally or spe cially 1[approved by the Board].  
(2) The Central Government may, on a request being made to it by the Small Industries Bank, 
guarantee the bonds and debentures issued by that Bank as to the repayment of prin cipal and th e payment 
of interest at su ch rate as may be fixed by that Government.  
2[16. Investment .—The Small Industries Bank may invest (whether by way of deposits in banks or 
otherwise) the amounts available in the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund or the Small 
Industries General Fund or any other fund or a ccount whi ch are not for the time being required for the 
transa ction of business in su ch manner as may be approved by the Board.]  
17. Power to transfer rights .—The rights and interests of the Small In dustries Bank (in cluding any 
other rights in cidental thereto) in relation to any loan or advan ce granted, or any amount re coverable, by it 
may be transferred by the Small Industries Bank, either in whole or in part, by the exe cution or issue of 
any instrument or by the transfer of any instrument by endorsement, or in any other manner in whi ch the 
rights and interests in relation to su ch loan or advan ce may be lawfully transferred, and the Small 
Industries Bank may, notwithstanding su ch transfer, a ct as the trustee for the transferee.  
18. Power to a cquire rights .—The Small Industries Bank shall have the right to a cquire, by transfer 
on assignment the rights and interest s of any publi c finan cial institution as defined in se ction 4A of the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 9, for “ approved  by the Development Bank ” (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for section 16 ( w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  15 
 Companies A ct, 1956 (1 of 1956) (in cluding any other rights in cidental thereto) in relation to any loan or 
advan ce granted, or any amount re coverable by su ch institution, either in whole or in part, by the 
execution or issue of any instrument or by the transfer of any i nstrument or in any other manner.  
19. Loans in foreign curren cy.—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Foreign Ex change 
Regulation A ct, 1973 (46 of 1973), or in any other ena ctment for the time being in for ce relating to 
foreign ex change, the Small  Industries Bank may, for the purposes of granting loans and advan ces under 
this A ct, borrow, with the previous consent of the Central Government 1***, foreign curren cy from any 
bank or finan cial institution in any foreign country or otherwise.  
(2) The Central Government may, where ne cessary, guarantee any loan taken by the Small Industries 
Bank under sub -section ( 1) or any part thereof as to the repayment of prin cipal and the payment of 
interest and other in cidental charges.  
(3) All loans and advan ces granted by the Small Industries Bank out of foreign curren cy borrowed 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be expressed in terms of foreign curren cy as equivalent of Indian curren cy 
calculated in a ccordan ce with the rate of ex change prevailing at the time of gra nt thereof, and the amount 
due thereunder shall be repayable in equivalent Indian curren cy, calculated in a ccordan ce with the rate of 
exchange prevailing at the time of repayment of su ch loan or advan ce. 
(4) Unless otherwise provided by the Central Governm ent, any loss or profit in conne ction with any 
borrowing of foreign curren cy under sub -section ( 1) for the purpose of granting loans and advan ces under 
this A ct, or with its repayment to the concerned foreign lending agen cy, on a ccount of any flu ctuations in 
the ex change a ccruing— 
(a) during the period within whi ch the loan or advan ce is repayable by the industrial concern in 
the small -scale se ctor or the period of a ctual repayment thereof by the concern, whi chever is longer, 
shall be reimbursed by, or paid  to, as the case may be, the re cipient of su ch loans and advan ces; 
(b) after the expiry of the p eriod spe cified in clause ( a),— 
(i) shall be borne by the Small Industries Bank in respe ct of normal market flu ctuations in the 
rate of foreign ex change;  
(ii) shall be reimbursed by, or paid to, as the case may be, the Central Government in respe ct 
of flu ctuations other than the normal market flu ctuations in foreign ex change.  
Explanation .—If any question arises as to whether any flu ctuation as aforesaid is a nor mal market 
fluctuation or not, the same shall be de cided by the Central Government whose de cision thereon shall be 
final.  
20. Grants, donations, et c., to the Small Industries Bank .—The Small Industries Bank may 
receive gifts, grants, donations, benefa ctions or other monies from Government or any other sour ce. 
2[CHAPTER IVA  
SHARES  
20A. Free transferability of shares .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), the equity 
shares of the Small Industries Bank shall be freely transferable.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall entitle the Development Bank, the publi c sector banks, 
the General Insuran ce Corporation, the Life Insuran ce Corporation and other institutions owned or 
controlled by the Central Government to transfer any share s held by them in the Small Industries Bank if 
such transfer will result in redu cing the equity shares held in aggregate by them to less than fifty -one per 
cent. of the issued equity share capital of the Small Industries Bank.  
                                                           
1. The words “and the Development Bank” omitted by Act 7 of 2000, s. 11  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  16 
 20B. Register of shareholders. —(1) The Small Industries Bank shall keep at its head offi ce a 
register, in one or more books, of the shareholders and shall enter therein the following parti culars so far 
as they may be available, namely: — 
(i) the names, addresses and o ccupations, if any, of the shareholders and a statement of the shares 
held by ea ch shareholder, distinguishing ea ch share by its denoting number;  
(ii) the date on whi ch each person is so entered as a shareholder;  
(iii) the date on whi ch any person ceases to be a  shareholder; and  
(iv) such other parti culars as may be pres cribed:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the shares held with a depository under the 
Depositories A ct, 1996 (22 of 1996).  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Small Industries 
Bank to keep the register of the shareholders in computer floppies, diskettes, compa ct disk or any other 
electroni c form, subje ct to su ch safeguards, as may be pres cribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Eviden ce Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), a copy of, or 
extra ct from, the register of the shareholders, certified to be a true copy under the hand of an offi cer of the 
Small Industries Bank authorised in this behalf, shall, in all legal pro ceedings, be admissible in eviden ce. 
(4) The Register of benefi cial owners maintained by a depository under se ction 11 of the Depositories 
Act, 1996 (22 of 1996) shall be deemed to be a Register of the shareholders for the purposes of this A ct. 
20C. Trust not  to be entered on the register of shareholders .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in se ction 20B, no noti ce of any trust, express, implied or constru ctive, shall be entered on the 
register of shareholders or be re ceivable by the Small Industries Bank:  
Provided that nothing in this se ction shall apply to a depository in respe ct of the shares held by it as a 
registered owner on behalf of a benefi cial owner.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of se ction 20B and this se ction, the expressions “benefi cial owner ”, 
“depository ” and “registered owner ” shall have the meanings respe ctively assigned to them in clauses ( a), 
(e) and ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of se ction 2 of the Depositories A ct, 1996 (22 of 1996).  
20D. Board’ s right to refuse registration of transfer of shares .—(1) The Board may refuse to 
register the transfer of any shares in the name of the transferee on any one or more of the following 
grounds, a nd on no other ground, namely: — 
(a) the transfer of the shares is in contravention of the provisions of this A ct or regulations made 
thereunder or any other law;  
(b) the transfer of the shares, in the opinion of the Board, is prejudi cial to the interests of the 
Small Industries Bank or to the publi c interest;  
(c) the transfer of shares is prohibited by an order of a court, tribunal or any other authority under 
any law for the time being in for ce. 
(2) The Board shall, before the expiry of two months from the date on whi ch the instrument of 
transfer of shares of the Small Industries Bank is lodged with it for the purpos e of registration of su ch 
transfer, not only form, in good faith, its opinion as to whether su ch registration ought not or ought to be 
refused on any of the grounds referred to in sub -section ( 1) but also, — 
(a) if it has formed the opinion that su ch registration ought not to be so refused, effe ct such 
registration; and  
(b) if it has formed the opinion that su ch registration ought to be refused on any of the grounds 
mentioned in sub -section ( 1), intimate the transferor and the transferee by noti ce in w riting.  
(3) An appeal against the order of refusal of the Board under sub -section ( 2) shall lie to the Central 
Government and the pro cedure for filing and hearing of su ch appeal shall be in a ccordan ce with the rules 
made by the Central Government in this b ehalf.  17 
 20E. Shares to be se curities under the Indian Trusts A ct, 1882 .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Indian Trusts A ct, 1882 (2  of 1882), the shares of the Small Industries Bank shall be 
deemed to be in cluded among the se curities enumerated in section 20 of the said A ct. 
CHAPTER IVB  
MEETING S AND PRO CEEDING S 
 20F. Annual general meeting .—(1) The Small Industries Bank shall in ea ch year hold, in addition 
to any other meetings, a general meeting as its annual general meeting and shall spe cify the meeting as 
such in the noti ces calling it; and not more than fifteen months shall elapse between the date of one 
annual general meeting and that of the next:  
Provided that the Small Industries Bank may hold the first annual general meeting within a period of 
six months from the date on whi ch it allots shares for the first time to publi c for subs cription:  
Provided further that the Central Government may extend the time within whi ch any annual general 
meeting shall be held by a period not ex ceeding three months.  
(2) Every annual general meeting shall be called for a time during business hours, on a day that is not 
publi c holiday, and shall be held either at head offi ce or at some other pla ce within the city or town in 
which the head offi ce is situated.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this se ction, “publi c holiday ” means a publi c holiday within the 
meaning of the Negotiable Instruments A ct, 1881 (26 of 1881):  
Provided that no Sunday shall be deemed to be su ch a holiday in relation to any meeting:  
Provided further that no day de clared by the Central Government to be a publi c holiday shall be 
deemed to be su ch a holiday, in relation to any meeting, unless the de claration was notified before the 
issue of the noti ce convening su ch meeting.  
20G. Matters to be di scussed and pro cedure in annual general meeting .—(1) The shareholders 
present at an annual general meeting shall be  entitled to dis cuss and adopt — 
(a) the balan ce-sheet and profit and loss a ccount of the Small Industries Bank made up to the date 
on whi ch its accounts are closed and balan ced; 
(b) the report of working of the Small Industries Bank for the period covered by the a ccounts;  
(c) the auditor’ s report on the balan ce-sheet and a ccounts;  
(d) proposals for de claration of dividend and capitalisation  of reserves;  
(e) appointment of auditors referred to in sub -section ( 1) of se ction 30.  
(2) The shareholders present at an annual general meeting may also dis cuss any other matter to be 
transa cted at su ch meetings in a ccordan ce with the provisions of this Act. 
(3) The matters relating to — 
(a) the manner in whi ch annual general meeting or other meetings are held under this  Act and the 
procedure to be followed thereat;  
(b) the manner in whi ch voting rights may be exer cised and resolutions may be passed; and  
(c) the pro cedure for transa ction of business at su ch meetings and related matters.  
shall be su ch as may be pres cribed. ] 
CHAPTER V  
SMALL  INDUSTRIES  DEVELOPMENT  ASSISTAN CE FUND 
21. Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .—(1) With effe ct from su ch date  as the Central 
Government may, by notifi cation, appoint, the Small Industries Bank shall establish and maintain, a 
special fund to be called the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund.  18 
 (2) The Small Industries Bank may, at any time, establish any fund as part of the Small Industries 
Development Assistan ce Fund for su ch purpose or purposes as may be approved by the Central 
Government on the re commendation of the  1[Board], or establish any other fund as may be required by or 
under any law for the tim e being in for ce. 
22. Credits to Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .—To the Small Industries 
Development As sistan ce Fund shall be credited— 
(a) all amounts re ceived for the purpose of that Fund by way of loans, gifts, grants, donations, 
benefa ctions or otherwise from Government or any other sour ce; 
(b) repayments or re coveries in respe ct of loans, advan ces or other fa cilities granted from the 
Fund;  
(c) income or profits from investments made from the Fund; and  
(d) income a ccruing or arising to the Fund, by way of interest or otherwise, on a ccount of the 
appli cation of the Fund in a ccordan ce with the provisions of se ction 23.  
23. Utilisation of Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .—The Small Industries Bank 
may disburse or spend from the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund, any amount for su ch 
purposes as the Central Government may, on the re commendation of the  2[Board], spe cify. 
24. Debits to Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .—(1) To the Small Industries 
Development A ssistan ce Fund shall be debited — 
(a) such amounts as may from time to time be disbursed or spend under se ction 23;  
(b) such amounts as may be required for dis charging the liabilities in respe ct of loans re ceived for 
the purpose of that Fund;  
(c) any loss arising on a ccount of investment made out of that Fund; and  
(d) such expenditure arising out of, or in conne ction with, the administration and appli cation of 
that Fund as may be determined by the Board.  
(2) No amount shall be debited to the Small Ind ustries Development Assistan ce Fund ex cept as 
provided for in sub -section ( 1). 
25. Accounts and audit of Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .—(1) The                 
balan ce-sheet and a ccounts of Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund shall be prepared in su ch 
form and manner as may be pres cribed.  
(2) The Board shall cause the books and a ccounts of the Small Industries Development Assistan ce 
Fund to be closed and balan ced as on the 31st day of Mar ch, ea ch year or su ch other date as the  3[Boar d] 
may spe cify. 
4[(3) The Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund shall be audited by the auditors, appointed 
under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 30, who shall make a separate report thereon.]  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of se ction 30 shall, so far as may be, apply in 
relation to the audit of the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund.  
(5) The Small Industries Bank shall furnish to the Central Government   5*** within four months from 
the date on whi ch the a ccounts of the S mall Industries Development Assistan ce Fund ar e closed and 
balan ced, a copy of balan ce-sheet and a ccounts together with a copy of its auditors ’ report and a report on 
the operation of that Fund during the relevant year and the Central Government shall, as soon as may be 
after they are re ceived by it, cause the same to be laid before ea ch House of Parliament.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 13, for “Development Bank” (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “ Development Bank” (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by  s. 15,  ibid., for “Development Bank”  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
4. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).   
5.  The words “and the Development Bank” omitted by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-3-2000).  19 
 26. Liquidation of Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund .—The Small Industries 
Development Assistan ce Fund shall not be closed or wound up save by order of the Central Government 
and in su ch manner as that Government may,  1*** direct.  
CHAPTER VI  
SMALL  INDUSTRIES  GENERAL  FUND, A CCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
27. Small Industries General Fund .—All re ceipts of the Small Industries Bank other than those 
which are to be credited to the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund under this A ct shall be 
credited to a fund to be called the Small Industries General Fund and all payments by the Small Industries 
Bank, other than those whi ch are to be debited to the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund, 
shall be made out of the Small Industries General Fund.  
28. Preparation of a ccounts and balan ce-sheet .—(1) The balan ce-sheet and a ccounts of the Small 
Industries Bank shall be prepared in  such form and manner as may be pres cribed.  
(2) The Board shall cause the books and a ccounts of the Small Industries Bank to be closed and 
balan ced as on the 31st day of Mar ch each year or su ch other date, as the  2[Board] may spe cify. 
29. Disposal of profits a ccruing to Small Industries General Fund .—(1) The Small Industries 
Bank may establish a reserve fund to whi ch may be transferred su ch sums as that Bank may deem fit out 
of the annual profits a ccruing to the Small Industries General Fund.  
3[(2) After making provision for bad and doubtful debts, depre ciation of assets and for all other 
matters for whi ch provision is ne cessary or expedient or whi ch is usually provided for by bankers and for 
the reserve fund referred to in sub -section ( 1), and after  transferring a part of the profits to su ch other 
reserves or funds as may be considered appropriate, the Board may, out of its net profits, propose a 
dividend.]  
30. Audit .—4[(1)The a ccounts of the Small Industries Banks shall be audited by auditors duly  
qualified to a ct as auditors under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 226 of the  Companies A ct, 1956 (1  of 1956), 
who shall be appointed by the Small Industries  Bank in general meeting of the shareholders out of the 
panel of auditors  approved by the Reserve Bank for su ch term and on su ch remuneration as the  Reserve 
Bank may fix.]  
(2) The auditors shall be supplied with a copy of the annual balan ce-sheet of the  Small Industries 
Bank and it shall be their duty to examine it tog ether with the  accounts and vou chers relating thereto and 
they shall have a list delivered to  them of all books kept by the Small Industries Bank and shall at all 
reasonable  times have a ccess to the books, a ccounts, vou chers and other do cuments of the  Small 
Industries Bank.  
(3) The auditors may, in relation to su ch accounts, examine any Dire ctor or any  officer or other 
employee of the Small Industries Bank and shall be entitled to  require from the Board or offi cers or other 
employees of the Small Industries  Bank su ch information and explanati on as they may think ne cessary for 
the performan ce of their duties.  
(4) The auditors shall make a report to the Small Industries Bank upon the annual  balan ce-sheet and 
accounts examined by them and in every su ch report they shall  state whether in their opinion the           
balan ce-sheet is a full and fair  balan ce-sheet containing all ne cessary parti culars and properly drawn up so 
as to exhibit a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the Small Industries  Bank and in case th ey had 
called for any explanation or information from the  Board or any offi cer or other employee of the Small 
Industries Bank whether it  has been given and whether it is satisfa ctory. 
                                                           
1. The words “ , on the recommendation of the Development Bank” omitted by Act 7 of 2000, s. 16 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Subs. by  s. 17, ibid., for  “Development Bank”  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by  s. 18, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 27-3-2000).  
4. Subs. by  s. 19,  ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  20 
 (5) The Small Industries Bank shall furnish to the Central Government   1*** within four months from 
the date on whi ch its a ccounts are closed and balan ced, a copy of its balan ce-sheet and a ccounts toget her 
with a copy of the auditors’ report and a report of the working of the Small Industries Bank during the  
relevant year, and  the Central Government shall, as soon as may be after they  are re ceived by it, cause the 
same to be laid before ea ch House of Parliament.  
31. Saving.—Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 4) of se ction 25, nothing contained in this 
Chapter shall apply to the Small Industries Development Assistan ce Fund.  
CHAPTER VII  
TRANSFER OF PART OF BUSINESS OF DEVELOPMENT BANK 
32. Transfer of part of business of Development Bank .—(1) On su ch date  as the Central 
Government may, by notifi cation, appoint, the business, assets and liabilities, rights, interests, privileges 
and obligations of the Development Bank relating to the Small Industries Development Fund and the 
National Equity Fund (hereinafter in this se ction referred to as Fund) shall stand transferred  to, and vest 
in, the Small Industries Bank.  
Explanation .—“Small Industries Development Fund ” and “National Equity Fund ” mean the Small 
Industries Development Fund and National Equity Fund referred to as su ch in the books and a ccounts of 
the Development Ba nk on the day immediately pre ceding the date appointed in this sub -section. 
(2) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Small Industries Bank under sub -section ( 1) of the Funds, 
that Bank shall pay to the Development Bank su ch amount and on su ch terms and  conditions as the 
Development Bank may determine.  
(3) All contra cts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers of attorney, grants of legal representation and 
other instruments of whatever nature whi ch relate to the Funds and whi ch are subsisting or having effe ct 
immediately before the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) and to whi ch the Development Bank is a party 
or whi ch are in favour of the Development Bank shall, — 
(a) if they relate ex clusively to the Funds, be of full for ce and effe ct against or in favour of the 
Small Industries Bank and may be enfor ced and a cted upon as fully and effe ctively as if, instead of 
the Development Bank, the Small Industries Bank had been a party thereto or as if they had been 
issued in favour of the Small Industries Bank; and  
(b) if they relate not only to the Funds but also to any of the other business or fun ctions of the 
Development Bank, be of full for ce and effe ct against or in favour of both the Development Bank and 
the Small Industries Bank and may be enfor ced or a cted upon as  fully and effe ctively as if, in addition 
to the Development Bank, the Small Industries Bank had also been a party thereto or as if they had 
been issued in favour of the Development Bank and also the Small Industries Bank.  
(4) If, on the date referred to i n sub -section ( 1), any suit, appeal or other legal pro ceeding of whatever 
nature relating to the Funds is pending, the same shall not abate, be dis continued or be in any way 
prejudi cially affe cted by reason of the transfer to the Small Industries Bank of the business of the 
Development Bank or of anything contained in this A ct, but the suit, a ppeal or other pro ceeding may, — 
(a) where it relates ex clusively to the Funds, be continued prose cuted and enfor ced by or against 
the Small Industries Bank; and  
(b) where it relates not only to the Funds but also to any of the other business or fun ctions of the 
Development Bank be continued, prose cuted and enfor ced by or against the Development Bank and 
the Small Industries Bank or, if the Central Government by order in writing so dire cts, by or against 
such one of them, as may be spe cified in su ch order.  
(5) If any question arises as to whether any contra ct, deed, bond, agreement, power of attorney, grant 
of legal representation or other instrument referred to in sub -section ( 3) or any suit, appeal or other legal 
                                                           
1. The words “and the Development Bank”  omitted by Act 7 of 2000, s. 19  (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  21 
 proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 4) relates or relate ex clusively to the Funds it shall be referred to 
the Development Bank for de cision and  the de cision of the Development Bank thereon shall be final.  
(6) The provisions of this se ction shall have effe ct notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Industrial Development Bank of India A ct, 1964 (18 of 1964), or any other law or any instrument hav ing 
force by virtue of the said A ct or other law.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
33. Staff of Small Industries Bank .—(1) The Small Industries Bank may appoint su ch number of 
officers and other employees as it considers ne cessary or desirable for the effi cient performan ce of its 
functions and determine the terms and conditions of their appointment and servi ce. 
(2) At any time before the expiry of six months from the appointed day, the Development Bank may, 
in publi c interest, transfer to the Small Industries Ban k such members of its staff whom the Development 
Bank considers as relevant to, or suitable for, the fun ctions of the Small Industries Bank, as on deputation 
with the Small Industries Bank, but su ch members shall hold offi ce by the same tenure and upon the same 
terms and conditions of servi ce as respe cts remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement or other 
terminal benefits as they would have held su ch offi ce if the Small Industries Bank had not been 
established and shal l continue to do so until the Development Bank either on its own motion or at the 
request of the Small Industries Bank re calls su ch member of staff to its servi ce: 
Provided that every member of the staff so transferred may ele ct to go ba ck to the Developme nt Bank 
by exer cising an option in writing to that effe ct before the expiry of a period of nine months from the 
appointed day and on the exer cise of su ch option, the Development Bank shall, before the expiration of a 
period of eighteen months from the appo inted day, take ba ck such member of the staff and he shall be 
deemed to have been on deputation to the Small Industries Bank during the period he was a member of 
the staff of the Small Industries Bank.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industri al Disputes A ct, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in for ce, the absorption of  any member of the staff by the Small Industries 
Bank in its regular servi ce under this se ction shall not entitle  such employee to any compensation under 
that A ct or other law and no su ch claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this se ction, “appointed day ” means the date of establishment of 
the Small Industries Bank under se ction 3.  
34. Delegat ion of powers .—The Board may, by general or spe cial order, delegate to any Dire ctor or 
committee constituted under se ction 12 or to any offi cer or other employee of the Small Industries Bank, 
subje ct to su ch conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, su ch of its powers and 
duties under this A ct as it may deem ne cessary.  
35. Returns .—The Small Industries Bank shall furnish from time to time to  1[the Central 
Government and the Reserve Bank] su ch returns as they may require.  
36. Obligations as to fidelity and se crecy.—(1) The Small Industries Bank shall not, ex cept as 
otherwise required by this A ct or any other law, divulge any information relating to, or to the affairs of, its 
constituents ex cept in circumstan ces in whi ch it is, in accordan ce with the law or pra ctice and usage 
customary among bankers ne cessary or appropriate for the Small Industries Bank to divulge su ch 
information.  
(2) The Small Industries Bank may, for the purpose of the effi cient dis charge of the fun ctions unde r 
this A ct, collect from or furnish to the Central Government, Reserve Bank, Development Bank, State 
Bank, any subsidiary bank, nationalised bank or other s cheduled bank, State Cooperative Bank, State 
Finan cial Corporation, State Industrial Development Corporation, State Small Industries Corporation or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 20, for “the Central Government, the Reserve Bank and th e Development Bank” (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  22 
 the National Small Industries Corporation or su ch other institutions   1[as may be spe cified by the Board], 
credit information or other information as it may consider useful for the purpose, in su ch manner and  at 
such times, as it may think fit.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, the expression “credit information ” shall have the 
same meaning as in clause ( c) of se ction 45A of the Reserve Bank of India A ct, 1934 (2 of 1934), subje ct 
to the modifi cation that “banking company ” referred to therein shall mean a bank, corporation or other 
institution referred to in this sub -section. 
(3) Every Dire ctor, member of a committee, auditor, offi cer or other employee of the Small Industries 
Bank   2*** whose servi ces are utilised by the Small Industries Bank under the provisions of this A ct, 
shall, before entering upon his duties, make a de claration of fidelity and se crecy in the form set out in the 
First S chedule to this A ct. 
37. Defe cts in appointment  not to invalidate a cts, etc.—(1) No a ct or pro ceeding of the Board or of 
any committee of the Small Industries Bank shall be questioned on the ground merely of the existen ce of 
any va cancy in, or defe ct in the constitution of, the Board or the committee, as the case may be.  
(2) No a ct done by any person a cting in good faith as a Dire ctor shall be deemed to be invalid merely 
on the ground that he was disqualified to be a Dire ctor or that there was any other defe ct in his 
appointment.  
3[37A. Amounts and se curities to be held in trust .—(1) Any sums re ceived by a borrowing 
institution in repayment or realisation of loans and advan ces refinan ced either wholly or partly by the 
Small Industries Bank shall, to the extent of the a ccommodation granted by the Small Industries Bank and 
remaining outstanding, be deemed to have been re ceived by the borrowing institution in trust for the 
Small Industries Bank, and shall a ccordingly be paid by su ch institution to the Small Industries Bank, as 
per the repayment s chedule fi xed by the Small Industries Bank.  
(2) Where an a ccommodation has been granted to a borrowing institution, all se curities held, or whi ch 
may be held, by su ch borrowing institution, on a ccount of any transa ction in respe ct of whi ch such 
accommodation has bee n granted by the Small Industries Bank, shall be held by su ch institution in trust 
for the Small Industries Bank.]  
38. Rights of Small Industries Bank in case of default .—(1) Where any industrial concern in the 
small -scale se ctor, whi ch is under a liability to the Small Industries Bank under an agreement, makes any 
default in repayment of any loan or advan ce or any instalment thereof or in meeting its obligations in 
relation to any guarantee given by the Small Industries Bank or otherwise fails to comply with the terms 
of its agreement, with the Small Industries Bank, the Small Industries Bank shall have the right to take 
over the management, or possession, or both of su ch industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor, as well 
as the right to transfer  by way of lease or sale and realise the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothe cated 
or assigned to the Small Industries Bank.  
(2) Any transfer of property made by the Small Industries Bank, in exer cise of its powers under            
sub-section ( 1), shall vest in the transferee all rights in or to the property transferred as if the transfer had 
been made by the owner of the property.  
(3) The Small Industries Bank shall have the same rights and powers with respe ct to goods 
manufa ctured or produ ced wholly or partly from goods forming part of the se curity held by it as it had 
with respe ct to the original goods.  
(4) Where any a ction has been taken against an industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor under the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1), all costs, charges and expenses whi ch in the opinion of the Small Industries 
Bank have been properly in curred by it as in cidental thereto shall be re coverable from the industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor and the money whi ch is re ceived by it shall, in the absen ce of any 
contra ct to the contrary, be held by it in trust to be applied firstly, in payment of su ch costs, charges and 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 21, for “as may be specified by the Development Bank” (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. The words “or the Dev elopment Bank” omitted by s. 21,  ibid., (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3.  Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  23 
 expenses and, se condly, in dis charge of the debt due to the Small Industries Bank, and the residue of the 
money so re ceived shall be paid  to the person entitled thereto in a ccordan ce with his rights and interests.  
(5) Where the Small Industries Bank takes over the management or possession of an industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor under the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Small I ndustries Bank shall 
be deemed to be the owner of su ch concern, for the purposes of suits by or against the concern, and shall 
sue and be sued in the name of the concern. 
39. Power to seek assistan ce of Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or Distri ct                   
Magistrate .—(1) Where any property, effe cts or a ctionable claims are sold or leased in pursuan ce of any 
power conferred by se ction 38, the Small Industries Bank or any other person authorised by it may, for 
the purpose of taking into custody or under control any su ch property, effe cts or a ctionable claims, 
request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Distri ct Magistrate within whose jurisdi ction 
any su ch property, effe cts, actionable claims, books of a ccount or other do cuments relating thereto may 
be situated or found, to take possession thereof, and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Distri ct 
Magistrate shall, on s uch request being made to him, — 
(a) take possession of su ch property, effe cts, actionable claims, or books of a ccount or other 
documents relating thereto; and  
(b) forward them to the Small Industries Bank or su ch other person, as the case may be.  
(2) For the purpose of se curing complian ce with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Chief 
Metropolitan Magi strate or the Distri ct Magistrate may take or cause to be taken su ch steps and use, or 
cause to be used, su ch for ce as may, in his opinion, be ne cessary.  
(3) No a ct of the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the Distri ct Magistrate done in pursuan ce of this 
section shall be called in question in any court or before any authority.  
40. Power to call for repayment before agreed period .—Notwithstanding anything in any 
agreement to the contrary, the Small Industries Bank may, by noti ce in writing, require any indu strial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor to whi ch it has granted any loan or advan ce to dis charge forthwith in full 
its liabilities to the Sm all Industries Bank, — 
(a) if it appears to the Board that false or misleading information in any material parti cular was 
given in the appli cation for the loan or advan ce; or 
(b) if the industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor has failed to comply with the terms of its 
contra ct with the Small Industries Bank in the matter of the loan or advan ce; or 
(c) if there is a reasonable apprehension that the industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor is 
unable to pay  its debt or that pro ceedings for liquidation may be commen ced in respe ct thereof; or  
(d) if the property pledged, mortgaged, hypothe cated or assigned to the Small Industries Bank as 
security for the loan or advan ce is not insured and kept insured by the industrial concern in the small -
scale se ctor to the satisfa ction of the Small Industries Bank; or depre ciates in value to su ch an extent 
that, in the opinion of the Board, further se curity to the satisfa ction of the Board should be given and 
such security is not given; or  
(e) if, without the permission of the Board, any ma chinery, plant or other equipment, whether 
forming part of the se curity or otherwise, is removed from the premises of the industrial concern in 
the small -scale se ctor without being repla ced; or  
(f) if for any reason it is ne cessary to prote ct the interests of the Small Industries Bank.  
41. Special provisions for enfor cement of claims by Small Industries Bank .—(1) Where an 
industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor, in brea ch of any agreement, makes any default in repayment 
of any loan or advan ce or any instalment thereof or in meeting its obligations in relation to an y guarantee 
given by the Small Industries Bank or otherwise fails to comply with the terms of its agreement with that 
Bank, or where the Small Industries Bank requires any industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor to 
make repayment of any loan or advan ce under se ction 40 and su ch industrial concern fails to make su ch 24 
 repayment, then, without prejudi ce to the provisions of se ction 38 of this A ct and se ction 69 of the 
Transfer of Property A ct, 1882 (4 of 1882), any offi cer of that Bank, generally or spe cially authorised by 
that Bank in this behalf, may apply , to the Court for one or more of the following reliefs, namely: — 
(a) for an order for the sale of the property assigned, charged, hypothe cated, mortgaged or 
pledged to that Bank as se curity for the lo an or advan ce; or 
(b) for enfor cing the liability of any surety; or  
(c) for an ad interim  injun ction restraining the industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor from 
transferring or removing its ma chinery, plant or equipment from the premises of su ch industrial 
concern without the permission of the Small Industries Bank, where su ch transfer or removal is 
apprehended.  
(2) An appli cation under sub -section ( 1) shall state the nature and extent of the liability of the 
industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor to the Small Industries Bank, the ground on whi ch it is made 
and su ch other parti culars as may be ne cessary for obtaining the relief prayed for.  
(3) Where the appli cation is for the reliefs mentioned in clause ( a) and clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1), 
the Court shall pass an ad interim  order atta ching the se curity, or so mu ch of the property of the industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor as would on being sold realise  in its estimation an amount equivalent in 
value to the outstanding liability of su ch industrial concern to the Small Industries Bank together with 
costs of the pro ceedings taken under this se ction with or without an ad interim injun ction restraining su ch 
industrial concern from transferring or removing its ma chinery, plant or equipment.  
(4) Where the appli cation is for the relief mentioned in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the Court shall 
issue a noti ce calling upon the surety to show cause on a date to be  specified in the noti ce as to why the 
liability should not be enfor ced. 
(5) Before passing any order under sub -section ( 3) or issuing a noti ce under sub -section ( 4), the Court 
may, if it thinks fit, examine the offi cer making the appli cation.  
(6) At the same time as it passes an order under sub -section ( 3), the Court shall issue to the industrial 
concern in the small -scale se ctor or to the owner of the se curity atta ched, a noti ce accompanied by copies 
of the order, the appli cation and the eviden ce, if any , recorded by the Court calling upon su ch industrial 
concern or owner, to show cause on a date to be spe cified in the noti ce, as to why the ad interim order of 
attachment should not be made absolute or the injun ction confirmed.  
(7) If no cause is shown, on  or before the date spe cified in the noti ce under sub -section ( 4), the Court 
shall forthwith order the enfor cement of the liability of the surety.  
(8) If no cause is shown on or before the date spe cified in the noti ce under sub -section ( 6), the Court 
shall forthwith make the ad interim order absolute and dire ct the sale of the atta ched property or confirm 
the injun ction. 
(9) If cause is shown, the Court shall pro ceed to investigate the claim of the Small Industries Bank in 
accordan ce with the provisions contained in the Code of Civil Pro cedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in  so far as 
such provisions may be applied thereto.  
(10) After making an investigation under sub-section ( 9), the Court may — 
(a) confirm the order of atta chment and dire ct the sale of the atta ched property;  
(b) vary the order of atta chment so as to release a portion of the property from atta chment and 
direct the sale of the remainder of the atta ched property;  
(c) release the property from atta chment;  
(d) confirm  or dissolve the injun ction; or  
(e) direct the enfor cement of the liability of the surety or reje ct the claim made in this behalf:  
Provided that when making an order under clause ( c) or making an order reje cting the claim to 
enfor ce the liability of the su rety under clause ( e), the Court may make su ch further order as it thinks 25 
 necessary to prote ct the interests of the Small Industries Bank and may apportion the cost of the 
proceedings in su ch manner as it thinks fit:  
Provided further that unless the Small Industries Bank intimates to the Court that it will not appeal 
against any order releasing any property from atta chment or reje cting the claim to enfor ce the liability of 
the surety, su ch order shall not be given effe ct to, until the expiry of the period fixed under                           
sub-section ( 12) within whi ch an appeal may be preferred or, if an appeal is preferred, unless the Court 
empowered to hear appeals from the de cisions of the said Court otherwise di rects, until the appeal is 
disposed of.  
(11) An order of atta chment or sale of property under this se ction shall be carried into effe ct as far as 
practicable in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Pro cedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), for the atta chment or 
sale of property in exe cution of a de cree as if the Small Industries Bank were the de cree holder.  
(12) Any party aggrieved by an order under sub -section ( 7), sub -section ( 8) or sub -section ( 10) may, 
within thirty days from the date of the order, appeal to the Court empowered to hear appeals from the 
decisions of the Court whi ch passed the order and upon su ch appeal the appellate Court may, after hearing 
the parties, pass su ch orders as it thinks proper.  
(13) Where pro ceedings for liquidation in respe ct of an industrial concern in the small -scale se ctor 
have commen ced before an appli cation is made under sub -section ( 1), nothing in this se ction shall be 
construed as giving to the Small Industries Bank any preferen ce over the other creditors of su ch indus trial 
concern not conferred on it by any other law.  
(14) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby de clared that any Court competent to grant an ad interim  
injun ction under this se ction shall also have the power to appoint a re ceiver and to exer cise all the other 
powers in cidental thereto.  
42. Small Industries Bank to have a ccess to re cords .—(1) The Small Industries Bank shall have 
free a ccess to all su ch records of any institution whi ch seeks to avail of any credit fa cilities from the 
Small Industries Bank and to all su ch records of any su ch person who seeks to avail of any credit fa cilities 
from su ch institution, perusal whereof may appear to the Small Industries Bank to be necessary in 
conne ction with the providing of finan ce or other assistan ce to su ch institution or the refinan cing of any 
loan or advan ce made to su ch person by the borrowing institution.  
(2) The Small Industries Bank may require any institution or person referred to in sub -section ( 1) to 
furnish to it copies of any of the re cords referre d to in that sub -section and the institution or the person, as 
the case may be, shall be bound to comply with su ch requisition.  
 43. Validity of loan or advan ce not to be questioned .—Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any other law for the time being in for ce, the validity of any loan or advan ce granted by the 
Small Industries Bank in pursuan ce of the provisions of this A ct shall not be called in question merely on 
the ground of non -complian ce with the requirements of su ch other law as aforesaid or of any resolution, 
contra ct, memorandum, arti cles of asso ciation or other instrument:  
Provided that nothing in this se ction shall render valid any loan or advan ce obtained by any company 
or co-operative so ciety where su ch compan y or co-operative so ciety is not empowered by its 
memorandum to obtain loans or advan ces. 
44. Indemnity of Dire ctors.—(1) Every Dire ctor shall be indemnified by the Small Industries Bank 
against all losses and expenses in curred by him in, or in relation to, the dis charge of his duties, ex cept 
such as are caused by his own wilful a ct or default.  
(2) A Dire ctor shall not be responsible for any other Dire ctor or for any offi cer or other employee of 
the Small Industries Bank or for any loss or expenses result ing to the Small Industries Bank or from the 
insuffi ciency or defi ciency of the value of, or title to, any property or se curity a cquired or taken on behalf 
of the Small Industries Bank or the insolven cy or wrongful a ct of any debtor or any person under 
obligation to the Small Industries Bank or anything done in good faith in the exe cution of the duties of his 
office or in relation thereto.  26 
 45. Prote ction of a ction taken under this A ct.—No suit or other legal pro ceeding shall lie against 
the Small Industries  Bank,  1[chairman and managing d irector, the whole -time director] or any Dire ctor or 
any offi cer or other employee of su ch Bank or any other person authorised by that Bank to dis charge any 
functions under this A ct for any loss or damage caused or likely to  be caused by anything whi ch is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuan ce of this A ct or any other law or provision having the 
force of law.  
46. Nomination by depositors or holders of bonds or other se curities .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law, where a nomination in respe ct of any deposits, bonds or other 
securities kept with or issued by the Small Industries Bank is made in the pres cribed manner, the amount 
due on su ch deposits, bonds or other se curities shall, on the death of the depositor or holder thereof, vest 
in, and be payable to, the nominee subje ct to any right, title, interest or claim of any other person, in 
relation to su ch deposits, bonds or other se curities.  
(2) Any payment by the Small Industries Bank in a ccordan ce with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 
shall be a full dis charge of its liability in respe ct of su ch deposits, bonds or se curities.  
47. Arrangement with Small Ind ustries Bank on appointment of d irectors to  prevail .—(1) Where 
any arrangement entered into by the Small Industries Bank with an industrial concern in the  small -scale 
sector provides for the appointment by the Small Industries Bank of one or more d irectors of su ch industrial 
concern, su ch provision and any appointment of d irectors made in pursuan ce, thereof shall be valid and 
effective notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the Companies A ct, 1956   (1 of 1956) , or in 
any other law for the time being in for ce or in the memorandum, arti cles of a ssociation or any other 
instrument relating to that industrial concern, and any provision regarding share qualifi cation, age -limit, 
number of dire ctorships, removal from offi ce of d irectors and su ch like conditions contained in any su ch 
law or instrument aforesaid, shall not apply to any d irector appointed by the Small Industries Bank in 
pursuan ce of the arrangement as aforesaid.  
(2) Any d irector appointed as aforesaid shall — 
(a) hold offi ce during the pleasure of the Small Industries Bank and may be remov ed or 
substituted by any person by order in writing of the Small Industries Bank;  
(b) not in cur any obligation or liability  by reason only of his being a d irector or for anything done 
or omitted to be done in good faith in the dis charge of his duties as a director or anything in relation 
thereto;  
(c) not be liable to retirement by rotation and shall not be taken into a ccount for computing the 
number of d irectors liable to su ch retirement.  
48. Act 18 of 1891 to apply in relation to Small Industries Bank .—The Bankers’  Books Eviden ce 
Act, 1891 shall apply in relation to Small Industries Bank as if it were a bank as defined in se ction 2 of 
that A ct. 
49. Act 10 of 1949 not to apply to Small Industries Bank .—Nothing contained in the Banking 
Regulation A ct, 1949, except se ction 34A and se ction 36AD thereof, shall apply to the Small Industries 
Bank.  
50. [ Act 43 of 1961 not to apply to Small Industries Bank .]—Omitted  by the Finance Act , 2001              
(14 of 2001),  s. 142 (w.e.f 1 -4-2002).  
51. Liquidation of Small Industries Bank .—No provision of law relating to the winding up of 
companies or corporations shall apply to the Small Industries Bank and that Bank shall not be pla ced in 
liquidation save by order of the Central Government and in su ch manner as it ma y dire ct. 
2[51 A. Power to make rules by Central Government .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notifi cation, make rules to carry out the provisions of this A ct. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 23, for “chairman” (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2000, s. 24 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  27 
 (2) In parti cular, and without prejudi ce to the generality of the foregoing power, su ch rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) the pro cedure for filing and hearing of appeal against the refusal to register the transfer of 
shares by the Board under sub -section ( 3) of se ction 20D; and  
(ii) any other matter whi ch has to be, or may be, pres cribed by rules under this A ct.] 
52. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may   1*** by notifi cation, make regulations not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this A ct to provide for all matters for whi ch provision is ne cessary or 
expedient for the purpose of giving effe ct to the provisions of this A ct. 
(2) In parti cular, and without prejudi ce to the generality of the foregoing power, su ch regulations may 
provide for — 
2[(a) the removal of Dire ctor under sub -section ( 8) of section 6;  
(aa) the pla ces of meetings of the Board under this A ct and the pro cedure to be followed at su ch 
meetings in cluding the quorum ne cessary for transa ction of business and the manner of adoption of 
resolution under se ction 6;  
(ab) the fun ctions to be dis charged by the Exe cutive Committee under sub -section ( 2) of              
section 12;  
(ac) the pla ces of meetings of the Exe cutive Committee and the pro cedure to be followed at su ch 
meetings under sub -section ( 4) of se ction 12;  
(ad) such fees and allowan ces whi ch may be paid to the d irectors and members of the Exe cutive 
Committee under se ction 12A;  
(ae) the parti culars to be pres cribed in the register of shareholders under clause ( iv) of                        
sub-section ( 1) of se ction 20B;  
(af) the pro cedure relating to maintenan ce of register of shareholders in ele ctroni c form under 
sub-section ( 2) of se ction 20B;  
(ag) the matters relating to the annual general meeting under sub -section ( 3) of se ction 20G;]  
(b) the form and manner in whi ch the balan ce-sheets and the a ccounts of the Small Industries 
Development Assistan ce Fund under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 25 and the Small Industries Bank 
under sub -section ( 1) of se ction 28 shall be prepared;  
(c) the manner in whi ch nominations may be made in terms of sub -section ( 1) of se ction 46;  
(d) generally the effi cient condu ct of the affairs of the Small Industries Bank;  
(e) any other matter whi ch is to be, or may be, pres cribed.  
3[(3) Every rule made by the Central Government, and every regulation made by the Board under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before ea ch House of Parliament, while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days whi ch may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, be fore the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modifi cation in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or r egulation shall thereafter 
have effe ct only in su ch modified form or be of no effe ct, as the case may be; so, however, that any su ch 
modifi cation or annulment shall be without prejudi ce to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulat ion.] 
  
                                                           
1. The words “with the previous approval of the Development Bank” omitted by  Act 7 of 2000,  s. 25 (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000) . 
2. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 27 -3-2000).  28 
 [53. Amendment of certain ena ctments .]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending A ct, 2001                       
(30 of 2001) , s. 2 and The First S chedule  (w.e.f.  3-9-2001).   
54. Power to remove diffi culties .—If any diffi culty arises in giving effe ct to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, in consultation with the Development Bank, by order, do anything, not 
inconsistent with su ch provisions, for the purpose of removing the diffi culty: 
Provided that no su ch order shall be made after the  expiration of three years from the date on whi ch 
this A ct receives the assent of the President.  
 
  29 
 THE FIRST S CHEDULE  
[See section 36( 3)] 
Declaration of fidelity and se crecy 
I,......................... , do hereby de clare that I will faithfully, truly and to the best of my skill and ability 
execute and perfor m the duties required of me as d irector, member of............. committee, auditor, offi cer, 
other employee (as the case may be) of the Small Industries Development Bank of India and whi ch 
properly relate to the offi ce or position held by me in or in relation to the said Bank.  
I further de clare that I will not communi cate or allow to be communi cated to any person not legally 
entitled thereto any information relating to the affairs of the Small Indust ries Development Bank of India 
or to the affairs of any person having any dealing with the said Bank, nor will I allow any su ch person to 
inspe ct or have a ccess to any books or do cuments belonging to or in the possession of the said Bank 
relating to the bu siness of the said Bank or the business of any person having any dealing with the said 
Bank.  
Signed before me.                             (Signature ) 
______  
 
 
[THE SE COND S CHEDULE ].—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending A ct, 2001 (30 of 2001) , s. 2 and 
The First S chedule  (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
