--------------------------The Armed Forces (Jammu and Kashmir) Special Powers Act, 1990--------------------------
1 
 THE ARMED FORCES (JAMMU AND KASHMIR)  
SPECIAL POWERS ACT, 1990  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______ ___ 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power to declare areas to be disturbed areas . 
4. Special powers of the armed forces . 
5. Power of search to include powers to break open locks , etc. 
6. Arrested persons and seized property to be made over to the police . 
7. Protection of persons acting in good faith under this Act . 
8. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE ARMED FORCES (JAMMU AND KASHMIR)  
SPECIAL POWERS ACT, 1990  
 ACT NO. 21 OF 1990  
[10th September , 1990.]  
An Act to enable certain special powers to be conferred upon members of the armed forces in the 
disturbed areas in the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -first Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Armed Forces (Jammu 
and Kas hmir) Special Powers Act, 1990.  
(2) It extends t o the whole of the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into forc e on the 5th day of July, 1990.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “armed forces ” means the military forces and the air forces operating as land forces and 
includes any other armed f orces of the Union so operating;  
(b) “disturbed area ” means an area which is for the time being declared by notification under 
section 3 to be a disturbed area;  
(c) all other words and expressions used herein, but not defined and defined in the Air Force Ac t, 
1950 (45 of 1950) , or the Army Act, 1950 (46 of 1950),  shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in those Acts.  
3. Power to declare areas to be disturbed areas. —If, in relation to the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir, the Governor of that State or the Central Government, is of opinion that the whole or any part of 
the State is in such a disturbed and dangerous condition that the use of armed force s in aid of the civil  
power is necessary to prevent — 
(a) activities involving terrorist acts directed towards overawing the Government as by law 
established or striking terror in the people or any section of the people or alienating any section of the 
people or adversely affecting the harmony amongst di fferent sections of the people;  
(b) activities directed towards disclaiming, questioning or disrupting the sovereignty and 
territorial integrity of India or bringing about cession of a part of the territo ry of India or secession of 
a part  of the territory of India from  the Union or causing insult to the Indian National Flag, the Indian 
National Anthem and the Constitution of India,  
the Governor of the State or the Central Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare 
the whole or any part of the State to be a disturbed area .  
Explanation. —In this section, “terrorist act ” has the same meaning as in Explanation  to article 248 of 
the Constitution of India as applicable to the State of Jamm u and Kashmir.  
4.Special powers of the armed forces. —Any commissioned officer, warrant officer, non -
commissioned officer or any other person of equivalent rank in the armed fo rces may, in a disturbed 
area,— 
(a) if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do for the maintenance of public order, after giving 
such due warning as he may consider necessary, fire upon or otherwise use force, even to the causing 
of death, against any person who is acting in contravention of any law or order for the time being in 
force in the disturbed area prohibiting the assembly of five or more persons or the carrying of 
weapons or of things capable of being used as weapons or of fire -arms, ammu nition or explosive 
substances;  
(b) if he is of opinion that it is necessary so to do, destroy any arms dump, prepared or fortified 
position or shelter from which armed attacks are made or are likely to be made or are attempted to be   3 
 made, or any structure used as a training cam p for arm ed volunteers or utilis ed as a hide -out by armed 
gangs or abs conders wanted for any offence;  
(c) arrest , without warrant, any person  who has committed a cognizable offence or against whom 
a reasonable suspicion exists that he has committed or is about to c ommit a cognizable offence and 
may use such force as may be necessary to effect the arrest;  
(d) enter and search, without warrant, any premises to make any such arrest as aforesaid or to 
recover any  person believed to be wrongful ly restrained or confined o r any property reasonably 
suspected to be stolen property or any arms, ammunition or explosive substances believed to be 
unlawful ly kept in such premises, and may for that purpose use such force as may be necessary, and 
seize any such property, arms, ammun ition or explosive substa nces;  
(e) stop, search and seize any vehicle or vessel reasonably suspected to be carrying any person 
who is a pro claimed offender, or any person  who has committed a non -cognizable offence, or against 
whom a reasonable suspicion ex ists that he has committed or is about to commit a non -cognizable 
offence, or any person who is carrying any arms, ammunition or explosive substance believed to be 
unlawfully held by him, and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be necessary to eff ect such 
stoppage, search or seizure, as the case may be.  
5. Power of search to include powers to break open locks, etc. —Every person making a search 
under this Act shall have the power to break open the lock of any door, almirah , safe, box, cupboard, 
drawer, package or other thing, if the key thereof is withheld.  
6. Arrested persons and seized property to be made over to the police. —Any person arrested and 
taken into custody under this Act and every property, arms, ammunition or explosive substance or any 
vehicle or vessel seized under this Act, shall be made over to the officer -in-charge of the nearest police 
station with the least possible delay, together with a report of the circumstances occasioning the arrest, or 
as the case may be, occasioning the seizure of such property, arms, ammunition or explosive substance or 
any vehicle  or vessel, as the case may be.  
7. Protection of persons acting in good faith under this Act .—No prosecution, suit or other legal 
proceeding shall be in stituted, except with the previous sanction of the Central Government, against any 
person in respect of anything done or purported to be done in exercise of th e powers conferred by this 
Act. 
8. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Armed Forces (Jammu and Kashmir) Sp ecial Powers Ordina nce, 
1990 (Ord. 3 of 1990) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The National Commission for Women Act, 1990--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1990  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN  
3. Constitution of the National Commission for  Women . 
4. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members . 
5. Officers and other employees of the Commission . 
6. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants . 
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Commission . 
8. Committees of t he Commission . 
9. Procedure to be regulated by the Commission . 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
10. Functions of the Commission . 
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
11. Grants by the Central Government . 
12. Accounts and audit . 
13. Annual report . 
14. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELL ANEOUS  
15. Chairperson, Members and Staff of the Commission to be public servants . 
16. Central Government to consult Commission . 
17. Power to make rules . 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN ACT, 1990  
ACT NO. 20 OF 1990  
[30th August , 1990 .] 
An Act  to constitute a National Commission for Women and to provide for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Forty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1)This Act may be called the National Commission for 
Women Act, 1990.  
  (2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
  (3) It shall come into force on such date1asthe Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
 2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
 (a) “Commission ” means the National Commission for Women constituted under section 3;  
 (b) “Member ” means a Member of the Commission and includes the Member -Secretary;  
 (c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR WOMEN  
3.Constitution of the National Commission for Women .—(1) The Central Government shall 
constitute a body to be known as the National Commission for Women to exercise the powers conferred 
on, and to perform the functions  assigned to, it under this Act.  
(2) The Commission sh all consist of — 
 (a) a Chairperson, committed to the cause of women, to be nominated by the Central 
Government;  
 (b) five Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons of ability, 
integrity  and standing who have had experience in law or legislation, trade unionism, management of 
an industry   or organisation committed to increasing the employment potential of women, women ’s 
voluntary  organisations (including women activists), administration, economic development, health, 
education or  social welfare:  
 Provided that at least one Member e ach shall be from amongst persons belonging to the 
Scheduled Castes  and Scheduled Tribes respectively;  
(c) a Member -Secretary to be nominated by the Ce ntral Government, who shall be — 
(i) an expert in the field of management, organisational  structure or sociological movement, 
or 
(ii) an officer who is a member of a civil service of the Union or of an all -India service or 
holds a civil   post under the Un ion with appropriate experience.  
                                                           
1. 31st January, 1992, vide notification No. S.O. 99(E), dated 31st January, 1992, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii). 3 
 4. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairpers on and Members .—(1)The Chairperson 
and every Member shall hold office for such period, not exceeding three years, as may be specified by the 
Central Government in this behalf.  
(2) The Chairperson or a Member (other than the Member -Secretary who is a member  of a civil 
service of the Union or of an all -India service or holds a civil post under the Union) may, by writing and 
addressed to the Central Government, resign from the office of Chairperson or, as the case may be, of the 
Member at any time.  
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the office of Chairperson or a Member 
referred to in sub-section ( 2) if that person — 
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;  
(b) gets  convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the opinion of the 
Central  Government involves moral turpitude;  
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  
(d) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting;  
(e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from three consecutive 
meetings of  the Commission; or  
(f) in the opinion of the Central Government has so abused the position of Chairperson or 
Member  as to render that person’ s continuanc e in office detrimental to the public interest:  
Provided that no person shall be removed under this clause until that person has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
 (4) A vacancy caused under sub -section ( 2) or otherwise shal l be filled by fresh nomination.  
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
5.Officers and other employees of the Commission .—(1) The Central  Government shall provide 
the Commission with such officers and employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of 
the functions of the Commission under this Act.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to , and the other terms and conditions of  service of, the 
officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of the Commission shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
6.Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants .—The salaries and allowances payable to the 
Chairperson and Members and the administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions 
payable to the officers and other employees referred to in section 5, shall be paid out of the grants referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) of section 11.   
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Commission .—No act or proceeding of the 
Commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy 
or defect in the constitution of the Commission.  
8. Committees of the Commission .—(1) The Commission may appoint such committees as may be 
necessary for dealing with such special issues as may be taken up by t he Commission from time to time.  
(2) The Commission shall have the power to co -opt as members of any committee appointed under 
sub-sectio n (1) such number of persons, who are not Members of the Commission, as it may think fit and 
the persons so co -opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee and take part in its 
proceedings but shall not have the right to vote.  
(3) The  persons so co -opted shall be entitled to receive such allowances for attending the meetings of 
the committee as may be prescribed.  4 
 9. Procedure to be regulated by the Commission .—(1) The Commission or a committee thereof 
shall meet as and when necessary and shall meet at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit.  
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the proc edure of the committees thereof.  
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Member -Secretary or 
any other officer of the Commission duly authorised by the Member -Secretary in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
10. Functions of the Commission .—(1) The Commission shall perform all or any of th e following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) investigate and examine all matters relating to the safeguards provided for women under the 
Constitution  and other law;  
(b) present to the Central Government, annually and at such other times as the Commission may 
deem fit,  reports upon the working of  those safeguards;  
(c) make in such reports recommendations for the effective implementation of those safeguards 
for improving  the conditions of women by the Union or any State;  
(d) review, from time to time, the existing provisions of the Constitution and  other laws affecting 
women and  recommend amendments thereto so as to suggest remedial legislative measures to meet 
any lacunae,  inadequacies or shortcomings in such legislations;  
(e) take up the cases of violation of the provisions of the Constitution an d of other laws relating to 
women  with the appropriate authorities;  
(f) look into complaints and take suomoto  notice of matters relating to — 
(i) deprivation of women’ s rights;  
(ii) non -implementation  of laws enacted to provide protection to women and also to achieve 
the objective of equality and development;  
(iii) non -compliance of policy decisions, guidelines or instructions aimed at mitigating 
hardships and  ensuring welfare and providing relief to women,  
and take up the issues arising out of such matters  with appropriate authorities;  
(g) call for special studies or investigations into specific problems or situations arising out of 
discrimination  and atrocities against women and identify the constra ints so as to recommend 
strategies for their removal;  
(h) undertake promotional and educational research so as to suggest ways of ensuring due 
representation  of women in all spheres and identify factors responsible for impeding their 
advancement, such as, lack of  access to housing and basic services, inadequate support services and 
technologies for reducing drudgery  and occupational health hazards and for increasing their 
productivity;  
(i) participate and advise on the planning process of socio -economic de velopment of women;  
(j) evaluate the progress of the development of women under the Union and any State;  
(k) inspect or cause to be inspe cted a jail, remand home, women’ s institution or other place of 
custody where  women are kept as prisoners or otherwise,  and take up with the concerned authorities 
for remedial action,  if found necessary;  
(l) fund litigation involving issues affecting a large body of women;  
(m) make periodical reports to the G overnment on any matter pertaining to women and in 
particular var ious  difficulties under which women toil;  
(n) any other matter which may be referred to it by the Central Government.  5 
 (2) The Central Government shall cause all the reports referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) to 
be laid before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the action taken or 
proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the non -
acceptance, if any  of any of such recommendations.  
(3) Where any such reportor any part thereof relate s to any matter with which any State Government 
is concerned, the Commission shall forward a copy of such report or part to such State Government who 
shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along with a memorandum explaining the  
action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the State and the reasons for the 
non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.  
(4) The Commission shall, while investigating any matter referred t o in clause ( a) or sub -clause ( i) of 
clause ( f) ofsub-section ( 1), have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit and, in particular, in respect 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning  and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining 
him on  oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any c ourt or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
11. Grants by the Central Government .—(1) The Central Government shall , after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such 
sums of money as the Central Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions under this Act, 
and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
12. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Au ditor -General at such 
intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointe d by him in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the aud it of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the Commission, as ce rtified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government by the Commission.  
13. Annual report. —TheCommission shall prepa re, in such form and at such time, for each financial 
year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous 
financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
  6 
 14. Annual report and audit report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government shall 
cause the annual report together with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained 
therein, in so far as they relate to the Central Government , and the reasons for the  non-acceptance, if any, 
of any of such recommendations and the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are 
received, before each House of  Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELL ANEOUS  
15. Chairperson, Members and Staff of the Commission to be public servants .—TheChairperson, 
the Members, officers and other employees of the Commission shall be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
16. Central Government to consult Commission .—The Cen tral Government shall consult the 
Commission on all major policy matters affecting women.  
17. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairper son and Members under sub -section ( 5) of section 4 and of officers and other employees 
under sub -section( 2) of section 5;  
(b) allowances for attending the meetings of the committee by the co -opted persons under sub -
section ( 3)of section 8;  
(c) other matter s under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(d) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be maintained under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 12 ; 
(e) the form in, and the time at, which the annual report shall be prepared under section 13;  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid , as soon as may be after it is made, before each Ho use 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such m odification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
 
--------------------------The Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990--------------------------
1 
 THE PRASAR BHARATI (BROADCASTING  CORPORATION  
OF INDIA) ACT, 1990  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
PRASAR  BHARATI  (BROADCASTING  CORPORATION OF INDIA ) 
3. Establishment and composition of Corporation.  
4. Appointment of Chairman and other Members.  
5. Powers and functions of Executive Member.  
6. Term of office , conditions of service , etc., of Chairman and other Members.  
7. Removal and sus pension of Chairman and Members.  
8. Meetings of Board.  
9. Officers and other employees of Corporation.  
10. Establishment of Recruitment Boards.  
11. Status of officers and employees.  
11A. Section 11 not to apply to certain officers and employees.  
11B. Transfer of posts of Akashvani and Doordarshan to Corporation.  
12. Functions and powers of Corporation.  
13. Parliamentary Committee.  
14. Establishment of Broad casting Council , term of office and removal , etc., of members thereof.  
15. Jurisdiction of, and the procedure to be followed by,  Broadcasting Council.  
 
CHAPTER III  
ASSETS , FINANCES AND ACCOUNTS  
16. Transfer of certain assets, liabilities, etc., of Central Government to Corporation.  
17. Grants, etc., by Central Government.  
18. Fund of Corporation.  
19. Investment of moneys.  
20. Annual Financial Statement of the Corporation.  
21. Accounts and audit of Corporation.  
22. [Omitted .] 
 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
24. Power of Central Government to obtain information.  
25. Report to Parliament in certain matters and recommendations as to  action against the Board.  
26. Office of member not to disqualify a Member of Parliament.  
27. Chairman, Members, etc., to be public servants.  2 
 SECTIONS  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
29. Auth entication of orders and other i nstruments of Corporation.  
30. Delegation of powers.  
31. Annual report.  
32. Power to make rules.  
33. Power to make regulations.  
34. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
35. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
  3 
 THE PRASAR BH ARATI (BROADCASTING CORPORATION  
OF INDIA) ACT, 1990  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1990  
[12th September , 1990 .]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Broadcasting Corporation for India, to be known as 
Prasar Bharati, to define its composition, functions and powers and to provide for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -first Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) Th is Act may be called the Prasar Bharati 
(Broadcasting Corporation of India) Act, 1990.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Akashvani ” means the offices, stations and other es tablishments, by whatever name called, 
which, immediately before the appointed day, formed part of or were under the Director -General,  
All India Radio of the Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting;  
(b) “appointed day ” means the date appointed unde r section 3;  
(c) “broadcasting ” means the dissemination of any form of communication like signs, signals, 
writing, pictures, images and sounds of all kinds by transmission of electro -magnetic waves through 
space or through cables intended to be received by  the general public either directly or indirectly 
through the medium of relay stations and all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions shall 
be construed accordingly;  
(d) “Board ” means the Prasar Bharati Board;  
(e) “Broadcasting Council ” means the Council established under section 14;  
(f) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Corporation appointed under section 4;  
(g) “Corporation ” means the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of Indi a) established under 
section 3;  
(h) “Doordarshan ” means the offices, kendras and other establishments, by whatever name called, 
which, immediately before the appointed day, formed part of or were under the Directorate -General,  
Doordarshan of the Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting;  
(i) “electe d Member ” means a Member elected under section 3;  
(j) “Executive Member ” means the Executive Member appointed under section 4;  
(k) “kendra ” means any telecasting centre with studios or transmitters or both and includes a relay 
station;  
(l) “Member ” means a  Member of the Board;  
(m) “Member (Finance) ” means the Member (Finance) appointed under section 4;  
(n) “Member (Personnel) ” means the Member (Personnel) appointed under section 4;  
                                                           
1. 15th September, 1997, vide notification No. S.O. 509(E), dated 22nd July, 1997 , see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary, Part II,                   
sec. 3(ii). 4 
 (o) “Nominated Member ” means the Member nominated by the Union Ministry of Information 
and Broadcasting under section 3;  
(p) “Non-lapsable Fund ” means the Fund created from the commercial revenues of Akashvani 
and Doordarshan to meet expenditure on certain schemes;  
(q) “notific ation ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(r) “Part-time Member ” means a Part -time Member of the Board appointed under section 4, but 
does not include an ex officio  Member, the Nominated Member or an elected Member;  
(s) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(t) “Recruitment Board ” means a board established under sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(u) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Corporation under this Act;  
(v) “station ” means any broadcasting station with studios or transmitters or both and includes a 
relay station;  
(w) “Whole-time Member ” means the Executive Member, Member (Finance) or  
Member (Personnel);  
(x) “year” means the financial year.  
CHAPTER  II 
PRASAR  BHARATI  (BROADCASTING  CORPORATION OF INDIA )  
3. Establishment and composition of Corporation .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may by notification appoint  in this behalf, there shall be established for the purposes of this 
Act a  Corporation, to be known as the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of  India).  
(2) The Corporation shall be a body corporate by the name  aforesaid , having perpetual succession and 
a common seal with power to acquire,  hold and dispose of property, both  movable and immovable, and to 
contract, and  shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The headquarters of the Corporation shall be at New  Delhi and the Corporation may establish 
offices, kendras or stations at other  places in India and, with the previou s approval of the Central 
Government,  outside India.  
(4) The general superintendence, direction and management  of the affairs of the Corporation shall 
vest in the Prasar Bharati Board which  may exercise all such powers and do all such acts and things as 
may be exercised  or done by the Corporation under this Act.  
(5) The Board shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairman;  
(b) one  Executive Member ; 
(c) one Member  (Finance)  ; 
(d) one Member  (Personnel)  ; 
(e) six Part-time Members ; 
(f) Director -General  (Akashvani), ex officio ; 
(g) Director -General (Doordarshan), ex officio ; 
(h) one  representative of the Union Ministry of Information and Broadcasting, to be  nominated by 
that Ministry ; and  
(i) two  representatives of the employees of the Corporation, of whom one shall be  elected by the 
engineering staff from amongst themselves and one shall be  elected by the other emp loyees from 
amongst themselves.  5 
 (6) The Corporation may appoint such committees as may be  necessary for the efficient performance, 
exercise and discharge of i ts functions, powers and duties : 
Provided that all or a majority of the members of each  committee shall be Members and a member of 
any such committee who is not a  Member shall have only the right to attend meetings of the committee 
and take  part in the pro ceedings thereof, but shall not have the right to vote.  
(7) The Corporation may associate with itself, in such  manner and for such purposes as may be 
provided by regulations, any person whose  assistance or advice it may need in complying with any of the 
provisions of this  Act and a person so associated shall have the right to take part in the  discussions of the 
Board relevant to the purposes of which he has been  associated, but shall not have the right to vote.  
(8) No act or proceeding of the Board or of an y committee  appointed by it under sub -section ( 6) shall 
be in validated merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of,  the Board or such committee ; or 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a  Member or a member of such 
committee;  or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board or such  committee not affecting the merits of 
the case.  
4. Appointment of Chairman and other Members .—(1) The Chairman and the other Members, 
except the ex officio  Members, th e Nominated Member and the elected Members shall be appointed by 
the President of India on the recommendati on of a committee consisting of — 
(a) the Chairman of the Council of States, who shall b e the Chairman of the Committee ; 
(b) the Chairman of the Press  Council of India established under section 4 of the Pres s Council 
Act, 1978  (37 of 1978); and 
(c) one nominee of the President of India.  
(2) No appointment of a Member shall be invalidated merely by reason of any vacancy in, or any 
defect in the constitution of, the committee appointed under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The Chairman and the Part -time Members shall be per sons of eminence in public life; the 
Executive Member shall be a person having special knowledge or practical experience in respect of su ch 
matters as administration, management, broadcasting, education, literature, culture, arts,  music, dramatics 
or journalism; the Member (Finance) shall be a person having special knowledge or practical experience 
in respect of financial matters and the Me mber (Personnel) shall be a person having special knowledge or 
practical experience in respect of personnel management and administration.  
(4) The recommendations made by the committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall be binding 
for the purposes of appointment under this section.  
5. Powers and functions of Executive Member .—The Executive Member shall be the Chief 
Executive of the Corporation and shall,  subject to the control and supervision of the Board, exercise such 
powers and  discharge such functi ons of the Board as it may delegate to him.  
6. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairman and other Members .—1[(1) The 
Chairman shall be Part -time Member and shall hold office for a term of three years from the date on 
which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that any person holding office as a Chairman immediately before the commencement of the 
Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Act, 2008  (12 of 20 08) shall, in so far as 
his appointment is inconsistent with the provisions of this sub -section, cease to hold office on such 
commencement as such Chairman and shall not be entitled to any compensation because of his ceasing to 
hold such office.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 12 of 2008, s.  2, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f .7-2-2008).  6 
 (2) 1*** the Member (Finance) and the Member (Personnel) shall be Whole -time Members and every 
such Member shall hold office for a term of six years from the date on which he enters upon his office or 
until he attains the age of sixty -two years, whichever is earlie r.  
2[(2A) The Executive Member shall be a Whole -time Member and shall hold office for a term of  
five years from the date on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, 
whichever is earlier:  
Provided that any person ho lding office as an Executive Member immediately before the 
commencement of the Prasar Bharati (Broadcasting Corporation of India) Amendment Act, 2008   
(12 of 2008) , shall, in so far as his appointment is inconsistent with the provisions of this sub -section , 
cease to hold office on such commencement as such Executive Member and shall not be entitled to any 
compensation because of his ceasing to hold such office.]  
(3) The term of office of Part -time Members shall be six years, but one -third of such Members sh all 
retire on the e xpiration of every second year.  
(4) The term of office of an elected Member shall be two years or till he ceases to be an employee of 
the Corporation, whichever is earlier.  
(5) As soon as may be after the establishment of the Corporation , the President of India may, by 
order, make such provision as he thinks fit for curtailing the term of office of some of the Part -time 
Members then appointed in order that one -third of the Members holding office as such Part -time 
Members shall retire in e very second year thereafter.  
(6) Where before the expiry of the term of office of a person holding the office of Chairman, or any 
other Member, a vacancy arises, for any reason whatsoever, such vacancy shall be deemed to be a casual 
vacancy and the person appointed or elected to fill such vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired period 
of the term for which his predecessor in office would have held office if such vacancy had not arisen.  
(7) The Whole -time Members shall be the employees of the Corporation  and as such shall be entitled 
to such salaries and allowances and shall be subject to such conditions of service in respect of leave, 
pension (if any), provident fund and other matters as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the salaries and allowances and th e conditions of service shall not be varied to their 
disadvantage after their appointment.  
(8) The Chairman and Part -time Members shall be entitled to such allowances as may be prescribed.  
7. Removal and suspension of Chairman and Members .—(1) Subject to the provisions of  
sub-section ( 3), the Chairman or any other Member,  except an ex officio  Member, the Nominated Member 
and an elected Member, shall  only be removed from his office by order of the President of India on the 
ground  of misbehavior after the Supreme Court, on a reference being made to it by the  President, has, on 
inquiry held in accordance with such procedure as the Supreme  Court may by rules provide, reported that 
the Chairman or such other Member, as  the case may be, ought, on such  ground, be removed.  
(2) The President may suspend from office the Chairman or other Member except an ex officio 
Member, the Nominated Member or an elected Member, in respect of whom a  reference has been made to 
the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 1) until the  President has passed orders on receipt of the report of 
the Supreme Court on  such reference.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the President may, by  order, remove the 
Chai rman or any Whole -time Member f rom his office if such Chairma n or such Whole -time Member — 
(a) ceases to be a citizen of India ; or 
(b) is adjudged an insolvent ; or 
(c) engages during his term of office in any paid  employment o utside the duties of his office ; or 
                                                           
1.  Words “The Executive Member,”  omitted by  Act 12 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -2-2008).  
2.  Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 7-2-2008).  7 
 (d) is convicted of any offence involving moral tu rpitude ; or 
(e) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue  in office by reas on of infirmity of body or 
mind : 
Provided that the President may, by order, remove any  Part-time Member from his office if he is 
adjudged an insolvent or is con victed  of any offence involving moral turpitude or where he is, in the 
opinion of the  President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of body or mind.  
(4) If the Chairman or any Whole -time Member, except any ex officio Member, the Nominated 
Member or any elected Member, is, or becomes in any  way concerned or interested in any contract or 
agreement made by or on behalf of  the Corporation or the Government of India or the Government of a 
State or,  participates in any way in the profit thereof, o r in any benefit or emolument  arising therefrom 
than as a member, and in common with other members of an  incorporated company, he shall, for the 
purposes of sub -section ( 1), be deemed  to be guilty of misbehaviour.  
(5) If a Part -time Member is, or becomes in any way  concerned , or interested in any contract or 
agreement made by or on behalf of the  Corporation, he shall, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), be 
deemed to be  guilty of misbehaviour.  
(6) The Chairman or any other Member may resign his office  by giving notice thereof in writing to 
the President of India and on such  resignation being accepted, the Chairman or other Member shall be 
deemed to have  vacated his office.  
8. Meetings of Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at such times and places and shall obs erve such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at 
meetings) as  may be provided by regulations : 
Provided that there shall not be less than six meetings every year but three months shall not interv ene 
between one meeting and the next meeting.  
(2) A Member shall be deemed to have vacated his office if he absents himself for three consecutive 
meetings of the Board without the leave of the Chairman.  
(3) The Chairman shall preside at the meetings of the  Board and if for any reason he is unable to 
attend any meeting, the Executive Member and in the absence of both, any other Member elected by the 
Members present at such meeting, shall preside at the meeting.  
(4) All questions which come up before any meet ing of the Board shall be decided by a majority of 
the votes of the Members present and voting and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in 
his absence, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
9. Officers and other employees of Corporation .—(1) Subject to such control, restrictions and 
conditions as may be prescribed, the Corporation may appoint, after consultation with the Recruitment 
Board, the Director -General (Akashvani), the Director -General (Doordarsh an) and such other officers and 
other employees as may be necessary.  
(2) The method of recruitment of such officers and employees and all other matters connected 
therewith and the conditions of service of such officers and other employees shall be such as may be 
provided by regulations.  
10. Establishment of Recruitment Boards .—(1) the Corporation shall, as soon as may be, after the 
appointed day and in such manner and subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, 
establish for the purpos es of section 9, one or more Recruitment Boards consisting wholly of persons 
other than the Members, officers and oth er employees of the Corporation : 
Provided that for the purposes of appointment to the posts carrying scales of pay which are not less 
than that of a Joint Secretary to the Central Government, the Recruitment Board shall consist of the 
Chairman, other Members, the ex officio  Members, the Nominated Member and the elected Members.  
(2) The qualifications and other conditions of service of the members constituting the Recruitment 
Board and the period for which such members shall hold office, shall be such as may be prescribed.  8 
 1[11. Stat us of officers and employees .—(1) All officers and employees recruited for the purposes of 
Akashvani or Doorda rshan before the appointed day and in service in the Corporation as on the 1st day of 
April, 2000, shall be on deemed deputation to the Corporation with effect from the 1st day of April, 2000, 
and shall so continue till their retirement.  
(2) All officers a nd employees recruited during the period on or after the appointed day till the  
5th day of October, 2007, shall be on deemed deputation to the Corporation with effect from the 1st day 
of April, 2000 or the date of their joining service in the Corporation,  whichever is later and until their 
retirement.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), “officers and employees recruited ” means 
officers and employees recruited either under the proviso to article 309 of the Constitution or in 
accordanc e with the regulations made under the Act, but shall not include persons engaged or appointed 
on daily wages, casual, ad hoc  or work charged basis.  
(3) The officers and employees referred to in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) shall be entitled to 
the pay and all other benefits as admissible to an emp loyee of the Central Government:  
Provided that such officers and employees shall not be entitled to any deputation allowance.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in fo rce, the Corporation 
shall have the disciplinary and supervisory powers and full control on the officers and employees referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2), including the power to transfer them from one place, post or 
media to another, and to  suspend, initiate disciplinary proceedings and impose major or minor penalties:  
Provided that the power to impose major penalties of compulsory retirement, removal or dismissal 
from service shall be exercised by the Central Government.  
(5) All officers an d employees recruited after the 5th day of October, 2007 shall be officers and 
employees of the Corporation and shall be governed by such conditions of service as may be  specified in 
the regulations.  
11A. Section 11 not to apply to certain officers and emp loyees .—(1) The provisions of section 11 
shall not apply to officers and employees of the Indian Information Service, the Central Secretariat 
Service or any other service borne on any cadre outside Akashvani or Doordarshan, who have been 
working in Akashva ni or Doordarshan before the appointed day or in service in the Corporation after that 
day. 
(2) The terms and conditions of service in the Corporation of officers and employees referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
11B. Transfer of posts of Akashvani and Doordarshan to Corporation .—(1) All posts in the 
erstwhile Akashvani and Doordarshan other than the posts borne on the strength of the cadres referred to 
in sub-section ( 2) shall be deemed to have been transferred to the Corporation with effect from the 1st day 
of April, 2000.  
(2) All matters relating to the posts borne on the strength of the cadres of the Indian Information 
Service, the Central Secretariat Service or any other cadre outside Akashvani or Doordarshan, in so  far as 
such posts are concerned with the Corporation, shall be determined in such manner and on such terms and 
conditi ons as may be prescribed. ] 
12. Functions and powers of Corporation .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the 
primary du ty of the Corporation to organise and conduct public broadcasting services to inform, educate 
and entertain the public and to ensure a balanced development of broadcasting on radio and television.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declar ed that the provisions of this section shall 
be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  (13 of 1985).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2012, s. 2, for section 11 (w.e.f . 8-3-2012).  9 
 (2) The Corporation shall, in the discharge of its functions, be guided by t he following objectives, 
namely: — 
(a) upholding the unity and integrity of the country and the value s enshrined in the Constitution ; 
(b) safeguarding the citizen’ s right to be informed freely, truthfully and objectively on all matters 
of public interest, national or international,  and presenting a fair and balanced flow of information 
including contrasting views without advocating any o pinion or ideology of its own ; 
(c) paying special attention to the fields of education and spread of literacy, agriculture, rural 
development, envir onment, health and family wel fare and science and technology ; 
(d) providing adequate coverage to the diverse cultures and languages of the various regions of 
the country by broa dcasting appropriate programmes ; 
(e) providing adequate coverage to sports and games so as to encourage healthy competition and 
the spirit of sportsmanship ; 
(f) providing appropriate programmes keeping in view  the special needs of the youth;  
(g) informing and stimulating the national consciousness in regard to the status and problems  of 
women and paying special atten tion to the upliftment of women ; 
(h) promoting social justice and combating exploitation, inequality and such evils as 
untouchability and advancing the welfare of the  weaker sections of the society ; 
(i) safeguarding the ri ghts of the working clas ses and advancing their welfare ; 
(j) serving the rural and weaker sections of the people and those residing in border re gions, 
backward or remote areas ; 
(k) providing suitable programmes keeping in view the special needs of the mi norities and tribal 
communities ; 
(l) taking special steps to protect the interests of children, the blind, the aged, the handicapped 
and other vu lnerable sections of the people ; 
(m) promoting national integration by broadcasting in a manner that facilitate s communic ation in 
the languages in India ; and facilitating the distribution of regional broadcasting services in every State  
in the languages of that State ; 
(n) providing co mprehensive broadcast coverage through the choice of appropriate technology 
and the best utilisation of the broadcast frequencies available and ensuring high quality recepti on; 
(o) promoting research and development activities in order to ensure that radio and television 
broadcast te chnology are constantly updated ; and  
(p) expanding b roadcasting facilities by establishing additional channels of transmission at 
various levels.  
(3) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the Corporation 
may tak e such steps as it thinks fit — 
(a) to ensure that b roadcasting is conducted as a public service to  provide and produce 
programmes ; 
(b) to establish a system for the gathering o f news for radio and television ; 
(c) to negotiate for purchase of, or otherwise acquire, programmes and rights or privileges in 
respect of sports and other events , films, serials, occasions, meet ings, functions or incidents of public 
interest, for broadcasting and to establish procedures for the allocation of such programmes, right s or 
privileges to the services ; 
(d) to establish a nd maintain a library or libraries of radio,  television and other materials ; 10 
 (e) to conduct or commission, from time to time, programmes, audience research, market or 
technical service, which may be released to such persons and in such manner and subject t o such 
terms and conditions a s the Corporation may think fit ; 
(f) to provide such other services as may be specified by regulations.  
(4) Nothing in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) shall prevent the Corporation from managing on behalf of the 
Central Government and  in accordance with such terms and conditions as may be specified by that 
Government the broadcasting of External Services and monitoring of broadcasts made by organisations 
outside India on the basis of arrangements made for reimbursement of expenses by t he Central 
Government.  
(5) For the purposes of ensuring that adequate time is made available for the promotion of the 
objectives set o ut in this se ction, the Central Government  shall have the power to determine the maximum 
limit of broadcast time in respec t of the advertisement.  
(6) The Corporation shall be subject to no civil liability on the ground merely that it failed to comply 
with any of the provisions of this section.  
(7) The Corporation shall have power to determine and levy fees and other service charges for or in 
respect of the advertisements and such programmes as may be specified by regulations : 
Provided that the fees and other service charges levied and collected under this sub -section shall not 
exceed such limits as may be determined by the Central Government, from time to time.  
13. Parliamentary Committee .—(1) There shall be constituted a Committee consisting of  
twenty -two Members of Parliament, of whom fifteen from the House of the People to be elected by the 
Members thereof and seven from the Council of States to be elected by the Members thereof in 
accordance with the system of proportional representation by means of the single transferable vote, to 
oversee th at the Corporation discharges its functions in accordance with the provisions of this Act and, in 
particular, the objectives set out in section 12 and submit a report thereon to Parliament.  
(2) The Committee shall function in accordance with such rules as may be made by the Speaker of the 
House of the People.  
14. Establishment of Broadcasting Council, term of office and removal, etc., of members 
thereof .—(1) There shall be established, by notification, as soon as may be after the appointed day, a 
Council, t o be known as the Broadcasting Council, to receive and consider complaints referred to in 
section 15 and to advise the Corporation in the discharge of its functions in accordance with the 
objectives set out in section 12.  
(2) The Broadcas ting Council shall  consist of — 
(i) a President and ten other members to be appointed by the President of India from amongst 
persons of eminence in pub lic life ; 
(ii) four Members of Parliament, of whom two from the House of the People to be nominated by 
the Speaker thereof and two from the Council of States to be nominated by the Chairman thereof.  
(3) The President of the Broadcasting Council shall be a whole -time member and every other member 
shall be a part -time member and the President or the part -time member shall hold o ffice as such for a term 
of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office.  
(4) The Broadcasting Council may constitute such number of Regional Councils as it may deem 
necessary to aid and assist the Council in the discharge of its functions.  
(5) The President of the Broadcasting Council shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and 
shall be subject to such conditions of service in respect of leave, pension (if any), provident fund and 
other matters as may be prescribed : 
Provided that th e salary and allowances and the conditions of service shall not be varied to the 
disadvantage of the President of the Broadcasting Council after his appointment.  11 
 (6) The other members of the Broadcasting Council and the members of the Regional Councils 
constituted under sub -section ( 4) shall be entitled to such allowances as may be prescribed.  
15. Jurisdiction of, and the procedure to be followed by, Broadcasting Council .—(1) The 
Broadcasting Council shall receiv e and consider complaints from — 
(i) any person or group of persons alleging that a certain programme or broadcast or the 
functioning of the Corporation in specific cases or in general is not in accordance with the objectives 
for which  the Corporation is established ; 
(ii) any person (other than an officer or employee of the Corporation) claiming himself to have 
been treated unjustly or unfairly in any manner (including unwarranted invasion of privacy, 
misrepresentation, distortion or lack of objectivity) in connection with any programme broadcast  by 
the Corporation.  
(2) A complaint under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such manner and within such period as may be 
specified by regulations.  
(3) The Broadcasting Council shall follow such procedure as it thinks fit for the disposal of 
complaints rece ived by it.  
(4) If the complaint is found to be justified either wholly or in part, the Broadcasting Council shall 
advise the Executive Member to take appropriate action.  
(5) If the Executive Member is unable to accept the recommendation of the Broadcastin g Council, he 
shall place such recommendation before the Board for its decision thereon.  
(6) If the Board is also unable to accept the recommendation of the Broadcasting Council, it shall 
record its reasons therefor and inform the Broadcasting Council acco rdingly.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 5) and ( 6), where the Broadcasting Council 
deems it appropriate, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, require the Corporation to broadcast its 
recommendations with respect to a comp laint in such manner as the Council may deem fit.  
CHAPTER  III 
ASSETS , FINANCES AND ACCOUNTS  
16. Transfer of certain assets, liabilities, etc., of Cent ral Government to Corporation .—As from 
the appointed day ,— 
(a) all property and assets (including the Non-lapsable Fund) which immediately before that day 
vested in the Central Government for the purpose of Akashvani or Doordarshan or both shall stand 
transferred to the Corporation on such terms and conditions as may be determined by the Central 
Government  and the book value of all such property and assets shall be treated as the capital provided 
by the Centra l Government to the Corporation ; 
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to  be done by, with or for the Central Government immediately before such day for or 
in connection with the purposes of Akashvani or Doordarshan or both shall be deemed to have been 
incurred, entered into and engaged to be done by, with or for the Corporatio n; 
(c) all sums of money due to the Central Government in relation to the Akashvani or Doordarshan 
or both immediately before such day shall be deem ed to be due to the Corporation ; 
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have be en instituted by or 
against the Central Government immediately before such day for any matter in relation to the 
Akashvani or Doordarshan or both may be continued or instituted by or against the Corporation.  
  12 
 17. Grants, etc., by Central Government .—For t he purposes of enabling the Corporation to 
discharge its functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Corpo ration in each financial year, — 
(i) the proceeds of  the broadcast receiver licence fees, if any, as reduced by the collection 
charges; and  
(ii) such other sums of money as that Government considers necessary,  
by way of equity, grant -in-aid or loan.  
18. Fund of Corporation .—(1) The Corporation shall have its own Fund and all the receipts of the 
Corporation (including the amounts which stand transferred to the Corporation under section 16) shall be 
credited to the Fund and all payments by the Corporation shall be made there from.  
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund shall be deposited in one or more nationalised banks in such 
manner as the Corporation may decide.  
(3) The Corporation may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing its functions under this Act 
and such sums shall be treated as expenditure p ayable out of the Fund of the Corporation.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “nationalised bank ” means a corresponding new bank 
specified in the First Schedule to the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) 
Act, 1970  (5 of  1970) or a corresponding new bank specified in the First Schedule to the Banking 
Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act, 1980  (40 of 1980).  
19. Investment of moneys .—The Corporation may invest its moneys in the securities of the Central  
Government or any State Government or in such other manner as may be prescribed.  
20. Annual Financial Statement of the Corporation .—(1) The Corporation shall prepare, in each 
financial year, an Annual Financial Statement for the next fin ancial year showin g separately — 
(a) the expenditure which is proposed to be met from the intern al resources of the Corporation ; 
and 
(b) the sums required from the Central Government to meet other  expenses, and distinguishing — 
(i) revenue exp enditure from other expenditure ; and 
(ii) non -plan expenditure from plan expenditure.  
(2) The Annual Financial Statement shall be prepared in such form and forwarded at such time to the 
Central Government for its approval as may be agreed to by that Government and the Corporation.  
21. Accounts and audit of Corporation .—(1) The Corporation shall maintain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form and in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) The accounts of the Corporation shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Corporation to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Corporation shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General has in connecti on with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of the offices of the Corporation.  
(4) The accounts of the C orporation as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the sam e to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
 13 
 22. [Corporation not liable to be taxed .] Omitted by Act  20 of 2002, s. 163 (w.e.f.1 -4-2003).  
CHAPTER  IV 
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Power of Central Government to give directions .—(1) The Central Government may, from 
time to time as and when occasion arises, issue to the Corporation such directions as it may think 
necessary in the interests of the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India or the security of the State or 
preservation of public order requiring it not to make a broadcast on a matter specified in the direction or 
to make a broadcast on any matter of public importance specified in the direction.  
(2) Where the Corporation makes a broadcast in pursuance of the direction issued under  
sub-section ( 1), the fact that such broadcast has been made in pursuance of such direction may also be 
announced along with such broadcast, if the Corporation so desires.  
(3) A copy of every direction issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of 
Parliament.  
24. Power of Central Government to obtain information .—The Central Government may require 
the Corporation to furnish such information as that Government may consider necessary.  
25. Report to Parliament in certain matters and recommendations as to action agains t the 
Board .—(1) Where the Board persistently makes default in complying with any directions  issued under 
section 23 or fails to supply the information required under  section 24, the Central Government may 
prepare a report thereof and lay it  before each Ho use of Parliament for any recommendation thereof as to 
any action  (including supersession of the Board) which may be taken against the Board.  
(2) On the recommendation of the Parliament, the President may b y notification  supersede the Board 
for such period  not exceeding six months as may be specified  in the notification : 
Provided that before issuing the  notification under this sub -section , the President shall give a 
reasonable  opportunity to the Board to show cause as to why it should not be superseded and  shall 
consider the explanations and objections, if any, of the Board.  
(3) Upon the publication of the notification under sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) all the Members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as  such; 
(b) all the powers, functi ons and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this  Act be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board, shall, until the  Board is reconstituted under this 
Act, be exercised and discharged by such  person or persons as the President may dir ect. 
(4) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification  issued under  
sub-section ( 2), the President may reconstitute the Board by fresh  appointments, and in such a case any 
person who had vacated his office under  clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) shall not be disqualified for 
appointment : 
Provided that the President may, at any time before the  expiration of the period of supersession, take 
action under this sub -section.  
(5) The Central Government shall cause the notification issu ed under sub -section ( 2) and a full report 
of the action taken under this section to be laid before each  House of Parliament.  
26. Office of member not to disqualify a Member of Parliament .—It is hereby declared that the 
office of the member of the Broadcas ting Council or of the Committee constituted under section 13 shall 
not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a Member of either House of Parliament.  
27. Chairman, Members, etc., to be public servants .—The Chairman and every other Member, 
every officer or other employee of the Corporation and every member of a Committee thereof, the 
President and every member of the Broadcasting Council or every member of a Regional Council or a 
Recruitment Board shall be deemed to be a public serva nt within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860).  14 
 28. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Corporation , the Chairman or any Member or officer or other employee thereof or  the President or a 
member of the Broadcasting Council or a member of a Regional Council or a Recruitment Board for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or of any rules on 
regulations made thereunder.  
29. Authentication of orders and other instruments of Corporation .—All orders and decisions of 
the Corporation shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any other Member authorised 
by the Corporation in this behalf and all other instruments execu ted by the Corporation shall be 
authenticated by the signature of the Executive Member or by any officer of the Corporation authorised 
by him in this behalf.  
30. Delegation of powers .—The Corporation may, by general or special order, delegate to the 
Chairman or any other Member or to any officer of the Corporation, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, if any, as may be specified therein, such of its powers and duties under this Act as it may 
deem fit.  
31. Annual report .—(1) The Corporation shall prepare once in every calendar year, in such form 
and within such time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a full account of its activities 
(including the recommendations and suggestions made by the Broadcasting Council and the action taken  
thereon) during the previous year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and 
that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each House of Parliament.  
(2) The Broadcasting Council shall prepare once in every calendar year, in such form and within such 
time as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a full account of its activities during the previous year 
and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the 
same to be laid be fore each House of Parliament.  
32. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service in respect of leave, pension (if any), 
provi dent fund and other matters in relation to the Whole -time Members und er sub -section ( 7) of 
section 6 ; 
(b) the allowances payable to the Chairman and Part -time Members und er sub -section ( 8) of 
section 6 ; 
(c) the control, restrictions and conditions subject to which the Corporation may appoint officers 
and other employees und er sub -section ( 1) of section 9 ; 
(d) the manner in which and the conditions and restrictions subject to which a Recruitment Board 
may be established unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 10 ; 
(e) the qualifications and other conditions of service of the members of a Recruitment Board and 
their period of office unde r sub -section ( 2) of section 10 ; 
1[(f) the terms and conditions of service in the Corporation of officers and employees under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 11A;  
(ff) the manner and the terms and conditions subject to which matters relating to the posts borne 
on the strength of the cadres of the Indian Information Service, the Central Secretariat Ser vice or any 
other cadre outside Ak ashvani or Doordarshan shall be determined under sub -section ( 2) of  
section 11B;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2012, s. 3, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 8 -3-2012).  15 
 (g) the salary and allowances and conditions of service in respect of leave, pension (if any), 
provident fund and other matters in relation to the President of the Broadcast ing Council under  
sub-section ( 5) of section 14 ; 
(h) the allowances payable to other members of the Broadcasting Council and the members of the 
Regional Councils, unde r sub -section ( 6) of section 14 ; 
(i) the manner in which the Corporation may inv est its moneys under section 19 ; 
(j) the form and the manner in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared unde r 
sub-section ( 1) of section 21 ; 
(k) the form in which, and the time within which the Corporation and the Broadcasting Council 
shall prepar e their  annual report under section 31 ; 
(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
33. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Corporation may, by notification, make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder for enabling it to perform its functions under this 
Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power such regulations may provide for all or 
any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which and the purposes for w hich the Corporation may associate with itself any 
person und er sub -section ( 7) of section 3 ; 
(b) the times and places at which meetings of the Board shall be held and, the procedure to be 
followed thereat, and the quorum necessary for the transaction of t he business at a meeting of the 
Board und er sub -section ( 1) of section 8 ; 
(c) the methods of recruitment and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the 
Corporation und er sub -section ( 2) of section 9 ; 
1[(d) the conditions of service of officers and employees under sub -section ( 5) of section 11;]  
 2*   *   *   *  * 
(f) the services which may be provided by the Corporation under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 12 ; 
(g) the determination and levy of fees and other service charges in  respect of advertisements and 
other programmes unde r sub -section ( 7) of section 12 ; 
(h) the manner in which and the period within which complaints may be made unde r  
sub-section ( 2) of section 15 ; 
(i) any other matter in respect of which provision is, in the opinion of the Corporation, necessary 
for the performance of its functions under this Act : 
Provided that the regulations under clause ( c) or clause ( d) shall be made only with the prior 
approval o f the Central Government.  
34. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session for a total per iod of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in  the rule or regulation, or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case may be ; so, however, that any such 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2012, s. 4, for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 8 -3-2012).  
2. Clause ( e) omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f.  8-3-2012).  16 
 modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
35. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order,  published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as it may deem necessary, for the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years f rom the 
appointed day.  
