--------------------------The Consumer Protection (Amendment) Act, 1991--------------------------
1 
 THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (AMENDMENT) ACT, 1991  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. [Repealed. ] 
3. [Repealed. ] 
4. [Repealed. ] 
5. Validation of certain orders, etc.  
6. Repeal and saving.  
 
  2 
 THE CONSUMER PROTECTION (AMENDMENT)  ACT, 1991  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1991  
[16th August , 1991.]  
An Act to amend the Consumer Protection Act, 1986.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the  Consumer Protection 
(Amendment) Act, 1991.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 15th day of June, 1991.  
2. [Amendment of section 14.] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001 ( 30 of 2001), s. 2 and  
the First Schedule  (w.e.f.  3-9-2001).  
3. [Insertion of new section 18A.] Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule.  ibid. (w.e.f. 3-9-2001).  
4. [Insertion of new section 29A.] Rep. by s. 2 and the First Schedule , ibid. (w.e.f3-9-2001 ). 
5. Validation of certain orders, etc. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any law or any 
judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority, any order  made by the District Forum 
of the State Commission under the principal Act, which would have been validly made if the amendments 
made to th e principal Act by this Act were in force on the date of such order, shall be deemed to have 
been validly made as if the amendments made to the principal Act by this Act were in force at all material 
times when such order was  made.  
6. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Consumer Protection (Amendment) Ordinance 1991                      
(Ord. 6 of 1991), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act as 
amended by this Act.  
--------------------------The Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election Commissioners and Transaction of Business) Act, 1991--------------------------
1 
 THE ELECTION COMMISSION (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE  OF ELECTION 
COMMISSIONERS AND TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS ) ACT, 1991  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
SALARY AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE CHIEF ELECTION  
COMMISSIONER AND ELECTION  COMMISSIONERS  
3. Salary . 
4. Term of office . 
5. Leave . 
6. Pension payable to  Election Commissioners . 
7. Right to subscribe to General Provident Fund . 
8. Other conditions of service . 
CHAPTER  III 
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS OF  ELECTION  COMMISSION  
9. Transaction of business of Election Commission . 
10. Disposal of business by Election Commission . 
  2 
  
2[THE ELECTION COMMISSION (CONDITIONS OF SERVICE  OF ELECTION 
COMMISSIONERS AND TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS )] ACT , 1991  
ACT NO. 11 OF 1991  
[25th January , 1991.]  
An Act to  determine the conditions of service of the Chief Election  Commission er and other 
Election Commissioners 1[and to provide for the procedure for transaction of business by the 
Election Commission and for matters] connected  therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -first Year of the Republic of Indi a as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called 2[the Election Commission (Conditions of Service of Election 
Commissioner s and Transaction of Business)] Act, 1991.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise require s,— 
(a)  “Chief Election Commissioner ” means the Chief Election  Commissioner appointed under 
articles 324 of the Constitution;  
3[(b) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission  referred to in article 324 of the 
Consti tution;]  
4[(c)]“Election Commissioner ” means any other Election Commissioner  appointed under  
article 324 of the Constitution.  
CHAPTER II  
SALARY AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE CHIEF ELECTION  
COMMISSIONER AND ELECTION  COMMISSIONERS  
3. Salary .—5***There shall be paid to the Chief Election Commissioner  6[and other Election 
Commissioners]  a salary which is equal to the salary of a Judge of the Supreme Court:  
7*   *   *   *   * 
Provided that  if a  person who,  immediately before  the date of  assuming office as the Chief Election 
Commissioner or, as the case maybe , an  Election Commissioner, was in receipt of, or, being eligible so  
to do, had election  to draw, a pension(other than a disability or wound  pension) in  respect of  any 
previous  service under the Government of  the Union  or under the Government of a State, his salary in 
respect of  service as the Chief Election Commissioner or,  as the case may be, an  Electio n Commissioner 
shall be reduced — 
(a) by the amount of that pension; and  
(b) if he had,  before assuming  office, rec eived,  in lieu of a  portion of the pension due to him in 
respect of such previous service,  the commuted  value thereof,  by the  amount of that portion of the  
pension.  
                                                           
1. Subs by Act 4 of 1994, s. 2, for “and for matters” (w.e.f. 1-10-1993).  
2. Subs by s. 3, ibid., for “ the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners (Conditions of Service)”  
(w.e.f. 1 -10-1993)  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Clause ( b) shall be re -lettered as clause ( c) by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by s. 5, ibid.(w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
7. Certain brackets, figure and words omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  3 
 4. Term of office .—The Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner  shall hold office 
for a term of six years from the date on which he  assum es his office:  
1[Provided that where the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner attains the age 
of sixty -five years before the expiry of the said term of six years, he shall vacate his office on the date on 
which he attains the said age:]  
Provided further that the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner may, at any 
time, by writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his office.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of  this section,  the term  of six  years in  respect of  th e Chief  
Election Commissioner or an Election  Commissioner holding office immediately before the  
commencement  of  this Act,  shall be  computed from  the date  on whi ch  he had assumed  office.  
5. Leave .—(1) A person who, immediately before the  date of  assuming  office as the Chief Election 
Commissioner or an Election Commissioner,  was in  service of  Government may  be granted  during his  
tenure  of  office but  not thereafter, leave in accordance with the rules for the  time being  applicable to the 
Service to which he belonged before such  date and  he shall  be entitled  to carry  forward the amount of 
leave  standing  at   his  credit  on  such  date,  notwithstandin g  any  thing  contained in section 6.  
(2) Any  other person  who is  appointed as  the  Chief  Election  Commissioner or  an Election  
Commissioner may  be  granted  leave  in  accordance with  such rules  as are for the time being applicable 
to a member of t he Indian Administrative Service.  
(3) The  power to  grant or  refuse leave  to the  Chief Election  Commissioner or  an Election  
Commissioner and  to revoke  or  curtail  leave granted to him,  shall vest in the President.  
6. Pension payable to Election Com missioners .—(1) A person who, immediately before the date of  
assuming  office as  the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner  was in  service of  
Government, shall  be deemed  to have retired from  service on  the date  on which  he enters  upon office  
as  the  Chief  Election Commissioner  or an  Election Commissioner but his subsequent  service as the 
Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner  shall be rec koned as continuing approved 
service counting for pension  in Servi ce to wh ich he belonged.  
(2) Where the Chief Election Commissioner  2[or an Election Commissioner]  demits office [whether  
in any  manner specified in 3[sub-section ( 3)] or by resignation], he shall, on such demission be entitled 
to— 
(a) a pension which is equal to the pension payable to a Judge of  the Supreme Court in 
accordance with the provisions of Part III of the  Schedule to  the Supreme  Court Judges  (Conditions 
of  Service)  Act,1958  (41 of 1958) , as amended from time to time; and  
(b) such pension (includi ng  commutation  of  pension), family  pension and gratuity as are 
admissible to a Judge of the Supreme Court  under the said Act and the rules made thereunder, as 
amended from time  to time.  
4*   *   *   *   * 
5[(3)]Except where the Chief Election Commission er or an Election  Commissioner demits office by 
resignation, he shall be deemed, for the purpose of this Act, to have demitted his office if, and only if, — 
(a) he has completed  the term of office specified in section 4,or  
(b) he has attained  the age of sixty -five years, 6*** or 
(c) his demission of office is medically certified to be necessitated  by ill -health.  
                                                           
1. Subs by Act 4 of 1994, s. 6, for the first proviso (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993 ). 
2. Ins . by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
3. Subs by s. 7, ibid., for “sub -section ( 4)” (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
4. Sub -section ( 3) omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
5. Sub-section ( 4) shall be re -numbered as sub -section ( 3) by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -10-1993).  
6. The words “or as the case may  be, sixty -two years,” omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f 1 -10-1993).  4 
 7. Right to subscribe to General Provident Fund .—Every person holding office as the Chief 
Election Commissioner  or an Election Commission er shall be entitled to subscribe to the General 
Provident Fund (Central Services).  
8. Other conditions of service .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the conditions of service 
relating  to  travelling  allowance,  provision  of  rent-free residence and  exemption from  payment of  
income -tax on  the value of  such rent -free residence, conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance,  medical 
facilities  and such  other conditions  of service as are, 1[for the time being, applicable to a Judge of the 
Supreme Court under Chapter IV of the Supreme Court Judges (Conditions of Service) Act, 1958 (41 of 
1958) and the rules made thereunder, shall, so far as may be, apply to the Chief Election Commissioner 
and other Election Commissioners] . 
2[CHAPTER III  
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS OF  ELECTION  COMMISSION  
9. Transaction of business of Election Commission .—The business of the Election Commission 
shall  be transacted in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
10. Disposal of business by Election Co mmission .—(1) The Election Commission may, by  
unanimous decision, regulate the procedure for transaction of its business as also allocation of its business 
amongst the Chief Election Commissioner and other Election Commissioners.  
(2) Save as provided in su b-section ( 1), all business of the  Election Commission shall, as far as 
possible, be transacted unanimously.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), if the Chief Election Commissioner and other 
Election Commissioners differ in opinion on any matter, such matter shall be decided according to the 
opinion of the majority. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 4 of 1994, s. 8, for certain words (w.e.f. 1-10-1993).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid.  (w.e.f.  1-10-1993).  
--------------------------The Places of Worship (Special Provisions) Act, 1991--------------------------
1 
 THE PLACES OF WORSHIP (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT , 1991  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Bar of conversion of places of worship . 
4. Declaration as to the religious character of certain places of worship and bar of jurisdiction of 
courts, etc . 
5. Act not to apply to Ram Janma  Bhumi -Babri Masjid . 
6. Punishment for contravention of section 3 . 
7. Act to override other enactments . 
8. [Repealed .] 
 
  2 
 THE PLACES OF WORSHIP (SPECIAL PROVISIONS) ACT , 1991  
 ACT NO. 42 OF 1991  
[18th September , 1991 .] 
An Act to prohibit conversion of any place of worship and to provide for the maintenance of the 
religious character of any place of worship as it existed on the 15th day of August, 1947, and 
for matters connected t herewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Places of Worship 
(Special Provisions) Act, 1991.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) The provisions of sections 3, 6 and 8 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force  on the 11th day of July, 1991.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “commencement of this Act ” means the commencement of this Act on the 11th day of July, 
1991;  
(b) “conversion ”, with its grammatical variations, includes alteratio n or change of whatever 
nature;  
(c) “place of worship ” means a temple, mosque, gurudwara, church, monastery or any other place 
of public religious worship of any religious denomination or any section th ereof, by whatever  name 
called.  
3. Bar of conversion of places of worship. —No person shall convert any place of worship of any 
religious denomination or any section thereof into a place of worship of a different section of the same 
religious denomination or of a different religious denom ination or any section thereof.  
 4. Declaratio n as to the religious character of certain places of worship and bar of jurisdiction 
of courts, etc. —(1) It is hereby declared that the religious character of a place of worship existing on the 
15th day of August, 1947 shall continue to be the sam e as it e xisted on that day.  
(2) If, on the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other proceeding with respect to the 
conversion of the religious character of any place of worship, existing on the 15th day of August, 1947, is 
pending before any court, trib unal or other authority, the same shall abate, and no suit, appeal or other 
proceeding with respect to any such matter shall lie on or after such commencement in any cour t, tribunal 
or other authority:  
Provided that if any suit, appeal or other proceeding,  instituted or filed on the ground that conversion 
has taken place in the religious character of any such place after the 15th day of August, 1947, is pending 
on the commencement of this Act, such suit, appeal or other proceeding shall be disposed of in 
accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) shall apply to, — 
(a) any place of worsh ip referred to in the said sub -sections which is an ancient and historical 
monument or an archaeological si te or remains covered by the Ancient Monuments and 
Archaeological Sites an d Remains Act, 1958 (24 of 1958 ) or any other l aw for the time being in 
force;  
(b) any suit, appeal or other proceeding, with respect to any matter referred to in sub -section ( 2), 
finally decided, settled or disposed of by a court, tribunal or other authority befor e the 
commencement of this Act;  
(c) any dispute with respect to any such matter settled by the parties amongst thems elves before 
such commencement;  3 
 (d) any  conversion of any such place effected before suc h commencement by acquiescence;  
(e) any conversion of any such place effected before such commencement which is not liable to 
be challenged in any court, tribunal or other authority being barred by limitatio n under any law  for the 
time being in force.  
5. Act not to apply to Ram Janma  Bhumi -Babri Masjid. —Nothing contained in this Act shall 
apply to the place or place of worship commonly known as Ram Janma  Bhumi -Babri Masjid situated in 
Ayodhya in the State of Uttar Pradesh and to any suit, appeal or other proceeding relating to the said place 
or place of worship.  
6. Punishment for contravention of section 3 .—(1) Whoever  contravenes the provisions of section 
3 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years an d shall also be 
liable to fine.  
(2) Whoever attempts to commit any  offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) or to cause such 
offence  to be committed and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of the offence shall be 
punishable with the punis hment provided for the offence.  
(3) Whoever abets, or is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit, an offence punishable under        
sub-section ( 1) shall, whether such offence be or be not committed in consequence of such abetment or in 
pursuance of such criminal conspiracy, and notwithstanding anything contained in section 116 of the  
Indian Penal Code  (45 o f 1860) , be punishable wit h the punis hment provided for the offence.  
7. Act to override other enactments .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrument 
having eff ect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
8. [Amendment of Act 43 of 1951. ]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001                             
(30 of 2001), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
 
--------------------------The Public Liability Insurance Act, 1991--------------------------
1 
 THE PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE ACT, 1991  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Liability to give relief in certain cases on principle of no fault . 
4. Duty of owner to take out insurance policies . 
5. Verification and publication of accident by Collector . 
6. Application for claim for relief . 
7. Award of relief . 
7A. Establishment of Environmental Relief Fund.  
8. Provisions as to other right to claim compensation for death, etc . 
9. Power to call for information . 
10. Powe r of entry and inspection . 
11. Power of search and seizure . 
12. Power to give directions . 
13. Power to make application to Courts for restraining owner from handling hazardous substances . 
14. Penalty for contravention of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 4 or failure to comply 
with directions under section 12 . 
15. Penalty for failure to comply with direction under section 9 or order under section 11 or 
obstructing any person in discharge of his functions under section 10 or 11 . 
16. Offences by companies . 
17. Offences by Government Departments . 
18. Cognizance of offence s. 
19. Power to delegate . 
20. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
21. Advisory Committee . 
22. Effect of other laws . 
23. Power to make rules . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
  2 
 THE PUBLIC LIABILITY INSURANCE ACT, 1991  
ACT NO. 6 OF1991  
[22nd January , 1991 .] 
An Act t o provide for public liability insurance for the purpose of providing immediate relief to 
the persons  affected by accident occurring while handling any hazardous substance and for 
matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the F orty-first Year of Th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Public Liability Insurance Act, 
1991.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
2[(a) “accident ” means an a ccident involving a fortuitous or sudden or unintended occurrence 
while handling any  hazardous sub stance resulting in continuous or intermittent  or repeated exposure 
to death of, or injury to, any person or  damage to any property but does not include an accident by 
reason only of war or radio -activity;]  
(b) “Collector ” means the Collector having jurisdiction over the area in which the accident 
occurs;  
(c) “handling ”, in relation to any hazardous substance, means the manufacture, processing, 
treatment, package,  storage, transportation by vehicle, use, collection, destruction, conversion, 
offering f or sale, transfer or the like of such  hazardous substance;  
(d) “hazardous substance ” means any substance or preparation which is defined as hazardous 
substance under the  Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 (29 of 1986), and exceeding such quantity as 
may be  specified, by notification, by  the Central Government;  
(e) “insurance ” means insurance against liability un der sub -section ( 1) of section 3 ; 
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the official Gazette;  
3[(g) “owner ” means a person who owns, or has control over handling , any hazardous substance 
at the time of accident  and includes, — 
(i) in the case of firm, any of its partners;  
(ii) in the case of an association, any of its members; and  
(iii) in the case o f a company, any of its directors, managers, secretaries or other officers who 
is directly in charge of,  and is responsible to , the company for the conduct of the business of the 
company;]  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
4[(ha) “Relief Fund ” means the Environmental Relief Fund  establish ed under section 7A ]; 
(i) “rules ” means rules made under this Act;  
(j) “vehicle ” means any mode of surface transport other than railways.  
3.Liability to give relief in certain cases on principle of no fault .—(1) Where death or injury to 
any person (other than a workman) or damage to any property has resulted  from  an accident, the owner 
shall be liable to give  such relief as is specified in the Schedule for such death,  injury or damage.  
                                                           
1. 1st April, 1991, vide notification No. G.S.R 253 , dated 27th March, 1991, see Gazette of India Ordinary, Part II sec.  3(i). 
2. Subs. by Act 11 of 1992, s. 2 , for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  
4. Ins. by  s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  3 
 (2) In any claim for relief under sub -section ( 1) (hereinafter referred to in this Act as claim for relief), 
the claimant shall not be required to plead and establish that the death, injury or damage in respect of 
which  the claim has been made was due to any wrongful act, neglect or default of any person.  
Explanation .—For the purpose s of this section, — 
(i) “workman ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Workmen ’s Compensation Act, 1923  
(8 of 1923);  
(ii) “injury ” includes permanent total or permanent partial disability or sickness resulting out of 
an accident.  
4. Duty of owner to take out insurance policies .—(1) Every owner shall take out, before he starts 
handling any hazardous substance, one or more  insurance po licies providing for contracts of insurance 
where by he is insured against liability to give relief  under sub -section ( 1) of section 3:  
Provided that an y owner handling any hazardous substance immediately before the commencement of  
this Act shall take out s uch insurance policy or policies as soon as may be and in any case within a period  
of one year from such commencement.  
(2) Every owner shall get the insurance policy, referred to in sub -section ( 1), renewed from time to 
time before the expiry of the period  of validity thereof so that the insurance policies may remain in force  
throughout the period during which such handling is continued.  
1[(2A) No insurance policy taken out  or renewed by an owner shall be for a n amount less than the 
amount of the paid -up capital of the under taking handling any hazardous substance and owned or 
controlled by that owner , and more than the amount, not exceeding fifty crore rupees, as may be 
prescribed.  
Explanation .— For the purposes of this sub -section,  “paid-up capital ” means, in the case of an owner 
not being a company,  the market value of all assets and stocks of the unde rtaking on the date of contract  
of insurance.  
(2B) The liabi lity of the insurer under one as surance policy shall not exceed the amount specified in 
the terms of the contract of insurance in that insurance policy.  
(2C) Every owner shall also, together with the amount of premium, pay to the insurer, for being 
credited to  the Relief Fund established under section 7A, such further amount, not exceeding the  sum 
equivalent to the amount of premium,  as may be prescribed.  
(2D) The insurer shall remit to the authority specified in sub -section ( 3) of section 7A the amount 
received from the owner under sub -section ( 2C) for being credited  to the Relief  Fund in such manner and 
within such period as may be prescribed and where the insurer fails to so remit  the amount, it shall be 
recoverable from insurer as arrears of land revenue or of public  demand.]  
(3)The Central Government may, by notification, exempt from the ope ration of sub -section ( 1) any 
owner,  namely: — 
(a) the Central Government;  
(b) any State Government;  
(c) any corporation owned or controlled by the Central Government or a State Government; or  
(d) any local authority:  
Provided that no such order shall be ma de in relation to such owner unless a fund has been  
established and is maintained by that owner in accordance with the rules made in this behalf for  meeting 
any liability under sub -section ( 1) of section 3.  
5. Verification  and publication of accident by Collector .—Whenever it comes to the notice of the 
Collector that an accident has occurred at any place within his  jurisdiction, he shall verify the occurrence 
                                                           
1.Ins. by Act 11 of 1992 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  4 
 of such accident and cause publicity to be given in such manner  as he deems fit for inviting applications 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 . 
6. Application for claim for relief .—(1) An application for claim f or relief may be made — 
(a) by the person who has sustained the  injury;  
(b) by the ow ner of the property to which  the damage has been caused;  
(c) where death has resulted from the accident, by all or any of the legal representatives of the  
deceased;  or 
(d) by any agent duly authorised by such person or owner of such property or all or any o f the 
legal  representatives  of the deceased, as the case may be:  
Provided that where all the legal representatives of the deceased have not joined in any such 
application  for relief, the application shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the legal 
representatives of th e deceased and the legal representatives who have not so joined shall be impleaded as 
respondents to the  application.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the Collector and shall be in such form, 
contain  such particulars and shall b e accompanied by such documents as may be prescribed.  
(3) No application for relief shall be entertained unless it is made within five years of the occurrence 
of the  accident.  
7. Award of relief .—(1) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, the Collector 
shall , after giving notice of  the application to the owner and after giving the parties an opportunity of 
being heard, hold an inquiry into  the claim or, each of the claims, and may make an award determining 
the amount of relief wh ich appears  to him to be just and specifying the  person or persons to whom such 
amount of relief shall be paid.  
(2) The Collector shall arrange to deliver copies of the awar d to the parties concerned expe ditiously 
and in any case within a period of fi fteen days from the date of the award.  
1[(3) When an award is made under this section, — 
(a) the insurer, who is required to pay any amount in terms  of such award and to the extent  
specified  in sub -section ( 2B) of section 4, shall, within a period of thirty days of the date of 
announcement  of the award, deposit that amount in such manner as the Collector may direct;  
(b) the Collector shall arrange to pay from the Relief Fund, in terms of such award and in 
accor dance with  the scheme made under section 7A, to the person or persons referred to in  
sub-section ( 1) such amount  as may be specified in that scheme;  
(c) the owner shall, within such period, deposit such amount in such manner as the Collector may 
direct .] 
(4) In holding any inquiry under sub -section ( 1), the Collector may, subject to any rules made in this 
behalf,  follow such summary procedure as he thinks fit.  
(5) The Collector shall have all the powers of Civil Court for the purpose of taking evidence on oath 
and of  enforcing the attendance of witnesses and of compelling the discovery and production of 
documents and  material objects and for such other purposes as may be prescribed;  
and the Collector shall be deemed to  be a Civil Court for all the purposes of section 195 and Ch apter 
XXV I of the Code of Criminal Procedure,1973 (2 of 1974).  
(6) Where the insurer or the owner against whom the award is made under sub -section ( 1) fails to 
deposit the  amount of such award within the period specified under sub -section ( 3), such amount shall be 
recoverable  from the owner, or as the case may be, the insurer as arrears of land revenue or of public 
demand . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 11 of 1992 , s. 4 , for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  5 
 (7) A claim for relief in respect of death of, or injury to, any person or damage to any property shall 
be disposed  of as expeditiously as possible and every endeavour shall be made to dispose of such claim 
within  three months of the receipt of the application for relief under sub -section ( 1) of section 6.  
1[(8) Where an owner is likely to remove or dispose of his prop erty with the object of evading 
payment by him of any amount of award, the Collector may, in accordance with th e provisions  of rules 1 
to 4 of Order XXXIX of the First Schedule to the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), grant a 
temporary inj unction  to restrain such act.]  
2[7A. Establishment of Environmental Relief Fund .—(1) The Central Government may,  by 
notification, establish a fund to be  known  as the Environment al Relief Fund.  
(2) The Relief Fund shall be  utilised  for paying, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the  
scheme made under sub -section ( 3),relief under the award made by the Collector under section 7.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, make a scheme specifying the  authorit y in wh ich 
the Relief F und shal l vest, the manner in which the Relief Fund shall be administered , the form  and the 
manner in which money shall be drawn from the Relief Fund and for all other matters connected  with or 
incidental to the administration of the Relief  Fund and the payment of relief therefrom.]  
8. Provisions as to other right to claim compensation for death, etc .—(1) The  right to claim relief 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 in respect of death of, or injury to, any  person or damage to any 
property shall be in addition to any other right to claim compensation in respect  thereof under any other 
law for the time being in force.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where in respect of death of, or injury to, 
any person  or damage to  any property, the owner, liable to give claim for relief, is also liable to pay 
compensation  under any other law, the amount of such comp ensation shall be reduced by the amount of  
relief paid under this Act.  
9.Power to call for information .—Any person authorised by the Central Government may, for the 
purposes of ascertaining whether any requirements  of this Act or of any rule or of any direction given 
under this Act have been compiled with,  require any owner to submit to that person such information as 
that person may reasonably think  necessary.  
10. Power of entry and inspection .—Any person, authorised by the  Central Government in this 
behalf, shall have a right to enter, at all reasonable  times with such assistance as he considers necessary, 
any place, premises or vehicle, where hazardous  substance is handled for the purpose of determining 
whether any provisions of this Act or of  any rule or of any direction given under this Act is being or has 
been compiled with and such owner is  bound to render all ass istance to such person.  
11. Power of search and seizure .—(1) If a person, authorised by the Central Government in this 
behalf, has reason to believe that handling  of any hazardous substance is taking place in any place , 
premises or vehicle, in contravention of sub -section  (1) of section 4, he may enter into and search such 
place, premises or vehicle for such handling of  hazardous substance.  
(2) Where, as a result o f any search under sub -section ( 1) any handling of hazard ous substance has 
been found  in relation to which contravention of sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 4 has taken place, he may s eize 
such hazardous  substance and other things which, in his opinion, will be useful for, or relevant to, any 
proceeding  under this Act:  
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such substance or thing , he may serve on the 
owner an  order that the owner shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with, the hazardous 
substance and  such other things except wit h the previous permission of that person.  
(3) He may, if he has reason to believe that it is expedient so to do to prevent an accident dispose of 
the hazardous substance seized under sub -section ( 2) immediately in such manner as he may deem fit.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by A ct 11 of 1992, s. 4  (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  6 
 (4) All ex penses incurred by him in the disposal of hazardous substances under sub -section ( 3) shall  
be recoverable  from the owner as arrears of land revenue or of public demand.  
12. Power to give directions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law but subject to 
the provisions of this Act, the Central  Government may, in exercise of its powers and performance of its 
functions under this Act, issue such  directions in writing as it may deem fit for the purposes of this Act to 
any owner or any person, offic er, authority or agency and such owner, person, officer, authority or agency 
shall be bound to comply with  such directions.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue directions 
under this  section includes the pow er to direct — 
(a) prohibition or regulation of the handling of any hazardous substance; or  
(b) stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity, water or any other service.  
13. Power to make application to Courts for restraining owner from handling hazardous 
substances .—(1) If the Central Government or any person authorised by that Government in this behalf 
has reason to  believe that any owner has been handling any hazardous sub stance in contravention of any 
of the  provisions of this Act, that Government or, as the case may be, that person may make an 
application to a  Court, not inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate first class 
for restraining suc h owner from such handling.  
(2) On receipt of the application under sub -section ( 1), the Court may make such order as it deems fit.  
(3) Where under sub -section ( 2), the Court makes an order restraining any owner from handling 
hazardous  substance, it may, i n that order — 
(a) direct such owner to desist from such handling;  
(b) aut horise the Central Government or, as the case may be, the person referred to in  
sub-section( 1), if the direction under clause ( a) is not complied with by the owner to whom such 
direction is issued, to  implement the dir ection in such manner as may be  specified by the  Court.  
(4) All expenses incurred by the Central Govern ment, or as the case may be, the person in 
implementing  the directions of Court under clause ( b) of sub -section (3), shall be recoverable from the 
owner as arrears  of land revenue or of public demand . 
14.Penalty for contravention of sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) of section 4 or failure to 
comply with directions under section 12 .—(1) Whoever contravenes any of the pro visions of 1[sub-
section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) or sub-section ( 2A) or sub-section ( 2C)] of section 4 or fai ls to comply with 
any direction issued under section 12, he shall be  punishable  with imprisonment for a term which shall 
not be less than one  year and six months but which may  extend to six years, or with fine which shall not 
be less than one lakh rupees, or with both . 
(2) Whoever, having already been convicted of an offence under sub -section ( 1), is convicted for the  
second offence or any offence subsequent to the second offence, he shall be punishable with  
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than two years but which may extend to seven years and  
with fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees.  
(3) Nothing  contained in section 360 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or in the  
Probation of Offenders Act, 1958 (20 of 1958), shall apply to a person convicted of an offence under this  
Act unless such person is under eighteen years of age.  
15.Penalty for failure to comply with direction under section 9 or order under section 11 or 
obstructing any person in discharge of his functions under section 10 or 11 .— If any owner fails to 
comply with direction issued under section 9 or fails to comply  with order issued  under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 11, or obstructs any person in discharge of his functions under section 10  or sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 3) of section 11, he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may  extend to three 
months, o r with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 11 of 1992, s. 6, for “sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2)” (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  7 
 16. Offences by companies .—(1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the  time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the  conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the  offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment  provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he  exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been  
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or  
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, m anager, secretary or other  
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty  
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of t his sec tion,— 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individual s; 
(b) “director, ” in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
17. Offences by Government  Departments .—Where  an offence under this Act has been committed 
by any Department of Government, the Head of  the Department shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against  and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in t his section shall render such Head of the Department liable to any  
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
18. Cognizance  of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Ac t except on 
a complaint made by — 
(a) the Central Government or any authority or officer authorised in this behalf by that 
Government; or  
(b) any  person who has given notice of not less than sixty days in the manner prescribed, of the 
alleged  offence and of his intention to make a complaint, to the Central Government or the authority 
or officer  authorised as aforesaid.  
19. Power to delegate .—The Ce ntral Government may, by notification , delegate, subject to such 
conditions and limitations as  may be specified in the notification, such of its powers and functions under 
this Act (except the power  under section 23) as it may deem necessary or expedient t o any person 
(including any officer, authority or  other agency).  
20. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Government or the person, officer,  authority or other agency in respect of a nything whic h 
is done or intended to be don e in good faith in  pursuance of this Act or the rules made or orders or 
directions issued thereunder.  
21. Advisory Committee .—(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, constitute an 
Advisory Committee on the matters  relating to the insurance policy under this Act.  
(2) The Advis ory Committee shall consist of — 
(a) three officers representing the Central Government;  
(b) two persons representing the insurers;  
(c) two persons representing the owners; and  
(d) two persons from amongst the experts of ins urance or hazardous substances.  
to be appointed by  the Central Government.  8 
 (3) The Chairman of the Advisory Committee shall be one of the members representing the Central  
Government , nominated in this behalf by th at Government.  
22.  Effect of other laws .—The provisions of this Act and any rules made thereunder shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything  inconsistent therewith contained in any other law . 
23. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for  all or any of the following matter s, namely — 
1[(a) the maximum amount for which an insurance policy may be taken out by an owner under 
sub-section  (2A) of section 4;  
(aa) the amount required to be  paid by every owner for being c redited to the Relief Fund under 
sub-section  (2C) of section 4;  
(ab) the manner in which and the period within  which the amount received from the owner is 
required to be remitted  by the insurer under sub -section ( 2D) of section 4];  
2[(ac)] establishment and maintenance of fund under sub -section ( 3) of section 4 ; 
(b) the  form of application and the particulars to be given therein and the documents to 
accompany such  application under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
(c) the procedure for holding an inquiry under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  
(d) the purposes for which the Col lector shall have powers of a Civil Court under sub -section ( 5) 
of section  7; 
(e) the manner in which notice of the offence and of the intention to make a complaint to the 
Central  Government shall be given under clause ( b) of section 18;  
(f) any other matt er which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every 3[rule or scheme ] made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each  House of Parl iament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in  one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately  following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in  the 3[rule or scheme ] or both H ouses agree that the 3[rule or scheme ] should not be made, 
the 3[rule or  scheme ] shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice  to the validity of 
anything  previously done under that 3[rule or scheme] . 
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Ac t 11 of 1992, s. 7 (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  
2. Clause ( a) shall be r e-lettered as clause ( ac) by s. 7 , ibid. (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “rule” (w.e.f. 31 -1-1992).  9 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( 1)] 
(i) Reimbursement of medical expenses incurred up to a maximum of Rs. 12,500 in each case.  
(ii) For fatal a ccidents the relief will be Rs. 25,000 per person in addition to reimbursement of 
medical  expenses if any, incurred on th e victim up to a maximum of Rs. 12,500.  
(iii) For permanent total or permanent partial disability or other injury or sickness, the relief will be 
(a) reimbursement  of medical expenses incurred, if any, up to a maximum of Rs. 12,500 in each case and 
(b) cash relief on the basis of percentage of disablement as certified by an authorised physician. The relief 
for total permanent disability will be Rs. 25,000.  
(iv) For loss of wages due to temporary partial disability which reduces the earning capacity of the 
victim,  there will be a fixed monthly relief not exceeding Rs. 1,000 per month up to a maximum of 3 
months:  
provided the victim has been hospitalised for a period exceeding 3 days and is above 16 years of age.  
(v) Up to Rs. 6,000 depending on the actual damage, for any damage to private property.  
--------------------------The Remittances of Foreign Exchange and Investment in Foreign Exchange Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE REMITTANCES OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE AND INVESTMENT IN FOREIGN 
EXCHANGE  BONDS (IMMUNITIES AND EXEMPTIONS) ACT, 1991  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
CHAPTER II  
REMITTANCES OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE  
2. Definitions . 
3. Immunities.  
4. Remittances not to be taken into account in certain cases . 
CHAPTER III  
INVESTMENT IN FOREIGN  EXCHANGE  BONDS  
5. Definitions . 
6. Immunities . 
7. Foreign Exchange Bonds not to be taken into account in certain cases . 
 
  2 
 THE REMITTANCES OF FOREI GN EXCHANGE AND INVESTMENT IN FOREIGN 
EXCHANGE  BONDS (IMMUN ITIES AND EXEMPTIONS) ACT, 1991  
 ACT NO. 41 OF 1991  
[18th September, 1991.]  
An Act to provide for certain immunities to persons receiving remittances in foregin  exchange 
and to persons owning the Foreign Exchange Bonds and for certain exemptions from direct 
taxes in relation to such remittances and bonds and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the position relating  to balance of payment s has become difficult and it is necessary to 
attract la rge inflow of foreign exchange;  
AND WHEREAS with a view to attracting such inflow of foreign exchange, it is expedient to provide for 
certain immunities and exemptions to render it possible for certain persons to receive the said remittances 
in foreign exchan ge and to own the said Bonds;  
BE it enacted b y Parliament in the Forty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Remittances of Foreign Exchange and 
Investment in Foreign Exchange Bonds (Immuni ties and Exemptions)  Act, 1991.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
CHAPTER II  
REMITTA NCES OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE  
2. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “recipient” means a person as defined in clause ( 31) of section 2 of the I ncome -tax Act, 1961 
(43 of 1961 ) who receives any remittance u nder this Chapter;  
(b) “remittance ” means remittance made in foreign exchange by any person resident outside India 
to a person resident in India on or after the date of commencement of this Act but before  the specified 
date, in the form of draft, traveller ’s cheques, cheques drawn on banks situated outside India 
telegraphic transfers, mail transfers, money orders or by way of transfer from Non -resident (External)  
Account, Foreign Currency Non -resident Acco unt or Foreign Currency Non -resident Special Deposit 
Account maintained in India under the rules made under the Foreign  Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 
(46 of 1973 ). 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “specified date ” means the 1st  day of December , 
1991 or such other later date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official G azette, 
specify in this behalf;  
(c) all other words and expressions used in this Chapter but not defined and defined in the 
Foreign Exchange R egulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973 ) shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned 
to them in that Act.  
 3. Immunities. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force,— 
(a) no recipient, who claims immunity under this Chapter in accordanc e with such scheme as the 
Reserve Bank of India may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify for the purposes of 
receiving remittances under this Chapter, shall be required to disclose, for any purpose whatsoever, 
the nature and source  of the remi ttance made to him;  
(b) no inquiry or investigation shall be commenced against the recipient under any such law on 
the ground that h e has received such remittance;  3 
 (c) the fact that the recipient has received a remittance shall not be taken into account an d shall be 
inadmissible as evidence in any proceedings relating to any offence or the imposition of an y penalty 
under any such law.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply — 
(a) to any foreign exchange which is required to be brought into India under any  of the provisions 
of— 
(i) the Foreign  Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973 ); or 
(ii) the In come -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961 ), read with the Foreign Exchange Re gulation Act, 
1973  (46 of 1973 ), 
if the period within which such foreign exchange is to be brought into India has not expired or where such 
period has been extended, in any manner, by the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of India or any 
other authority, such extended period has not expired on the da te of commencement of this Act;  
(b) in re lation to prosecution for any offence punishable under Chapter IX or Chapter XVII of the  
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ), the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Su bstances Act, 1985                  
(61 of 1985 ), the Terrorist and Disruptive Activities (Pre vention) Act, 1987  (28 of 1987 ), the 
Prevention of C orruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988 )or for the purpose of enfo rcement of any civil 
liability.  
(3) The Central Government shall cause the scheme notified under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) to be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is notified, before each House of Parliament.  
4. Remittances not to be taken into account in certain cases. —Without prejudice to the generality 
of the provisions of section 3, — 
(a) any remittance received under this  Chapter shall not be taken into account for the purpose of 
any proceeding under the I ncome -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961 ) and, in particular, the recipient shall not 
be entitled to claim any set -off or relief in any assessment, re -assessment, appeal, referenc e or other 
proceeding under that Act or t o re-open any assessment or re -asses sment made under that Act on the 
ground that h e has received such remittance.  
Explanation .—For the avoidance of doubt, it is hereby declared that the provisions of the  
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961 ) will apply to any income which accrues or arises or is deemed to 
accrue or arise to the recipient fro m the amount of the remittance;  
(b) any remittance received under this Chapter shall not form par t of the assets of any assessee  for 
the purposes of computing his net wealth under the W ealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957 ) in relation to 
any assessment year commencing bef ore the 1st day of April, 1992.  
CHAPTER III  
INVESTMENT IN FOREIGN  EXCHANGE  BONDS 
5. Definitions. —(1) In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Foreign Exchange Bonds ” means the Bonds, issued by the State Bank of India constituted 
under the State Bank  of India Act, 1955 (28 of 1955 ) in accordance with such scheme as the Reserve 
Bank of In dia may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf, the investment 
wherein is made on or after the date of commencement of this Act but before the specified date.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, “specified date ” means th e 1st day of December, 
1991 or such other later date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official G azette, 
specify in this behalf;  
(b) “non-resident Indian ” means an individual, being a citizen of India or a person of Indian 
origin  who is  resident outside India.  
Explanation 1 .—A person shall be dee med to be of Indian origin if — 4 
 (i) he, or either of his parents or any of his grand - parents, was a citizen of India by virtue of 
the Constitution or the Cit izenship Act, 1955 (57 of 1955) ; or 
(ii) he at an y time held an Indian passport:  
Provided that the nationals of Pakistan or Bangladesh sha ll not be deemed to be of Indian  origin.  
Explanation 2. —A spouse (not being a national of Pakistan or Bangladesh) of a person of Indian 
origin shall also be deemed to be of Indian origin;  
(c) “overseas corporate body ” means any institution, association or body, whether incorporated or 
not, established under the laws of a country  outside India wherein any non -resident Indian has any 
interest;  
(d) all other words and expressions used in this Chapter but not defined and defined in the 
Foreign Exchange Re gulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973 ), shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned 
to them in that Act.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause the scheme notified under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) to be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is notified, b efore each House of Parliament.  
6. Immunities. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the We alth-tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957 ), 
the Gift -tax Act, 1958  (18 of 1958 ), the In come -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961 ), the Foreign Exchange 
Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973 ) and the Foreign Contrib ution (Regulation) Act, 1976 (46 of 1976 ),— 
(a) no non -resident Indian or overseas corporate body who or which owns the Foreign Exchange 
Bonds or any person resident in India to whom a gift of such Bonds has been made by such non -
resident Indian or overseas corporate body, shall be required to disclose, for any purpose whatsoever, 
the nature and source of the inv estment in such Bonds;  
(b) no inquiry or investigation shall be commenced against any of the persons referred to in 
clause ( a) under any of the said Acts on the ground th at such person owns such Bonds;  
(c) the fact that any of the persons referred to in clause ( a) owns such Bonds shal l not be taken 
into account and shall be inadmissible as evidence in any proceedings relating to any offence or the 
imposition of any penalt y under any of the said Acts.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to foreign exchange which is required to b e brought into 
India under any of the provisions of — 
(i) the Foreign  Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973);or  
(ii) the In come -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961 ), read with the Foreign  Exchange Regulation Act, 
1973 (46 of 197 3), 
if the period within which such  foreign exchange is to be brought into India has not expired or where such 
period has been extended, in any manner, by the Central Government or the Reserve Bank of India or any 
other authority, such extended period has not expired on the da te of commence ment of this Act.  
7. Foreign Exchange Bonds not to be taken into account in certain cases. —Without prejudice to 
the generality of the provisions of section 6, — 
(a) the provisions of the I ncome -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961 ) shall not apply to any interest 
accruing in relation  to the Foreign Exchange Bonds;  
(b) the provisions of the W ealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957 ) shall not apply in relation to the 
Foreign Exchange Bonds;  
(c) the provisions of the  Gift-tax Act, 1958 (18 of 1958 ) shall not apply where any non -resident 
Indian becomes a resident in India and makes a gift of the Foreign Exchange Bonds.  
