--------------------------The Central Agricultural University Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. The University.  
4. Objects of the University.  
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. University  open to all classes, castes and creed.  
8. The Visitor.  
9. Officers of the University.  
10. The Chancellor.  
11. The Vice -Chancellor.  
12. Deans and Directors.  
13. The Registrar.  
14. The Comptroller.  
15. Other officers.  
16. Authorities of the University.  
17. The Board.  
18. The Academic Council.  
19. The Finance Committee.  
20. The Research Programme Committee.  
21. The Extension Education Advisory Committee.  
22. The Board of Studies.  
23. Faculties.  
24. Other authorities.  
25. Power to make Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made.  
27. Power to make Ordinances.  
28. Regulations.  
29. Annual report.  
30. Annu al accounts.  
31. Conditions of service of employees.  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
33. Right to appeal.  
34. Provident and pension funds.  
35. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities.  
36. Constitution of Committees.  
37. Filling of casual vacancies.  
38. Proceedings of University authorities not invalidated by vacancy.  
39. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
40. Mode of proof of University  records.  2 
 SECTIONS  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  
42. Transitional provisions.  
43. Statutes, Ordinances  and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE CENTRAL AGRICULTURAL UNIVERSITY ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1992  
[26th December , 1992.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment  and incorporation of a Univer sity for the North -Eastern 
region  for the deve lopment of agricu lture and for the furtherance of the  advancement of 
learning and prosecution of rese arch in agriculture and allied sciences in that region.  
BE it enacted by Parlia ment in the Forty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencemen t.—(1) This Act may be called the Central Agr icultural University 
Act, 1992.  
(2) It shall  come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless th e context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council” means the Acad emic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff”  means such categories of staff as are designated as ac ademic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “agriculture” means the basic and applied sciences of the soil and water management, crop 
production including production of all garden crops, control of plants, pes ts and diseases, horticulture 
including floriculture, animal husbandry including veterinary and dairy science, fisheries, fo restry 
including farm forestry, home -science, agricultural engineering and technology, marketing and 
processing of agricultural and animal husbandry pro ducts, land use and management;  
(d) “Board”  means the Board of Management of the University;  
(e) “Board of Studies”  means the Boar d of Studies of the University;  
(f) “Chancellor” means th e Chancellor of the University;  
(g) “college” means a constituent college of the University whether located at the hea dquarters, 
campus or elsewhere;  
(h) “Department” means a Departmen t of Studies of the University;  
(i) “employee” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and  other 
staff of the University;  
(j) “extension education”  means the educational activities concerned with the training of 
orchardists, farmers and other groups serving agriculture, horticulture, fisheries and improved 
practices related thereto and the vario us phases of scientific technology related to agriculture and 
agricultural production including post ha rvest technology and marketing;  
(k) “Faculty”  means Faculty of the University;  
(l) “North -Eastern region” means the North -Eastern region of India comprising the States of 
Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalay a, Mizoram, 2[Nagaland,]  Sikkim and Tripura;  
(m) “Ordinances”  means th e Ordinances of the University;  
(n) “Regulations” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University;  
(o) “Researc h Advisory Committee” means the Research Advisory Committee of the University;  
(p) “Statutes” means the Statutes of the University;  
  
                                                           
1. 26th January, 1993,  vide notification No. S.O. 72(E), dated 25th  January, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II ,  
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by Act 45 of 2016, s. 2 (w.e.f. 19 -8-2016).  4 
 (q) “student” means a person enrolled in the University for undergoing a course of studies for 
obtaining a degree, diploma  or other academ ic distinction duly instituted;  
(r) “teachers” means Professors, Associate Professors, Assistant Professors, Teaching Faculty 
Members and their equivalent appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research or extension 
education pro grammes or combination of these in the University, college or any institute maintained 
by the University and designated  as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(s) “Univers ity” means the Central Agricultural Univers ity established under this Act;  
(t) “Vice -Chancellor” means the Vic e-Chancellor of the University;  
(u) “Visitor” means  the Visitor of the University.  
3. The University .—(1) There shall be established a University by the name of the “ Central 
Agricultural University” . 
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Imphal in the State of Mani pur and it may also 
establish ca mpuses at such other places within its j urisdiction as it may deem fit.  
(3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members  of the Board, the 
Academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, so long as they 
continue to hold such office or membership are hereby constituted a body corporate by the name of the 
Central Agricultural University.  
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall su e and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects of the University .—The objec ts of the University shall be — 
(a) to impart education in different branches of agricultural and allied sc iences as it may deem fit;  
(b) to further the advancement of learning and prosecution of research in a griculture and allied 
sciences;  
(c) to undertake programmes of extension education in the Sta tes under its jurisdiction; and  
(d) to undertake such other activities as it may , from time to time, determine.  
5. Powers of the University .—The University shall have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to make provision for instructions in agricultural and  allied sciences;  
(ii) to make provisi on for conduct of research in agricultural a nd allied branches of learning;  
(iii) to make provision for dissemination of the findings of research and technical informatio n 
through extension programmes;  
(iv) to grant, subject to such conditions as it may determine, diplomas or certificates to, and 
confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examination, evaluation or any other method 
of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other academic 
distinc tion for good and sufficient cause;  
(v) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the man ner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(vi) to provide lectures and instructions for field workers, village leaders and other persons not 
enrolled as regular students of the University and to grant certificates to them as may  be prescribed by 
the Statutes;  
(vii) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes  as the University may determine;  
(viii) to establish and maintain colleges relating to agriculture, fisheries, dairying, veterinary 
medicine and animal science, home -science, agricultural engineering, forestry and allied scien ces; 5 
 (ix) to establish and ma intain such campuses, special centres, specialised laboratories, libraries, 
museums or other units for research and instruction as are, in its opinion, necessary for the 
furtherance of its objects;  
(x) to create teaching, research and extension education p osts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts an d to make appointments thereto;  
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, stude ntships, medals and prizes;  
(xiii) to determine standards of ad mission to the University, which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xiv) to provide and maintain residential accommodat ion for students and employees;  
(xv) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting th eir health and general welfare;  
(xvi) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, i ncluding their code of 
conduct;  
(xvii) to regulate  and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this r egard as it may deem necessary;  
(xviii) to fix, demand and receive such fees and other charges as may  be prescribed by the 
Statutes;  
(xix) to borr ow, with the approval of the Central Government on the security of its property, 
money for  the purpose of the University;  
(xx) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any 
property, movable or immovable, incl uding trust and endowment prope rties for its purposes;  
(xxi) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainmen t of all or any of its objects.  
6. Jurisdiction .—(1) The jurisdiction and responsibility of the University with respect to teaching, 
research and programmes of extension education at the University level, in the field of agricultural shall 
extend to the States of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur, Meghalay a, Mizo ram, 1[Nagaland,]  Sikkim and 
Tripura.  
(2) All colleges, research and experimental stations or other institutions coming under the jurisdiction 
and authority of the University shall be its constituent units under the full management and control of its 
officers and authorities and no such units sh all be recognised as affiliated u nits. 
(3) The University may assume responsibility for the training of field extension workers and others 
and may develop such training centres as may be required in various parts of the  States under its 
jurisdiction.  
7. Un iversity open to  all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religi ous belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided  that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, handicapped or of persons belonging to the 
weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Caste s and the Scheduled Tribes.  
8. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be  the Visitor of the University.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), the Visitor shall have the right to cause an 
inspection to be made, by such person or persons as he may direct, of the University, its buildings, 
laboratories, libraries, museums, workshops and equipments, and of any institution or college and also of 
the examination, instruction and other work conducted or done by the University, and to cause an inquiry 
                                                           
1. Ins.  by Act 45 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 19 -8-2016).  6 
 to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration and finances of the 
University.  
(3) The Visitor shall, in every cas e, give notice to the University of his intention to cause an 
inspection or inquiry to be made and the University shall, on receipt of such notice, have the right to 
make, within thirty days from the date of receipt of the notice or such other period as th e Visitor may 
determine, such representations to hi m as it may consider necessary.  
(4) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to be 
made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Where an inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall be 
entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to appear in person and to be heard  on such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(6) The Visitor may addre ss the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the results of such inspection or 
inquiry together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer and on receipt of the address made by the Visitor, t he Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate forthwith to the Board the results of the inspection or inquiry and the views of the Visitor 
and the advice tendered by him upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(7) The Board shall communicate through the Vice -Chancello r to the Visitor such action, if any, as it 
proposes to take or has been taken by it upon the results  of such inspection or inquiry.  
(8) Where the Board does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of the Visitor, 
the Visitor may, af ter considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the Board, issue 
such directions as he may think fit and the Board shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
(9) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Vis itor may, by an order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the University to show cause why 
such an order  should not be made and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable ti me, he shall consider 
the same.  
(10) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be  specified by the Statutes.  
9. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of th e Univers ity, namely: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) Deans;  
(4) Directors;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Comptroller; and  
(7) such other officers as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office,  be the Head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocations of the University held for  conferring 
degrees.  
11. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  7 
 (2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the  authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the acti on taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been take n, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to ap peal against such action to the 
Board within three months from the date on which decision on such action is communicated to him and 
thereupon the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the actio n taken by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he i s of opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the  authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred t o the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
12. Deans and Directors .—Every Dean and every Director shall  be appointed in such manner and 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
13. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may  be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall h ave the power to enter into agreements, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescr ibed by the Statutes.  
14. The Comptroller .—The Comptroller shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authoriti es of the University, 
namely: — 
(1) the Board;  
(2) the Academic Council;  
(3) the Finance Committee;  
(4) the Research Programme Committee;  
(5) the Extensio n Education Advisory Committee;  
(6) the Board of Studies; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. The Board .—(1) The Board shall be the principal ex ecutive body of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board, the term of office of its members and its powers and functions shall  
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statu tes and Ordinances, have the control 8 
 and general regulation of, and be responsible for, the maintenance of standards of learning, education, 
instruction, evaluation and examination within the University and shall exercise such other powers and 
perform such  other functions as may be conferred or i mposed upon it by the Statutes.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council and the term of office of its members shall  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. Th e Research Programme Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the 
Research Programme Committee shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. The Extension Education Advisory Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the 
Extension Education Advisory Committee shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. Faculties .—The University shall have such Faculties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. Other authorities .—The constitution, powers and functions of other authorities of the University 
referred to in clause ( 7) of section 16 shall be such as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the a uthorities of the University, as may be  
constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities, the filling 
up of vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to those authorities for whi ch it may be 
necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the U niversity and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the U niversity and their 
emoluments;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for a specific period f or undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fund, the manner of termination of s ervice and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of t he employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Board by any employee or student against the action of any 
officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the establishment and abolition of Departments, Cent res, colleges and institutions;  
(k) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(l) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and o ther academic distinctions;  
(m) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and p rizes;  
(n) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities  or officers of the Uni versity;  
(o) the maintenance of discipline am ong the employees and students;  
(p) all other matters which by this Act are to be, or may be, prescribed by the Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are  those set out in the Schedule.  9 
 (2) The Board may from time to time make Statutes or may amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in 
sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that the Board shall not make, amend or repeal any Statute affecting the status, powers or 
constitution of any authority of the Uni versity until such authority has been given an opportunity of 
expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed sh all be 
considered by the Board.  
(3) Every Statute or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require t he assent of the Visitor who 
may assent thereto or withhold assent therefrom or remit it to the Board for consideration.  
(4) A Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless it has 
been assented to by the Visit or. 
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three years immediately afte r the 
commencement of this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anyt hing contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the Board is 
unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Vi sitor may, after considering the 
reasons, if any, communicated by the Board for its inability to comply with such direction, make or 
amend th e Statutes suitably.  
27. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the Universi ty and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the gran ting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees, diplomas and cert ificates of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examine rs and moderators;  
(h) the condition s of residence of the students;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of speci al courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointment and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision  has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of spe cial centres, specialized lab oratories and other committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities  including 
learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body wh ich is considered necessary for 
improving the a cademic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of colleges and institutions  establ ished by the University;  10 
 (p) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chanc ellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended or repealed at any time by the Board 
in the man ner prescribed by the Statutes.  
28. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the committees 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinanc es in the man ner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Board, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University towards the 
fulfilment o f its objects and shall be submitted to the Board on or after such date as may be prescribed by 
the Statutes and the Board shall consider the rep ort in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Board shall submit the annual report to the Visitor a long with its comments,  if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Centra l Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid be fore both Houses of 
Parliament.  
30. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual a ccounts of the University shall be prepared under the 
directions of the Board and shall, once at least every year and at intervals of not more than fifteen months, 
be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such persons as h e may auth orise in this 
behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Board and the Visitor along with  the observations of the Board.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall b e brought to the notice of the 
Board and the observations of the Board, if any, sha ll be submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Governme nt, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid be fore 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Official Gazette.  
31. Cond itions of service of  employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furni shed 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between th e University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Board, one member nominated by the employee concerned and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the ter ms of this section within the meaning of the Arb itration Act, 1940 (2 of 1940).  
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disci plinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred fro m appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 11 
 appeal to the Board and the Board may confirm, modify or reverse the decision of the Vic e-Chancellor or 
the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of  
sub-sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 31 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference m ade under this 
sub-section.  
33. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a college or institution 
maintained by the University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal, 
within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Board against the decision of any officer or 
authority of the University or any college or an institution, as the case may  be, and thereupon the Board 
may confirm, modify or reverse  the decision appealed against.  
34. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance scheme s as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provision of the Provident Funds Act , 1925 (19 of 1925), shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
35. Disputes as to constit ution of University authorities .—If any question arises as to whether any 
person has been duly appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority of the University, the 
matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
36. Constitution of Committees .—Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Committees, s uch Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the author ity in each case may 
think fit.  
37. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the person who 
appointed or co -opted the member whose place has become vacant and person appointed or co -opted to a 
casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for the residue of the term for which the 
person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
38. Proceedings of University authorit ies not invalidated by vacancy .—No act or proceedings of 
any authority of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the existence of a vacancy or 
vacancies among its members.  
39. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Board, any au thority or officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances.  
40. Mode of proof of  University records .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession 
of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if verified by th e 
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, 
resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein wher e the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in 
evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the India n Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ) or in any 
other l aw for the time being in force.  
41. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any diffi culty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for re moving 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  12 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
42. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and shall 
hold o ffice for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Comptroller shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of the 
said officers shall hold of fice for a term of three years;  
(c) the first members of the Board shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold of fice for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first members of the Academic Council shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall hold 
office for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointme nt or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or nominated 
shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or nominated would 
have held office, if  such vacancy had not occurred.  
43. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette an d to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be pub lished 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if , before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation s hould not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyth ing previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regula tion. 
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statut es, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statutes, 
Ordinances or  Regulations may be applicable.  
  13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 26)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE  UNIVERSITY  
The Chancellor  
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons 
recommended by the Board from amongst persons of eminence in education in genera l and agric ultural 
sciences in particular:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Board.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall not be eligible for 
reapp ointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall continue to hold 
office until his su ccessor enters upon his office.  
The Vice -Chancellor  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three 
persons who shall be recommended by a Committee a s constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the panel,  he may call 
for a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1), shall consist of a nominee of  the Visitor, the  
Director -General of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research and the Secretary to the North -Eastern 
Council, set -up under section 3 of the North -Eastern Council Act, 1971 (84 of 1971) and the nominee of 
the Visitor shall be  the convener of the Committee.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on w hich he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not  be 
eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appoin ted and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him. 
(5) The emoluments and other con ditions of service of the Vice -Chance llor shall be as follows: —  
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than the house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government fr om time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence throughout his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the  maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be  entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Board with the approval of  the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a college or an institution maintained by it, 
or of any other Universit y or any Institution maintained by or affiliated to such other University, is 
appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund 
of which he is a member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that 
provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately before his 
appo intment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall  make the necessary  contribution to such scheme.  14 
 (iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rate s as may be fixed by 
the Board.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a  
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the 1st day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of  the  
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be credited proportionately at the 
rate of two and -a-half days for e ach completed month of service.  
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service. This half pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate. When commuted leave 
is availed, twice the amount of hal f pay leave shall be debi ted against half pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise, or 
if he is unable to perform his duties due to ill -health or any other cause, the senior -most Dean or 
Director, as the case may be, shall perform the duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new  
Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the Vice -Chancellor attends to the duties of his office, as the 
case may be.  
Powers an d duties of the Vice -Chancellor  
3. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of the Board, the Academic Council and the 
Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, preside at the convocations h eld for 
conferring degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote there  at unless he  is a member of such authority.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the powers neces sary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall give effect 
to the decisions of all the auth orities of the University . 
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person  or persons as he may deem fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shal l have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of the 
Board, the Academic Cou ncil and the Finance Committee.  
Deans of colleges  
4. (1) Every Dean of a college shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from among the Professors 
in the colle ge for a period of five years and he shall  be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shal l cease to hold office as such:  
Provided further that if at any time there is no Professor in a college, the Vice -Chancel lor, or a Dean 
authorise d by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, shall exercise the pow ers of the Dean of the college.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties  of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the college and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teachi ng and research in the college and shall have such other functions 
as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Board of Studies or 
Committees of the college, as the case may be,  but shall not have the right to vote thereat  unless he is a 
member thereof.   15 
 Director Instruction  
5. (1) The Director Instruction shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time salaried offi cer of the University.  
(2) The Director Instruction shall hold office for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for 
reappointment:  
Provided that the Director Instruction on attaining the age of sixty years shall ce ase to hold o ffice as 
such.  
(3) The Director Instruction sh all be responsible for planning, coordination and supervision for all 
educational programmes in the various faculties of the University.  
The Director of Research  
6. (1) The Director of Research shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of a 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Research shall hold office for a term of five years and shall  be eligible  for 
reappointment:  
Provided that the Director of Research on attaining the age of sixty years shal l cease to hold office as 
such.  
(3) The Director of Research shall be responsible for the supervision and coordination of research 
programmes in the Universi ty.  
The Director of Extension Education  
7. (1) The Director of Extension Education shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of 
a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Director of Extension Education shall hold office for a term of five years and shall  be eligible 
for reappointment:  
Provided that the Director of Extension Education on attaining the age of sixty years shal l cease to 
hold office as such.  
(3) The D irector of Extension Education shall be responsible for the supervision and coordination of 
all Extension Educatio n Programmes of the University.  
Registrar  
8. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Regist rar shall be such as may 
be pr escribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on at taining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, continue in 
office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period of one 
year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence, 
or any other cause, unable to p erform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teac hers, as may be specified in the order of the Board and to suspend them pending inquiry, to 
administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of censure o r the withholding of increment:  16 
 Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalti es specified in  sub-clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along with 
his recommendations:  
Provided  that an appeal shall lie to the Board against an order of the Vice -Chancellor imposing any 
penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Board and the Academic Council, but shall not 
be deemed to be a memb er of any of these authorities.  
(7) It shall  be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Bo ard shall commit to his charge;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Board, the Academic Council and of any 
Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Board, the Academic Council and of any 
Committees appointed by those authoriti es; 
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Board and the Academic Council;  
(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in accordance with the 
manne r prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued; an d the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign  
powers -of-attorney and verify pleading s or depute his repre sentatives for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by th e Board or the Vice -Chancellor.  
The Comptroller  
9. (1) The Comptroller shall be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Comptroller shall be such as 
may b e prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that a Comptroller shall retire on at taining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further  that the Comptroller shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enter s upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Comptroller is vacant or when the Comptroller is, by reason of illness, 
absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be 
performed by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Comptroller shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be deemed 
to be a member of such Commit tee.  17 
 (6) The Comptroller shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as re gards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Board or as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the  Board, the Comptroller shall — 
(a) hold  and manage the property and investments of the University includ ing trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Board for recurring and non -recurring expenditure for a 
year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the p urpose for whic h they are granted or 
allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their presentation to the Board;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances a nd on t he state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is co nducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Specialised Laboratories, Colleges and Institutions maintained by the Uni versity;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularitie s and suggest disciplinary action ag ainst persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by the University any 
information or returns that he may consider necessary for  the performance of his duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Comptroller or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Board for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient disch arge for payment of such 
money.  
Heads of Departments  
10. (1) Each Department shall ha ve a Head who shall be not below the rank of an Associate Professor 
and whose duties and functions and terms and conditions of appointment shall b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances:  
Provided that if there is more than one Professor in any Department, the Head of the Department shall 
be appointed by the Board on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor from among the Professors:  
Provided further that in the case of Departments where there is only one Professor, the Board shall 
have the option to appoint, on the  recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, either the Professor or an 
Associate Professor  as the Head of the Department:  
Provided also that in a Department where there is no Professor, an Associate Professor may be 
appointed as the Head of the Department by t he Board on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided also that if there is no Professor or Reader, in a Department, the Dean of College concerned 
shall act  as the Head of the Department.  
(2) It shall be open to a Professor or an Associate Profes sor to decline the offer of appointment  as the 
Head of the Department.  
(3) A Professor or an Associate Professor appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office 
as such for a period of three years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.   18 
 (4) A H ead of a Department may resign his office at any ti me during his tenure of office.  
(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Librarians  
11. ( 1) Every Librarian shall be appointed by the Board on the rec ommendation of the Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(2) Every Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Board.  
Constitution,  powers and functions of the Board.  
12. (1) The Board shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  Chairman;  
(ii) two secretaries from amongst the secretaries in charge of the Departments of Agriculture and 
Forests of a State in the North -Eastern region to be nominated by the Visitor by rotation in the 
alphabetical ord er to represent that State;  
(iii) two eminent scientists to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(iv) two  distinguished persons representing Agro -based industries to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(v) the Deputy Director -General (Education) representing the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research ; 
(vi) the Secretary to the North -Eastern Council set up under sec tion 3 of the North -Eastern 
Council Act, 1971 (84 of 1971);  
(vii) one Dean of college and one Director to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on rotational 
basis;  
(viii) two  persons representing farmers in the States of the North -Eastern region to be nominated 
by the Vice -Chancellor by rotation in the alph abetical order of those States;  
(ix) an industrialist or a manufacturer having special knowledge in agricultural developme nt to be 
nominate d by the Visitor;  
(x) one woman social worker representing women social organisati on in the North -Eastern 
region;  
(xi) an Advisor (Agr iculture), Planning Commission;  
(xii) a distinguished authority on forestry, social forestry or environme nt management to be 
nominated by the Visitor;  
(xiii) three persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary representing respectively the 
Departments of the Central Government dealing with Agriculture, Animal Husbandry and Forestry;  
and 
(xiv) the Registrar of  the University, Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the Board, other than ex offic io members, shall be two years.  
(3) The Board shall have the power of management and administration of the revenue and property of 
the University and the con duct of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Board shall, in addition 
to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such posts 
and to define the duties and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff and Deans of 
colleges, Directors and heads of other institutions maintai ned by the Unive rsity;   19 
 (ii) to appoint such teachers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, and Deans of 
colleges, Directors and heads of other institutions maintained by the University on the 
recommendation of the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and to fill up temporary 
vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make appointments 
thereto in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice-Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of s uch 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University, and for that pu rpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommenda tions of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, includi ng any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, shares or securities, from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying suc h investment from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept tr ansfers of any movable or immovable proper ty on behalf of the 
University;  
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying  
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contrac ts on behalf of the University;  
(xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the University;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix the ir fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Counc il; 
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary fo r the residence an d discipline of 
women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Deans, Directors, the Registrar or 
the Comptroller or such other employee or authority of the University or to a committee appo inted by 
it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and pri zes; 
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and cond itions of such app ointment; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act, or the Statutes.  
Quorum for meetings of the Board  
13. Seven members of the Board shall form a quo rum for a meeting of the Board . 
Constitution and  powers of the Academic Council  
14. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor, ex officio  member;   20 
 (ii) all the Deans of the Colleges of the University;  
(iii) the Director  of Research of the University;  
(iv) the Director of Extensi on Education of the University;  
(v) the Director Instruction;  
(vi) a Librarian to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on rotational basis;  
(vii) five outstanding teachers to be co -opted from outsi de the University re presenting different 
Faculties;  
(viii) seven heads of the Department to be nomi nated by the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ix) the Education Officer or his representative to be nominated by the North -Eastern Council set 
up under section 3 of the Nor th-Eastern Council Act, 1971 (84 of 1971);  
(x) the Registrar of the  University, ex officio  Member -Secretary.  
(2) The term of office of the members of the Academic Council other than ex offi cio members shall 
be two years.  
(3) Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all 
other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to giv e 
directions regarding methods of instructions, co -operative teaching among colleges and institutions, 
evaluation of research or impr ovements in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -college co -ordination to establish or appoint committees or boards , for 
taking up proj ects on an inter -college basis;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference 
by a college or the Board and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences,  admissions, award of fellowsh ips 
and studentships, fees, concessions,  corporate life and attendance.  
Quorum for m eetings of the Academic Council  
15. Nine members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a m eeting of the Academic 
Council.  
Board of S tudies  
16. (1) Each Department sha ll have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of a Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall  be provided by 
the Ordinances.  
(3) The functions of a Board of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees 
and other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned Board in the manne r 
prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the sta ndard of teaching and research:  
Prov ided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of three years 
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.   21 
 Finance Committee  
17. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Financial Adviser, Indian Co uncil of Agricultural Research;  
(iii) three persons to be nominated by the Board, out of whom at least one shall be a member of 
the Board;  
(iv) three persons to b e nominated by  the Visitor; and  
(v) the Comptroller of th e University, Member -Secretary.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a me eting of the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) The members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold of fice for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree with any dec ision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice a year to e xamine the accounts and to scruti nise 
proposals for expenditure.  
(6) Every proposal relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, should be examined by the Finance Committee before th ey are considered by the Boa rd. 
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Comptroller 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submi tted to 
the Board for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee sh all recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
Selection Commit tees 
18. ( 1) There shall be a Selection Committee for making recommendations to the Board for 
appointment to the posts of teachers, Comptroller, Registrar, Librarian, Deans of colleges, Directors and 
heads of other institution s maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the Table b elow 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, Director Instruction, Director of Research, Director of Extension 
Education, a nominee of the Visitor and th e persons specified in the corresponding entry  in column 2 of 
the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned if he is a Professor.  
 (ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated 
by the Board, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Professor will be concerned.  
Associate Professor/   
Assistant Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned.  
 (ii) One Professor to be no minated by the Vice -Chancellor.  22 
 1  2 
 (iii) Two persons not in  the service of the University nominated 
by the Board, out of a panel of names recommended by the 
Academic Council for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Associate Professor/Assistant 
Professor will be concerned.  
Registrar, Comptroller  (i) Two members of the Board nominated by it; and  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University, nominated by 
the Board.  
Librarian   Two persons not in the service of the University, who have 
special knowledge of the subject of the Library 
Science/Library Administration to be nominated by the 
Board.  
Dean of college, Directors or head 
of other institution maintained by 
the University   Three persons not in the service of the University of whom 
two shall be nominated by the Board and one by the 
Academic Council  for their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, a subject in which instructio n is being provided by the 
college or institution.  
NOTES : 1. Where the a ppointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project the head of the project shall be deemed to 
be the Head of the Department concerned.  
 2. The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned with the speciality for which the selection is being 
made and that the Vice -Chancellor shall consult the Head of the Department and the Dean of college before 
nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, his nominee shall preside at the meetings of a Selection  
Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, 
and subjec t to the convenience of Visitor’ s nominee and the persons nominated  by the Board under  
clause ( 2): 
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committ ee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor’ s nominee and the persons nominated by the Board is four in all, 
at least  three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor’ s nominee and the persons nominated by the Board is three in all, 
at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor or  in his absence 
by his nominee.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations shall be laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Board is unable to accept the recommendations made by a Selection Committ ee, it shall 
record its reasons and submit the case t o the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made i n the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacanc y is for a duration longer than one academic session, it shall  be filled 
on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indi cated in the foregoing 
clauses:   23 
 Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment m ay be made on a purely temporary basis by a local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a p eriod not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the college 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two n ominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or any 
other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned, ma ke a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Re gistrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, b e continued in service on such t emporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointm ent, as the case may be.  
Special mode of appointment  
19. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the Board may invite a person of high 
academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Associate Professor or 
any other academic post in the University, as the case may be,  on such terms and conditions as it deems 
fit, and on the person agreeing to  do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Board may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for undertaking a joint project in a ccordance with the manner laid down in the Ordinances.  
Appointment for a fixed tenure  
20. The Board may appoint a person selected in accordance with the procedure laid down in Statute 
18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.  
Reco gnised teachers  
21. ( 1) The qualifications of recognised teachers shall be such as may b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
in the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the mann er laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that beha lf. 
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than  
two-thirds of the members present and voting, withd raw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has  been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them have been considered by the Academic Council.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause ( 5) may, within three months from 
the date of communication to him of such order, appeal to the Board which may pass such o rders thereon 
as it thinks fit.   24 
 Committees  
22. ( 1) The authorities of the University specified in section 16 may appoint as many standing or 
special committees as it may deem fit, and may appoint to such committees persons who are  not members 
of such authority.  
(2) Any such committee app ointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject d elegated to it subject 
to confirmation by t he authority appointing it.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc.  
23. ( 1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any 
agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the R egulations.  
(2) Every teacher and member of the academic sta ff of the University shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited wi th the Registrar.  
Terms and conditions of service and code o f conduct of other employees  
24. All the employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff of the 
University, shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions 
of service and code of  conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
Seniority list  
25. ( 1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be a member of 
an authority of the University by rotation according to senio rity, such seniority shall be determined 
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and, in accordance with such 
other principles as the Board may, from time to time,  prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to pr epare and maintain, in respect of each class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance wit h 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Board whose decision thereon shall be final.  
Removal  of employees of the University  
26. ( 1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the academic staff 
or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or member of the 
academic staf f, and the authority competent to appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) 
in the case of other employee, may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff 
or other employee, as the case may be, under suspensio n and shall forthwith report to the Board the 
circumstanc es in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Board may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do not warrant 
the suspension of the teacher or a member of the aca demic staff , revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Board in respect of teachers and other academic 
staff, and the appointing authorit y, in respect of other employees, shall have the power  to remove a 
teacher or a member of the academic staff, or as the case may be, other empl oyees on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Board, or as the case may be, the appointing authority , shall not be entitled 
to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good cause  and after 
giving three months’ notice or on payment of three months ’ salary in  lieu thereof.  25 
 (4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on whic h the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the da te on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff  or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving thre e months’ notice in writing to the Board 
or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by paying three months’ salary in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employ ee, only after giving one month’ s notice in writing to the 
Board or, as the case  may be, the appointing authority or by paying o ne month’ s salary in lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is accepted 
by the Board or the appointing  authority, as the case may be.  
Honorary  degrees  
27. ( 1) The Board may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council and by a resolution passed 
by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, make proposals to the Visitor 
for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Board may, on its o wn motion, make such proposals.  
(2) The Board may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members 
present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Vi sitor, any honorary degr ee conferred by 
the University.  
Withdrawal of degrees, etc.  
28. The Board may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic distinction c onferred on, or any certificate 
or diploma granted to, any person by the University  for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause withi n such time as may be specified in the notice why such  a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been considered b y the Board.  
Maintenance of discipline a mong students of the University  
29. ( 1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the 
University shall vest in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to such officers as 
he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise  of his powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled, or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a college, institution or 
Department of the University for a stated period, or be punish ed with fine for an amount to be specified in 
the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the University, 
college, institution or Department for one or more years, or that the results of the student or students 
concern ed in the examination or examinations in which he or t hey have appeared be cancelled.  26 
 (4) The Deans of colleges, institutions and Heads of teaching Departments in the University shall 
have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the stu dents in their respective colleges, 
institutions and teaching Departments in the University as may be necessary for the proper conduct of 
such colleges, institutions and teaching in the Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancello r, the Deans and other persons specified in 
clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. The Deans of 
colleges, institutions and Heads of teaching Departments in the University may also make the 
supplementary  rules as they deem necess ary for the aforesaid purposes.  
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other authoritie s of the 
University.  
Maintenance of discipline a mong students of colleges, etc.  
30. All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of a college or an 
institution maintained by the University, shall vest in the Dean of the  college or institution, as the case 
may be, in accordance with the procedur e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Advisory Committee  
31. Every college or institution maintained by the University shall have an Advisory Committee 
consisting of not more than fiftee n persons which shall consist of, among others, three teachers including 
the Dean of the college or institution, and two teachers of the University nominated by the Board.  
Convocations  
32. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes shall be held in 
such manner as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Acting Chairman  
33. When no provision is made for a Chairman to preside over a meeting of any authority of the 
University or any committee of such authority or when the  Chairman so provided for is absent, the 
members present shall elect one from among themsel ves to preside at such meeting.  
Resignation  
34. Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Board, Academic Council or any other 
authority of the University o r any committees of such authority may resign by letter addressed to the 
Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received by the Registrar.  
Disqualifications  
35. ( 1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of any of the 
authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if h e is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for a peri od of not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of  the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
thereon shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
Residence cond ition for membership and  office  
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in 
India shall be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the University.  
  27 
 Membership of authorities by virtu e of membership of other bodies  
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University 
or is a member of any authority of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular authority or 
as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only for so long as he 
continues to be a member of that particular authority or the holder of that particular a ppointment, as the 
case may be.  
Alumni Association  
38. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumini Associa tion shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member of the  Association for at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a degree 
holder of the University o f at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relatin g to the completion of one year’ s membership shall not apply in the 
case of th e first election.  
Students’ Council  
39. ( 1) There shall be constituted  in the University, a Students’ Council for every  academic year, 
consisting of — 
(i) the Director Instruction who shall be the Cha irman of the Students’ Council;  
(ii) all students who have won prizes in the previous academic year in the fields of studies, fine 
arts, sports and extension work;  
(iii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports, activities and all -round dev elopment of personality:  
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the 
Universi ty before the Students’ Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discu ssions at any meeting when the matter is taken up for consideration . 
(2) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regar d to the programmes of studies, students ’ welfare and othe r matters of 
importance in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion  
 (3) The Students’ Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably  in the beginning of 
that year.  
Ordinances how made  
40. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 27 may be amended or repealed at 
any time by the Board  in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerat ed in section 27, other than those enumerated in 
clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) thereof, shall be made by the Board unless a draft of such Ordinance has 
been pr oposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Board shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordi nance proposed by the Academic 
Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic Council for 
reconsideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the Board may suggest.  
(4) Where the Board h as rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by the Academic 
Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original draft is 
reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voti ng and more than half 
the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Board which 
shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor  whose decision shall be final.  28 
 (5) Every Ordinance made by the Board shal l come into e ffect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Board shall be submitted to the Visitor within two weeks from the 
date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four weeks of the 
receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as soon as possible, 
inform the Board about hi s objection to the proposed Ordinance. The Visitor may, after receiving the 
comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending the Ordinan ce or disallow the 
Ordinance, and his decision shall be final.  
Regulations  
41. ( 1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances for t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying  down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of mem bers 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances t o be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters concerning such authorities or committees appointed by them 
and not provided for by the Act, th e Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the 
members of suc h authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Board may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify, of any Regulation made 
under the S tatutes or the an nulment of any such Regulation.  
Delegation of powers  
42. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of the University 
may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective 
control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated 
shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
--------------------------The Cess and Other Taxes on Minerals (Validation) Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE CESS  AND OTHER TAXES ON M INERALS  
(VALIDATION) ACT, 19 92 
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTI ONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Validation of certain State laws and actions taken and things done thereunder . 
3. Repeal and savings . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE CESS  AND OTHER TAXES ON M INERALS  
(VALIDATION) ACT, 19 92 
 
ACT NO. 16 OF 1992  
[4thApril , 1992.]  
An Act to validate the imposition and collection of cesses and certain other taxes on minerals 
under certain State laws.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cess and Other Taxe s on 
Minerals (Validation) Act, 1992 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on  the 15th day of February, 1992 . 
2. Validation of certain State laws and actions t aken and things done thereunder .—(1) The laws 
specified in the Schedule to this Act shall be, and shall be deemed always to have been, as valid as if the 
provisions contained therein relating to cesses or other taxes on minerals had been enacted by Parliament 
and such provisions shall be deemed to have remained in force u p to the 4th day of April, 1991 . 
(2) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, all actions taken, things done, rules 
made, notifications issued or purported to have been taken, done, made or issued and cesses or other tax es 
on minerals realised under any such laws shall be deemed to have been validly taken, done, made, issued 
or realised, as the case may be, as if this section had been in force at all material times when such actions 
were taken, things were  done, rules wer e made, notifi cations were issued, or cesses or other taxes were 
realised, and no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continued in any court for the refund of 
the cesses or other taxes realised under any such laws.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing in sub -section ( 2) shall be construed 
as preventing any person from claiming refund of any cess or tax paid by him in excess of the amount due 
from him under any such  laws.  
3. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Cess and Other Taxes on Minerals (Validation) Ordinance, 1992 
(Ord. 7 of 1992 ) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.   3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
1. The Andhra Pradesh (Mineral Rights) Tax A ct, 1975 (A.P. Act 14 of 1975).  
2. The Andhra Pradesh (Andhra A rea) District Boards Act, 1920.  
3. The Andhra Pradesh (Telengana A rea) District Boards Act, 1955.  
4. The Cess Act, 1880 (Bengal Act 9 of 1880) as ap plicable in the State of Bihar.  
5. The Karnataka Zilla Parishads, Taluk Panchayat Samitis, Mandal Panchayats and Nyaya 
Panchayats Act, 1983 (Karnataka Act 20 of 1985) . 
6. The Karnataka (Mineral Rights) Tax Act, 1 984 (Karnataka Act 32 of 1984).  
7. The Madhya Pradesh Karadhan Adhiniyam, 1982 (M.P. Act 15 of 1982).  
8. The Madhya Pradesh Upkar Adhini yam, 1981 (M.P. Act 1 of 1982).  
9. The Maharashtra Zilla Parishads and Panchayat Samitis (Amendment and Validation) Act, 198 1 
(Maharashtra Act 46 of 198 1). 
10. The Orissa Cess Act, 1962 (Orissa Act II of 1962) . 
11. The Tamil Nadu Panchayat Act, 1958 (Tamil Nadu Act XXXV of 1958).  
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Destructive Insects and Pests (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION)             
ACT, 1992  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Amendment of section 3 of Act 2 of 1914 . 
3. Validation . 
4. Repeal and saving . 
  2 
 THE DESTRUCTIVE INSECTS AND PESTS (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION)              
ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 12 OF 1992  
[31st March,  1992 .] 
An Act further to amend the Destructive Insects and Pests Act, 1914.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of th e Republic of India as follows: –– 
1. Short title and commencement. ––(1) This Act may be called the Destructive Insects and Pests 
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 1992 . 
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 27th day of October, 1989 . 
2. [Amendment of section 3 of Act 2 of 1914. ]––Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001          
(30 of 2001) , s. 2  and Sch . (w.e.f . 3-9-2001) . 
3. Validation .––(1) Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other 
authority, –– 
(i) the notification No .S.O.867(E), dated the 27th October, 1989 issued under sub -section ( 1) of 
the section 3 of the principal Act, and  
(ii) any fees levied or collected or purported to have been levied or collected for making an 
application for a permit  to import, or for making inspection, fumigation, dis infection, disinfestation or 
supervision of, any article or class of articles or any insect or class of insects under the principa l Act 
or the said notification,  
shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be and to have always been validly issued or, as the case may be, 
levied or collected in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act as amended by this 
Act, and accordingly –– 
(a) no suit or other proceeding shall be maintained or continue d in any court for the refund of any 
fees so collected;  
(b) no court or other authority shall enforce any decree or order directing the refund of any fees so 
collected;  
(c) any fees levied or purported to have been levied but not collected, may be recovered under the 
principal Act as amended by this Act; and  
(d) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken under or for the 
purposes of the princip al Act shall be deemed to have been validly done or taken in accordance with 
law as if the provisions of section 3 of the principal Act, as amended by this Act, had been in force at 
all material times . 
(2) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared t hat nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be construed 
as preventing any person –– 
(a) from questioning in accordance with the provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this 
Act, or the notification issued under section 3 of the principal Act, the levy or collection of such fees; 
or 
(b) from  claiming refund of any fees paid by him in excess of the amount due from him under the 
principal Act, as amended by this Act, or the said notification . 
  3 
 4. Repeal and saving. ––(1) The Destructive Insects and Pests (Amendment and Validation) 
Ordinance, 1992 (Ord . 4 of 1992) is hereby repealed . 
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by this A ct. 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE FOREIGN TRADE (DEVELOPMENT AND  REGULATION) ACT, 1992  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO MAKE ORDER AND ANNOUNCE FOREIGN TRADE POLICY  
3. Powers to make provisions  relating to imports and exports . 
4. Continuance of existing orders.  
5. Foreign Trade Policy . 
6. Appointment of Director General and his functions.  
CHAPTER III  
IMPORTER -EXPORTER  CODE NUMBER AND LICENCE  
7. Importer -exporter Code Number . 
8. Suspension and cancellation of Importer -exporter Code Number . 
9. Issue, suspension and cancellation of licence . 
CHAPTER IIIA  
QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS  
9A.Power of Central Government to impose quantitative restrictions . 
CHAPTER IV  
SEARCH, SEIZURE, PENALTY AND CONFISCATION  
10. Power relating to search and seizure . 
11. Contravention of provisions of this Act, rules, orders and foreign trade policy.  
11A. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties in Consolidated Fund of India  
11B. Empowering Settlement Commission for reg ularisation of export obligation default  
12. Penalty or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment.  
13. Adjudicating Authority . 
14. Giving of opportunity to the owner of the goods (including the goods connect ed with services or 
technology) , etc.  
CHAPTER IVA  
CONTROLS ON EXPORT OF SPECIFIED GOODS, SERVICES AND TECHNOLOGY  
14A. Controls on export of specified goods, services and technology . 
14B. Transfer controls . 
14C. Catch -all controls . 
14D. Suspension or cancellation of a licence . 
14E. Offences and penalties . 
 2 
 CHAPTER V  
APPEAL AND REVIEW  
SECTIONS  
15. Appeal . 
16. Review . 
17. Powers of Adjudicating and other Authorities . 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
18A.  Application of other laws not barred . 
19. Power to make rules . 
20. Repeal and savings . 
  3 
  
THE  FOREIGN TRADE (DEVELOPMENT ANDREGULATION) ACT, 1992  
 
ACT NO. 22 OF 1992  
[7th August , 1992.]  
  
An Act to provide for the development and regulation of foreign trade by facilitating imports 
into, and augmenting exports from , India and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Foreign Trade (Development 
and Regulation) Act, 1992.  
(2) Sections 11 to 14 shall come into force at once and the remaining provisions of this Act shall be 
deemed to have come into force on the 19th day of June , 1992.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Adjudicating Authority” means the authority specified in, or under, section 13;  
(b) “Appellate Authority” means the authority specified in, or under, sub -section ( 1) of  
section 15;  
(c) “conveyance” means any vehicle, vessel, airc raft or any other means of transport including 
any animal;  
(d) “Director General” means the Director General of ForeignTrade appointed under section 6;  
1[(e) “import” and “export” means, — 
(I) in relation to goods, bringing into, or taking out of, India  any goods by land, sea or air;  
(II) in relati on to services or technology, — 
(i) supplying, services or technology — 
(A) from the territory of another count ry into the territory of India;  
(B) in the territory of another country to an Indian service consum er; 
(C) by a service supplier of another country, through commercial presence in India;  
(D) by a service supplier of another country, through presence of their natural 
persons in India;  
(ii) supp lying, services or technology — 
(A) from  India into the territory of any other country;  
(B) in India to the service  consumer of any other country;  
(C) by a service suppli er of India, through commercial presence in the  territory of any 
other country;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2010 , s. 2 , for clause ( e) (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  4 
 (D) by a service supplier of India, through pr esence of Indian natural persons in the 
territory of any other country:  
Provided that “import” and “export” in relation to the goods, services and technology regarding 
Special Economic Zone or between two Special Economic Zones shall be governed in accorda nce 
with the provisions contained in the Sp ecial Economic Zones Act, 2005  (28 of 2005) .] 
(f) “Importer -exporter Code Number” means the Code Number granted under section 7;  
(g) “licence” means a licence  to import or export and includes a customs clearance permit and 
any other permission issued or granted under this Act;  
(h) “Order” means any O rder made by the Central Government under section 3; and  
(i) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under thisAct.  
1[(j) “services” means service of any description which is made available to potential users and 
includes all the tradable services specified under the General Agreement on Trade in Services entered 
into amongst India and other countries who a re party to the said Agreement:  
Provided that, this definition shall not a pply to the domain of taxation;  
(k) “service supplier” means any person who supplies a service and who intends to take benefit 
under the foreign trade policy;  
(l) “specified goods or services or technology” means the goods or services or technology, the 
export, import, transfer, re -transfer, transit and transshipment of which is prohibited or restricted 
because of imposition of conditions on the grounds of their being pertinent or rele vant to I ndia as a 
Nuclear Weapon State, or to the national security of India,  or to the furtherance of its foreign policy 
or its international obligations under any bilateral, multil ateral or international treaty, covenant, 
convention or arrangement relat ing to weapons of mass destruction or their means of delivery to 
which India is a party or its agreement with a foreign country under the foreign trade policy 
formulated and notif ied under section 5 of the Act;  
(m) “technology” means any information (inclu ding information embodied in software), other 
than information in the public domain, that is capable of being used in — 
(i) the development, production o r use of any goods or software;  
(ii) the development of, or the carrying out of, an industrial or commer cial activity or the 
provision of service of any kind.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause — 
(a) when technology is described wholly or partly by reference to the uses to which it (or the 
goods to which it relates) may be put, it shall include servi ces which are provided or used, or 
which are capable of being used in the developm ent, production or use of such technology or 
goods;  
(b) “public domain” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( i) of section 4 of 
the Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery System (Prohibition of  Unlawful Activities) 
Act, 2005  (21 of 2005) .] 
CHAPTER II  
POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO MAKE ORDER  AND ANNOUNCE 2[FOREIGN TRADE POLICY]  
3. Powers to make provision s relating to imports and exports .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by Order published in the Official Gazette, make provision for the development and regulation of 
foreign trade by facilitating imports and increasing exports.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 25 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f . 27-8-2010).  
2. Subs. by s.3 , ibid., for “EXPORT AND IMPORT POLICY” (w.e.f. 27-8-2010).  5 
 (2) The Central Government may also, by Order published in the Official Gazette, make provision for 
prohibiting, restricting or otherwise regulating, in all cases or in specified classes of cases and subject to 
such ex ceptions, if any, as may be made by or u nder the Order, the 1[import or export of goods or services 
or technology] : 
2[Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall be applicable, in case of import or export of 
services or technology, only when the service or technology provider is availing benefit s under the 
foreign trade policy or is dealing with specified ser vices or specified technologies .] 
(3) All goods to which any Order under sub -section ( 2) applies shall be deemed to be goods the 
import or export of which has been prohibited under section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962)  
and all the provisions of that Act shall have effect accordingly.  
2[(4) Without prejudice to anything contained in any other law, rule, regulation, notification or order, 
no permit or licence  shall be necessary for import or export of any goods , nor any goods shall be 
prohibited for import or export except, as may be required under this Act, or rules or orders made 
thereunder .] 
4. Continuance of existing orders .—All Orders made under the Impor ts and Exports (Control) Act, 
1947  (18 of 1947), and in force immediately before the commencement of this Act shall, so far as they are 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to be in force and shall be deemed to have been 
made under th is Act.  
3[5. Foreign Trade Policy .—The Central Government may, from time to time, formulate and 
announce , by notification in the Official Gazette, the foreign t rade policy and may also, in  like manner, 
amend that policy:  
Provided that the Central Government may direct that, in respect of the Special Economic Zones, the 
foreign trade policy shall apply to the goods, services and technology with such exceptions, modifications 
and adaptations, as may be specified by it by notifi cation in the Official Gazette .] 
6. Appointment of Dir ector General and his functions .—(1) The Central Government may appoint 
any person to be the Director General of Foreign Trade for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Director General shall advise the Central Gover nment in the formulation of the 4[foreign trade 
policy] and shall be responsible for carrying out that policy.  
(3) The Central Government may, by Order published in the Official Gazette , direct that any power 
exercisable by it under this Act (other than the powers under sections 3,  5, 15, 16 and 19) may also be 
exercised, in such cases and subject to such conditions, by the Director General or such other officer 
subordinate to the Directo r General, as may be specified in the Order.  
CHAPTER III  
IMPORTER -EXPORTER  CODE NUMBER AND LICENCE  
7. Impo rter-exporter Code Number .—No person shall make any import or export except under an 
Importer -exporter Code Number granted by the Director General or the officer authorised by the Director 
General in this behalf, in accordance with the procedure specified in this  behalf by the Direc tor General:  
5[Provided that in case of import or export of services or technology , the Importer -exporter Code 
Number shall be necessary only when the service or technology provider is taking benefit s under the 
foreign trade policy or is dealing with speci fied ser vices or specified technologies .] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2010, s. 4 , for “imp ort or export of goods” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
2. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
3. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for section 5 (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
4. Subs. by s. 6 , ibid., for “export and import policy” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
5. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  6 
 8. Suspension and cancellation o f Importer -exporter Code Number .—1[(1) Where — 
(a) any person has contravened any of the provisions of this Act or any rules or orders made 
thereunder or the foreign trade policy or  any other law for the time being in force relating to Central 
excise or customs or foreign exchange or has committed any other economic offence under any other 
law for the time being in force as may be specified by the Central Government by notificat ion in the 
Official Gazette; or 
(b) the Director Gener al or any other officer authoris ed by him has reason to believe that any 
person has made an export or import in a manner prejudicial to the trade relations of India with any 
foreign country or to the interes ts of other persons engaged in imports or exports or has brought 
disrepute to the credit or the goods of, or services or technology provid ed from , the country; or 
(c) any person who imports or exports specified goods or services or technology, in contraven tion 
of any provision of this Act or any rules or orders made thereund er or the foreign trade policy,  
the Director Gener al or any other officer authoris ed by him may call for the record or any other 
information from that person and may, after giving to tha t person a notice in writing informing him of the 
grounds on which it is proposed to suspend or cancel the Importer -exporter Code Number and after giving 
him a reasonable opportunity of making a representation in writing within such reasonable time as may be 
specified in the notice and, if that person so desires, of being heard, suspend for a period, as may be 
specified in the order, or cancel the Importer -exporter Code  Number granted to that person.]  
(2) Where any Importer -exporter Code Number granted to a  person has been suspended or cancelled 
under sub -section ( 1), that person shall not be entitled to 2[import or export any g oods or services or 
technology] except under a special licence, granted, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may 
be prescribed, by the Director General to that person.  
9. Issue, suspension and cancellation of licence .—(1) The Central Government may levy fees, 
subject to such exceptions, in respect of such person or class of persons making an application 
for3[licence, ce rtificate, scrip or any instrument bestowin g financial or fiscal benefits]  of in respect of any 
3[licence, certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowing financial or fiscal benefits] granted or renewed in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
4[(2) The Directo r General or an officer authoris ed by him may, on an application and after making 
such inquiry as he may think fit, grant or renew or refuse to grant or renew a licence to import or export 
such class or classes of goods or services or technology as may be prescribed and, grant or renew or 
refuse to grant or renew  a certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowing financial or fiscal benefit , after 
recording in writing his reasons for such refusal.]  
(3) A 3[licence, certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowin g financial or fiscal benefits] granted or 
renewed under this section shall — 
(a) be in such form as may be prescribed;  
(b) be valid for such period as may be specified therein;and  
(c) be subject to such terms, conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed or as specified in the 
3[licence, certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowin g financial or fiscal benefits] with reference to 
the terms, conditions and restrictions so prescribed.  
(4) The Director General or the officer authorised under sub -section ( 2) may, subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed , for good and sufficient reasons, to be recorded in writing ,suspend or 
cancel any 3[licence, certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowin g financial or fiscal benefits] granted 
under this Act:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2010, s. 8 , for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.  f .27-8-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 8 , ibid., for “import or export any goods” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
3. Subs. by s. 9 , ibid., for “licence” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
4. Subs. by s. 9 , ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f.  27-8-2010) . 7 
 Provided that no such suspension or cancellation shall be made except after giving the holder of the 
1[licence, certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowin g financial or fiscal benefits] a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard.  
(5) An appeal against an order refusing to grant, or renew  or suspending or cancelling, a 1[licence, 
certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowin g financial or fiscal benefits] shall lie in like manner as an 
appeal against an order would lie under  section 15.  
2[CHAPTER IIIA  
QUANTITATIVE RESTRICTIONS  
9A. Power of Central Government to impose quantitative restrictions .—(1) If the Central 
Government, after conducting such enquiry as it deems fit, is satisfied that any goods are imported into 
India in such increased quantities and under such conditions as to cause or threaten to cause serious injury 
to domestic industry, it may, by notification in the Official Gazette, impose such quantitative restrictions 
on the import of such goods as it may deem fit:  
Provided that no such quantitative restrictions shall be imposed on any goods originating from a 
developing country so long as the share of imports of such goods from that country does not  exceed three 
per cent. or where s uch goods originate from more than one developing country, then, so long as the 
aggregate of the imports from all such countries taken together  does not exceed nine per cent. of the total 
impor ts of such goods into India.  
(2) The quantitative restrictions imposed under this section shall, unless revoked earlier, cease to have 
effect on the expiry of four years fr om the date of such imposition:  
Provided that if the Central Government is of the opinion that the domestic industry has taken 
measures to adjust t o such injury or threat thereof and it is necessary that the quantitative restriction s 
should contin ue to be imposed to prevent such injury or threat and  to facilitate the adjustments , it may 
extend the  said period beyond four years:  
Provided further that in no case the quantitative restriction s shall continue to be imposed beyond a 
period of ten years from the date on which such restriction s were first imposed.  
(3) The Central Government may, by rules provide for the manner in which goods, the import of 
which shall be subject to quantitative restrictions under this section, may be identified and the manner in 
which the causes of serious  injury or causes of threat of serious injury in relation t o such goods may be 
determined.  
(4) For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “developing country” means a country notified by the Central Government in the Official 
Gazett e, in this regard;  
(b) “domestic industry” means the producers of goods (including pr oducers of agricultural 
goods) — 
(i) as a whole of the like goods or directly  competitive goods in India; or  
(ii) whose collective output of the like goods or directly competitive goods in India 
constitutes a major share of the total product ion of the said goods in India;  
(c) “serious injury” m eans an  injury causing significant overall impairment in the p osition of a 
domestic industry;  
(d) “threat of serious injury” means a clear and immi nent danger of serious injury.]  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2010, s. 9 , for “licence” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010) . 
2. Ins. by s.10, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  8 
 CHAPTER IV  
SEARCH, SEIZURE, PENALTY AND CONFISCATION  
10. Power relating to search and seizure .—1[(1) The Central Government may, by notification i n 
the Official Gazette, authoris e any person for the purposes of exercisi ng such powers with respect to ,— 
(a) entering such premises where the goods are kept, stored or processed, manufactured, traded or 
supplied or received for the purposes of import or export and searching , inspecting and seizing of 
such goods, documents, things and conveyances connected with such import and export of goods ; 
(b) entering such premises from which t he services or technology are being provided, suppli ed, 
received, consumed or utilis ed and searching, inspecting and seizing of such goods, documents, 
things and conveyances connected with such import and exp ort of services and technology,  
subject to su ch requirements and conditions and with  the approval of such officer, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the provisions of c lause (b) shall be a pplicable, in case of import or export of services 
or technology, only when the service or technology provider  is availing benefit under the foreign trade 
policy or is dealing with specified ser vices or specified technologies .] 
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search and seizure made under this section.  
2[11. Contravention of provisions of this Act, rules, orde rs and foreign trade policy .—(1) No 
export or import shall be made by any perso n except in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the 
rules and orders made there under and the foreign trade policy for the time being in force.  
(2) Where any person makes or abets or attempts to make any export or import in contravention of 
any prov ision of this Act or  any rules or orders made there under or the foreign trade policy , he shall be 
liable to a penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees and not more than five times the value of the goods 
or services or technology in respect of which any  contravention is made or attempted to be made, 
whic hever is more.  
(3) Where any person signs or uses, or causes to be made, signed or used, any declaration, statement 
or document submitted to the Director General or any officer authorised by him under thi s Act, knowing 
or having reason to believe that such declaration, state ment or document is forged or ta mpered with or 
false in any material particular, he shall be liable to a penalty of not less than ten thousand rupees or more 
than five times the val ue of the g oods or services or technology in respect of which such declaration, 
statement or document had bee n submitted, whichever is more.  
(4) Where any per son, on a notice to him by the A djudicating Authority, admits any contravention, 
the Adjudicating Auth ority may, in such class or classes or  cases and in such manner as may be 
prescribed, determine, by way of settlement, an a mount to be paid by that person.  
(5) A penalty imposed under t his Act may, if it is not paid by any person, be recovered by any one o r 
more o f the following modes, namely: — 
(a) the Director General may deduct or require any officer subordinate to him to deduct the 
amount payable under this Act from any money owing to such person which may be under the control 
of such officer; or  
(b) the Director General may require any officer of customs to deduct the amount payable under 
this Act from any money owing to such person which may be under the control of such officer of 
customs, as if the said amount is payable under the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) ; or 
(c) the Director General may require the Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy 
Commissioner of Customs or any other officer of Customs to recover the amount so payable by 
detaining or selling any goods (including the goods connected wit h services or technology) belonging 
to such person which are under the control of the Assistant Commissioner of Customs or Deputy 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25  of 2010, s. 11 , for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27-8-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 12 ,ibid., for section 11 (w.e.f. 27-8-2010).  9 
 Commissioner or   Customs or any other officer of Customs, as if the said amount is payable under the 
Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) ; or 
(d) if the amount cannot be recovered from such person in the manner provide d in clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( c),— 
(i) the Director  General or any officer authoris ed by him may prepare a certificate signed by 
him specifying the amount due from s uch person and send it to the Collector of the District in 
which such person owns any property or resides or carries on business and the said Collector on 
receipt of such certificate shall proceed to recover from such person the amount specified 
thereunder  as if it wer e an arrear of land revenue; or  
(ii) the Director General or any officer authorised by him (including an officer of Customs 
who shall then exercise his powers under the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) ) and in accordance 
with the rules made in this behalf, detain any movable or immovable property belonging to or 
under the control of such person, and detain the same until the amount payable is paid, as if the 
said amount is payable under the Customs Act, 1962; and in case, any part of the said am ount 
payable or of the cost of the distress or keeping of the property, remains unpaid for a period of 
thirty days next after any such distress, may cause the said property to be sold and with the 
proceeds of such sale, may satisfy the amount payable and c osts including cost of sale remaining 
unpaid and shall render the surplus , if any to such person.  
(6) Where the terms of any bond or other instrument executed under this Act or any rules made 
thereunder provide that any amount due under such instrument may  be recovered in the manner laid down 
in sub -section ( 5), the amount may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery, be recovered in 
accordance with the provisions of that sub -section.  
(7) Without prejudice to the provis ions containe d in this section, the Importer -Exporter Code Number 
of any person who fails to pay any penalty imposed under this Act, may be suspended by the 
Adjudicating Authority till the penalty is paid or  recovered, as the case may be.  
(8) Where any contravention of any provi sion of this Act or any rules or orders made thereunder or 
the foreign trade policy has been, is being, or is attempted to be, made, the goods (including the goods 
connected with services or technology) together with any package, covering or receptacle and  any 
conveyances shall, subject to such conditions and requirement as may be prescribed, be liable to 
confisca tion by the Adjudicating Authority.  
(9) The goods (including the goods connected with services o r technology) or the conveyance  
confiscated under sub-section ( 8) may be released by the Adjudicating Authority, in such manner and 
subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, on payment by the person concerned of the redemption 
charges equivalent to  the market value of the goods or conveyance, as th e case may be.]  
1[11A. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties in Consolidated Fund of India .—All sums 
realis ed by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
11B.  Empowering Settlement Commission for regularisation of export obligation default .—
Settlement of customs duty and interest thereon as ordered by the Settlement Commission as constituted 
under section 32 of the Central Excise Act, 1944  (1 of 1944) , shall be deemed to be a settlement under 
this Act.]  
12. Penalty or confiscation not to i nterfere with other punishments .—No penalty imposed or 
confiscation made under this Act shall prevent the imposition of any other punishment to which the 
person affected thereby is liable under any other law for th e time being in force.  
13. Adjudicating Authority .—Any penalty may be imposed or any confiscation may be adjudged 
under this Act by the Director General or, subject to such limits as may be specified, by such other officer 
as the  Central Government may , by notification in the Official  Gazett e, authorise in this behalf.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 25 of 2010, s. 13 (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  10 
 14. Giving of opportunity  to the owner of the 1[goods (including the goods connected with 
services or technology)], etc.—No order imposing a penalty or of adjudication of confiscation shall be 
made unless the owner of the 1[goods (including the goods connected with services or technology)]  or 
conveyance , or other person concerned, has been given a notice in writing — 
(a) informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to impose a penalty or to confiscate 
such 1[goods (including the goods connected with services or technology)] or conveyance;  and 
(b) to make a representation in writing within such reasonable time as may be specified in the 
notice against the imposition of penalty or confisc ation mentione d therein, and, if he so desires , of 
being heard in the matter.    
2[CHAPTER IVA  
CONTROLS ON EXPORT OF SPECIFIED GOODS, SERVICES AND TECHNOLOGY  
14A.  Controls on export of specified goods, services and technology .—(1) In regard to controls on 
export of specified goods, services and technology referred to in this Chapter, the Weapons of Mass 
Destruction and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005  (21 of 2005) shall 
apply to exports, transf ers, re -trans fers, brought in transit, trans -shipment of, and brokering in specified  
goods, technology or services.  
(2) All terms, expressions  or provisions of the Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery 
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005  (21 of 2005) shall apply to the specified goods, 
services or technology with such exceptions, modifications and adaptations as may be specified by the 
Central Government by notifi cation in the Official Gazette.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct th at any of the 
provisions of this Chapter — 
(a) shall not apply to any good s, services or technologies, or  
(b) shall apply to any goods, services or technologies with such exceptions, modifications and 
adaptations as may be  specified in the notification.  
14B.  Transfer controls .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules in confor mity with the provisions of the Weapons of Mass Destruction and their Delivery 
Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005  (21 of 2005) for, or, in connection  with, the 
imposition of controls in relation to transfer of specified goods, services or technology.  
(2) No goods, services or technology notified under this Chapter shall be exported, transferred,  
re-transferred, brought in transit or transshipped except in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the 
Weapons of Mass Destruction and th eir Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 
(21 of 2005) or any other relevant Act.  
14C.  Catch -all controls .—No person shall export any material, equipment or technology knowing 
that such material, equipment or technology is intended to be used in the design or manufacture of a 
biological weapon, chemical weapon, nuclear weapon or other nuclear explosive device, or in their 
missile delivery systems.  
14D.  Suspension or cancellation of  a licence .—The Directo r General or an officer authoris ed by 
him may, by order , suspend or cancel a licence to import or  export of specified goods or services or 
technology without  giving the holder of the licenc e a reasonable opportunity of being heard but such 
person shall be given a reasonable opportunity of being heard within six months of such order and 
thereup on the Director General or the officer so authoris ed may, if necessary, by order in writing, 
confir m, modify or revoke such order.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2010, s. 14, for “goods” (w.e.f. 27 -8-2010).  
2. Ins. b y s. 15 , ibid. (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  11 
 14E.  Offences and penalties .—(1) In case of a contravention relating to specified goods, services or 
technologies, the penalty shall be in accordance with the provisions of the Weapons of Mass Destruction 
and their Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful Activities) Act, 2005 (21 of 2005).  
(2) Where any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets, any of the provision(s) of this 
Chapter in relation to import or export of any specified goods or services or technology, he shall, without 
prejudice to any penalty which may be imposed on him, be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
stipulated in the Weapons of Mass Destruction and th eir Delivery Systems (Prohibition of Unlawful 
Activities) Act, 2005 (21 of 2005).  
(3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Chapter without the previous 
sanction of the Central Go vernment or any officer authoris ed in this beha lf by the Central Governme nt by 
general or special order.]  
CHAPTER V  
APPEAL AND 1[REVIEW]  
15. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order made by the Adjudicating Authority 
under  this Act may prefer an appeal, — 
(a) where  the decision or order has been made by the Director Gene ral, to the Central 
Government;  
(b) where the decision or order has been made by an officer subordinate to the Director General, 
to the Director General or to any officer superior to the Adjudicating  Authority authorised by the 
Direc tor General to hear the appeal,  
within a period of forty -five days from the date on which the decision or order is served on such person:  
Provided that the Appellate Authority may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was  prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the aforesaid period, allow such appeal to be preferred 
within a further period of thirty days:  
Provided further that in the case of an appeal against a decision or order imposing a penalty o r 
redemption charges, no such appeal shall be entertained unless the amount of penalty or redemption 
charges has been deposited by the appellant:  
Provided also that, where the Appellate Authority is of opinion that the deposit to be made will cause 
undue h ardship to the appellant, it may, at its discretion , dispense with such deposit either unconditionally 
or subject to such conditions as it may impose.  
(2) The Appellate Authority may, after giving to the appellant a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard, i f he so desires, and after making such further inquiries, if any, as it may consider necessary, make 
such orders as it thinks fit, confirming, modifying or reversing the decision or order appealed against, or 
may send back the case with such directions , as it may think fit, for a fresh adjudicatio n or decision, as the 
case may be, after taking additional evidence , if necessary:  
Provided that an order enhancing or imposing a penalty or redemption charges or confiscating 2[the 
goods  (including the goods conne cted with services or technology )] of a greater value shall not be made 
under this section unless the appellant has been given an opportunity of making a representation, and , if 
he so desires , of being heard in his defence.  
(3) The order made in appeal by the Appellate Authority shall be final.  
3[16. Review .—The Central Government , in the case of any decision or order made by the Director 
General, or the Director General in the case of any decision or order made by any officer subordinate to 
him, may on its or his own motion or otherwise, call for and examine the records of any proce eding, for 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2010, s. 16 , for “REVISION” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “goods” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
3. Subs. by s. 18, ibid., for section 16  (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  12 
 the purpose of satisfying itself or himself, as the case may be, as to the correctness, legality or propriety of 
such decision or order and make such orders thereo n as may be deemed fit:  
Provided that no decision or order shall be varied under t his section so as to prejudicially affect  any 
person unless such person — 
(a) has, within a period of two years from the date of such decision or o rder, received a notice to 
show  cause why such decision or  order shall not be varied; and 
(b) has been given a  reasonable opportunity of making representation and, if he so desires,  of 
being heard in his defence.]  
17. Powers of Adjudicating and other Authorities .—(1) Every authority making any adjudication 
or hearing any appeal or exercising any powers of 1[review ] under this Act shall have all the powers of a 
civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of  the 
following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses;  
(b) requiring the d iscovery and production of any document;  
(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(2) Every authority making any adjudication or hearing any appeal or exercising any powers of 
1[review ] under this Act shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedu re, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) Every authority making any adjudication or hearing any appeal or exercising any powers of 
1[review ] under this Act shall have the power to make such orders of an interim nature as it may think fit 
and may also, for sufficient cause, order the stay of ope ration of any decision or order.  
(4) Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any decision or order or errors arising therein from any 
accidental slip or omission may at any time be corrected by the authority by which the decision or order 
was made, either on its own motion or on the application of any of the parties:  
Provide d that where any correction proposed to be made under this sub -section will have the effect of 
prejudicially affecting any person, no such correction shall be made except after giving to th at person a 
reasonable opportunity of making a representation in the matter and no such correction shall be made 
after the expiry of two years from the date on which such decision or order was made.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Protection of action taken i n good faith .—No order made or deemed to have been made under 
this Act shall be called in question in any court, and no suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against any person for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under th is Act or any order 
made or deemed to have been made thereunder.  
2[18A .Application of other laws not barred .—The provision s of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law fo r the time being in force.]  
19. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 2010, s. 19 , for “Revision” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
2. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  13 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may  
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which a special licence may be issued under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 8;  
(b) the exceptions subject to which and the person or  class of persons  in respect of whom fees 
may be  levied and the manner in which a 1[licence, certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowing 
financial or fiscal benefits ] may be  granted or renewed under sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
2[(c) the class or classes of goods (including the goods connected with service or technology) for 
which a licence, certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowing financial or fiscal benefits may be 
granted under sub -section ( 2) of section 9; ] 
(d) the form in which and the terms , conditions and restrictions subject to which1[licence, 
certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowing financial or fiscal benefits ] may be granted under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 9;  
(e) the conditions subject to which a 1[licence, certificate, scrip or any instrument bestowing 
financial or fiscal benefits ] may be suspended or cancelled under sub -section ( 4) of section 9;  
3[(ea) the matter in which goods the import of which shall be subject to quantitative restrictions, 
may be identi fied and the manner in which the causes of serious injury or causes of threat of serious 
injury in relation to such goods may be determined under sub -section ( 3) of section 9A;]  
(f) the premises,4[goods (including the goods connected with the service or te chnology) ], 
documents, things and conveyances in respect of which and the requirements and conditions subject 
to which power of entry, search, inspection and seizure may be exercised under sub -section ( 1) of 
section10;  
(g) the  class or classes of cases for which and the manner in which an amount , by way of 
settlemen t, may be determined under 5[sub-section ( 4) of section 11 ]; 
6[(h) the requirement s and co nditions subject to which goods  (including the goods connected with  
the service or technology ) and conveyances shall be liable to confiscation under sub -section ( 8) of 
section 11;]  
7[(i) the manner in which and the co nditions subject to which goods ( including the goods 
connected with the service or technology ) and conveyances may be released on payment of 
redemption charges under sub -section ( 9) of section 11;]  
(j) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by rules.  
(3) Every rule and every Order made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session o r in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or the Order or both Houses agree that the rule or the 
Order should not be made, the rule or the Order, as the case may be, shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to t he validity of anything previously done under that rule or the 
Order.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 25 of 201 0, s. 21 , for “licence” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
3. Ins. b y s.21, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
4. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “ goods” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
5. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “sub -section (3) of section 11” (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for clause ( h) (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  
7. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for  clause ( i) (w.e.f.  27-8-2010).  14 
 20. Repeal and saving s.—(1) The Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947  (18 of 1947) and the 
Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Ordinance, 1992  (Ord. 11 of 1992) are hereby repea led. 
(2) The repeal of the Imports and Exports (Control) Act, 1947  (18 of 1947) shall, however, not 
affect ,— 
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything duly done or suffered thereunder;   or 
(b) any  right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired , accrued or incurred under the Act so 
repealed; or  
(c) any penalty, confiscation or punishment incurred in respect of any contravention under  the 
Act so repealed; or  
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respe ct of any such right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, 
confiscat ion or punishment as aforesaid,  
and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced , and any such penalty, 
confiscation or punishment may be imposed or made as if that Act had not been repealed.  
(3) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Ordinance, 1992  
(Ord. 11 of 1992) , anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991--------------------------
1 
 THE GOVERNMENT  OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY  OF DELHI ACT, 1991  
_____  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY  
3. Legislative Assembly and its composition.  
4. Qualification s for membership of Legislative  Assembl y. 
5. Duration of Legislative Assembly.  
6. Sessions of Legislative  Assembl y, prorogation and dissolution.  
7. Speaker and  Deputy  Speaker of Legislative Assembly.  
8. Speake r or Deputy Speaker not to provi de while a resolution for his removal from office is under 
consideration.  
9. Right of Lieutenant Governor to address and send messages to Legislative  Assembl y. 
10. Special a ddress by the Lieutenant Governor.  
11. Rights of Ministers as respects Legislative Assembl y. 
12. Oath or affi rmation by members.  
13. Voting in Assembly, power of  Assembly to act notwithstanding vacancies and quorum.  
14. Vacation of seats.  
15. Disqualifications for membership.  
16. Disqualification on ground of defection.  
17. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirm ation or when not qualified or when 
disqualified.  
18. Powers, privileges, etc., of members.  
19. Salaries and allowances of members.  
20. Exemption of property of the Union form taxation.  
21. Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative  Assembly with respect to certain matter s. 
22. Special provisions as to financial Bills.  
23. Procedure as to lapsing of Bills.  
24. Assent to Bills.  
25. Bills reserved for consideration.  
26. Requirements as to sanction, etc.  
27. Annual financial statement.  
28. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimate s. 
29. Appropriation Bills.  
30. Supplementary , additional or excess grants.  
31. Votes on account.  
32. Authorisation of expenditure pending its sanction by Legislative Assembly.  
33. Rules of procedure . 
 2 
 SECTIONS  
34. Official language or language s of the Capital and language or language s to be used in Legislative 
Assembly.  
35. Language to be used for Bills, Acts, etc.  
36. Restriction on discuss ion in the Legislative Assembly.  
37. Courts not to inquire into proceedings of Legislative Assembly.  
 
PART III  
DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES  
38. Election Commissi on to delimit constituencies.  
39. Power of Election Commission to maintain delimitation orders up -to-date.  
40. Election s to the Legislative  Assembly.  
 
PART IV  
CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATI NG TO LIEUTENANT  GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS  
41. Matters  in which Lieutenant Governor to act in his discretion.  
42. Advice by Ministers.  
43. Other provision s as to Ministers.  
44. Conduct of business.  
45. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of information to the Lieutenant Governor, etc.  
 
PART V  
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS  
46. Consolidated Fund of the Capital.  
46A. Public Account of the Capital and money s credited to it.  
47. Contingency Fund of the Capital.  
47A. Borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital . 
47B. Form of accounts of the Capital . 
48. Audit reports.  
49. Relation of Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers to President.  
50. Period of order made under article 239AB and approval thereof by Parliament.  
51. Authorisation of expenditure by President.  
52. Contracts and suits.  
53. Power of President to remove difficulties.  
54. Laying o f rules before Legislative Assembly.  
55. [Repealed. ] 
56. Repeal of Act 19 of 1966.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  3 
 THE GOVERNMENT OF NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI ACT, 1991  
 ACT NO. 1 OF 1992  
[2nd January , 1992 .] 
An Act to  supplement the provisions of the Constitution relating to the Legislative Assembly and 
a Council of Ministers for the National Capital Territory of Delhi and for matters connected 
therewith or i ncidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -second Y ear of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
PART I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1)   This Act may be called the Government of National 
Capital Territory of Delhi Act, 1991.  
(2)   It sha ll come into force on such date1 as the Central Governme nt may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed  as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires ,— 
(a)   “article”  means an arti cle of the Constitution;  
(b)  “assembly constituency”  means a const ituency provided under this Act  for the purpose of 
electio ns to the Legislative Assembly;  
(c)  “Capital” means the Nati onal Capital Territory of Delhi ; 
(d)  “Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred  to in article 324;  
(e)  “Legislative Assembly” means the Legislative Assembly of the Natio nal Capital Territory of 
Delhi;  
(f)  “Scheduled Castes” , in relation to the Capital, means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or 
groups within such castes, races or tribes as are deemed under article 341 to be Scheduled Ca stes in  
relation to the Capital.  
PART II 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY  
 3. Legislative Assembly and its composition .—(1)   The total number of seats in the Legislative 
Assembly to be filled by persons chosen by direct election from territorial c onstituencies shall be seve nty. 
(2)   For the purpose of elections to the Legislative Assembly, the Capital shall be divided into            
single -member assembly constituencies in accordance with the provisions of Part III in such manner that 
the population of each of the constituenci es shall, so far as practicable , be the same throughout the 
Capital.   
                                                           
1. 1st February, 1992 (ss. 2, 3, 38, 39, 40 and 53),  vide notification No. S.O. 97(E), dated 31st January, 1992, See Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3 ( ).  
   2nd October, 1993 [ss. 4 to 37 (both inclusive), 43 to 45 (both inclusive), 49 to 52 (both inclusive), 54 and 55], vide notification 
No. S.O. 735(E), dated 30th September, 1993, See Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
  25th Nove mber, 1993 (ss 46, 47 and 48), vide notification No. S.O. 894(E), dated 25th November, 1993,  see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
  29th November, 1993 (s. 56), vide notification No. S.O. 910(E), dated 29th November, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (3)  Seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes in the Legislative Assembly, and the number of 
seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to  the total number of seats in the 
Assembly as the population of the Schedule d Castes in the Capital bears to the total population of the 
Capital and the provisions of article 334 sh all apply to such reservation . 
Explanation .—In this section, the expression  “population” means the population  as ascertained in the 
last preceding census of which the relev ant figures have been published:  
1[Provided that the reference in this Explanation  to the last preceding census of which the relevant 
figures have been publish ed shall, until the relevant figures for the first census taken after the year 2026 
have been published, be construed as a reference to the 2001 census:]  
2[Provided further that any readjustment in the division of the Capital into territorial constituencies by 
the Delimitation Commission under the Delimitation Act, 2002 (33 of 2002) on the basis of 2001 census 
shall take effect from such date as the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official 
Gazette, specify and until such read justment take s effect, any election to the Legislative Assembly may be 
held on the basis of the territorial constituencies existing before such readjustment. ] 
4.  Qualifications for memb ership of Legislative Assembly. —A pers on shall not be qualified to b e 
chosen to fill a seat in the Le gislative Assembly unless he — 
(a)    is a citizen of India and makes and subscr ibes before some person authoris ed in that behalf 
by the Election Commission an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in 
the Schedule ; 
(b)   is not less than twenty -five years of age; and  
(c)  possesses such other qualifications   as may be prescribed in that behalf by or under any law 
made by parliament.  
5. Duration of Legislative Assembly .—The Legislative Assembly, unless sooner dissolved, shall 
continue  for five years from the date  appointed for its firs t meeting and no longer, and the expiration of 
the said period of five years shall operate a s a dissolution of the Assembly : 
Provided that the said period may, while  a Proclamation of Emergency issued under clause ( 1) of 
article 352 is in operation, be extended by the President by order for a period not exceeding one year at a 
time and not extending in any case beyond a period of six months after the Proclamation has ceased to 
operate.   
6. Sessions of Legislative Assemb ly, p rorogation and dissolution. —(1)  The Lieutena nt Governor 
shall, from time to time, summon the Legislative Assembly to meet at such time and place as he thinks fit, 
but six months shall not  intervene between its last sitting in one session and the date appointed for its 
first sitting in the next session.  
(2) The Lieutenant Governor may, from time to time ,— 
(a)  prorogue the Assembly ;  
(b)  dissolve the Assembly.  
 7.  Speaker and Deputy Speak er of Legislative Assembly. —(1) The Legislative Assembly shall, 
as soon as may be, choose two members of the Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker 
thereof and, so often as the office of Speaker or Deputy Speaker become  vacant, the Assembly  shall 
choose another member to be Speaker or Deputy Speaker, as the case may be.  
(2) A member holding office as Speaker or Deputy Spea ker of the Legislative Assembly — 
(a)  shall vacate his office if he ceases to be a member of the Assembly;  
(b)  may, at any time by writing under his hand addressed, if such member is the Speaker, to the 
Deputy Speaker, and if such member is the Deputy Speaker, to the Speaker, resign his office; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 19 of 2005, s. 5, for the proviso (w.e.f. 21 -5-2005).  
2. Ins. by Act 5 of 2006, s. 3 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2005).  5 
 (c)  may be removed from his office by a resolution of the Assembl y passed by a majority of all 
the then members of the Assembly : 
Provided that no resolution for the purpose of cla use (c) shall be moved unless at least fourteen days ’ 
notice has been given of the i ntention to move the resolution:  
 Provided further that whenever the Assembly is dissolved, the Speaker shall not vacate his office 
until immediately before the first meeting of the Assembly after the dissolution.  
(3)   While the office of Speaker is vacant , the duties of the office shall be performed by the De puty 
Speaker or, if the office of Deputy Speaker is also vacant, by such member of the Assembly as may be 
determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly.  
(4)    During the absence of the Speaker from any sitting of the Assembly, the Deputy Speaker, or, if 
he is also absent, such person as may be determined by the rules of procedure of the Assembly, or, if no 
such person is present, such other person as may be determined by the Assembly, shall act as Speaker.  
(5) There shall be paid to the Speaker and  the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly such 
salaries and allowances as may be respectively fixed by the Legislative Assembly by law and, until 
provision in that behalf is so made, such salaries an d allowances as the Lieutenant Governor may, with 
the approval of the President, by order determine.  
8. Speaker or Deputy Speaker not to pr ovide while a resolution for his removal from office is 
under consideration. —(1) At any sitting of the Legislative Assembly, while any resolution for the 
removal of the  Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Speaker, or while any resolution for the 
removal of the Deputy Speaker from his office is under consideration, the Deputy Speaker , shall not, 
though he is present, preside and the provisions of sub -section (4) of section 7 shall apply in relation to 
every such sitting as they apply in relation to a sitting from which the Speaker or, as the case may be, the 
Deputy Speaker is absent.  
(2) The Speaker shall have the right to speak in , and otherwise to take pa rt in the proceedings of, the 
Legislative Assembly while any resolution for his removal from office  is under consideration in the 
Assembly and shall, notwithstanding anything in section 13, be entitled to vote only in the first instance 
on such resolution or on any other matter during such procee dings but not in the case of an  equality of 
votes.  
9. Right of Lieutenant Governor to a ddress and send m essages to Legislative                      
Assembly. —(1) The Lieutenant Governor may address the Legislative Assembly and for that purpose 
require the attendance of members.  
(2) The Lieutenant Governor may send messages to the Assembly whether with respect to a Bill then 
pending in the Assembly or otherwise, and when a message is so sent, the Assembly shall with all 
convenient dispatch consider any matter required by the message to be taken into consideration.   
10. Special a ddress by the Lieutenant Governor .—(1) At the commencement of the first session 
after each general election to the Legislative Assembly and at  the commencement of the first session of 
each year , the Lieutenant Governor shall address the Legislative Assembly and inform it of the causes of 
its summons.  
(2) Provision shall be made by rules to be made by the Assembly regulati ng its procedure for the  
allotment of time for discussion of  the matters referred to in such address.  
11. Rights of Minister s as respects Legislative Assembly. —Every Minister  shall have the right to 
speak in , and other wise to take part in the p roceedings of, the Legislative  Assembly and to speak in, and 
otherwise to take part in the proceeding s of, any committee of the Legislative Assembly of which he may 
be named a member, but shall not by virtue of this section be entitled to vote.   
12. Oath or affirmation by members .—Every  member of the Legislative Assembly shall, before 
taking his seat, make and subscribe before the Lieutenant Governor, or some person appointed in that 
behalf by him, an oath or affirmation according to the form set out for the purpose in the Schedule.   6 
 13. Voting in Assembly, power of Assembly to act notwi thstanding vacancies and                  
quorum.—(1)   Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all questions at any sitting of the Legislative 
Assembly shall be determined by a majority of votes of the me mbers present and voting other than the 
Speaker or person acting as such.  
(2)   The Speaker or person acting as such shall not vote in the first instance, but shall have and 
exercise a casting vote in the case of an equality of votes.  
(3)  The Legislative Assembly shall have power to act notwithstanding any vacancy in the 
membership thereof, and any proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall be valid notwithstanding that 
it is discovered subsequently that some person who was not entitled so to do, sat or  voted or otherwise 
took part in the proceedings.  
(4)  The quorum to constitute a meeting of the Legislative Assembly shall be one -third of the total 
number of members of the Assembly.  
(5)  If at any time during a meeting of the Legislative Assembly there is no quorum, it shall be the 
duty of the Speaker, or person acting as such, either to adjourn the Assembly or to suspend the meeting 
until there is a quorum.   
14. Vacation of Seats .—(1) No person shall be a member both of   Parliament and of the Legislativ e 
Assembly and if a person is chosen a member both of Parliament and of such Assembly, then, at the 
expiration of such period as is specified in or under the Representation of the People Act,                            
1951  (43 of 1951)  and the rules made  by the President under clause  (2) of article 101 and clause  (2) of 
article 190, that person’s seat in Parliament shall become vacant , unless he has previously resigned his 
seat in the Legislative Assembly.  
(2)  If a membe r of the Legislative Assembly — 
(a)  becomes subject to any disqualification mentioned in section 15 or section 16 for 
membership of the Assembly , or 
(b)   resigns his seat by writing under his hand addressed to the Speaker and his resignation is 
accepted by the Speaker,  
his sea t shall ther eupon become vacant :  
Provided that in the case of any resignation referred to in clause ( b), if from the information received 
or otherwise and after making such inquiry as he thinks fit, the Speaker is satisfied that such resignation is 
not voluntary or g enuine, he shall not accept such resignation.  
(3)  If for a period of sixty days a member of the Legislative Assembly is without permission of the 
Assembly absent from all meetings thereof, the Assembly may declare his seat vacant:  
Provided  that in computi ng the said period of sixty days, no account shall be taken of any period 
during which the A ssembly is prorogued or is adjourned for more than four consecutive days.  
15. Disqualifications for membership .—(1)   A person shall be disqualified for being chose n as, and 
for being, a mem ber of the Legislative Assembly — 
(a)   if he holds any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government of any 
State or the Government of  any Union t erritory other than an office declared by law made by 
Parliament or by the Legislature of any State or by the Legislative Assembly of the Capital or of any 
other Union territo ry not to disqualify its holder ; or 
(b)   if he is for the time bein g disqualified for being chosen  as, and for being, a member of either  
House of  Parliament under the p rovisions of sub -clause ( b), sub -clause ( c) or s ub-clause ( d) of                  
clause (1)   of article 102 or of any law made in pursuance of that article.  
(2)   For the purposes of this section, a person shall not be deemed to hol d an office of profit under the 
Government of India or the Government of any State or the Gov ernment of any Union territory  by reason 
only that he  is a Minister either for the Union or for such State or Unio n territory.  7 
 (3)   If any question arises as to w hether a member of the Legislative Assembly has become 
disqualified for being such a member under the provisions of sub -section  (1), the question shall be 
referred for the decision of the President and his decision shall be final.  
(4)   Before giving any d ecision on any such question, the President shall obtain the opinion of the 
Election  Commission and shall act according to such opinion.  
16. Disqualification on ground of defection .—The provisions of the Tenth Schedule to the 
Constitution shall, subject to  the necessary modifications (including modifications for construing 
references therein to the Legislative Assembly of a State, article 188 , article 194 and article 212 as 
references, respectively, to the Legislative A ssembly, section 12, section 18  and se ction 37 of this Act) , 
apply to and in relation to the members of the Legislative Assembl y as they apply to and in relation to the 
members of the Legislative Assembly of a State, and accordingly :— 
(a)  the said Tenth Schedule as so modified shall be deemed  to form part of this Act; and  
(b)  a person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Legislative Assembly if he is so 
disqualified under the said Tenth Schedule as so modified.  
17. Penalty for sitting and voting before making oath or affirmation or  when not qualified or 
when disqualified .—If a person sits or votes as a member of the Legislative Assembly before he has 
complied with the requirements of section 12 or when he knows that he is not qualified or that he is 
disqualified for membership there of, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or votes 
to a penalty of five hundred rupees to be recovered as a debt due to the Union.  
18.  Powers, privileges, etc. , of members .—(1)   Subject to the provisions of this Act and to the rules 
and standing orders regulating the procedure of the Legislative Assembly, there shall be freedom of 
speech in the Legislative Assembly.  
(2)  No member of the Legislative Assembly shall be liable to any proceedings in any court in respect 
of anything said or any vote given by him in the Assembly or any committee thereof and no person shall 
be so liable in respect of the publication by or under the authority of such Assembly of any report, paper, 
votes or proceedings.  
(3) In other respects, the powers , privileges and immunities of the Legislative Assembly and of the 
members and the committees thereof shall be such as are for the time being enjoyed by the House of the 
People and its members and committees.  
(4) The provisions of sub -sections ( 1),  (2) and (3) shall apply in relation to persons who by virtue of 
this Act have the right to speak in, and otherwise to take part in the proceedings of, the Legislative 
Assembly or any committee thereof as they app ly in relation to members of that  Assembly.   
19. Salaries and allowances of members. —Members of the Legislative Assembly shall be entitled 
to receive such salaries and allowances as may from time to time be determined by the Legislative 
Assembly by law and until provision in that behalf is so made, such sal aries and allowances as the 
Lieutenant Governor may, with the approval of the President , by order determine.  
20. Exemption of property of the Union from taxation .—The property of the Union shall, save in 
so far as Parliament may by law otherwise provide, b e exempted from all taxes imposed by or under any 
law made by the Legislative Assembly or by or under  any other law in force in the Capital:  
Provided that nothin g in this section shall, until P arliament  by law otherwise provides, prevent any 
authority within the Capital from levying any tax on any property of the Union to which such property 
was immediately before the commencement of the Constitution liable or treated as liable, so long as that 
tax conti nues to be levied in the Capital.  
21. Restrictions on laws passed by Legislative Assembly with respect to certain                      
matters .—(1) The provisions of article 286, article 287 and article 288 shall apply in relation to any law 8 
 passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters referred to in those articles as they 
apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with respect to those matters.  
(2) The provisions of article 304 shall, with the necessary modif ications, apply in relation to any law 
passed by the Legislative Assembly with respect to any of the matters referred to in that article as they 
apply in relation to any law passed by the Legislature of a State with respect to those matters.  
22.  Special p rovisions as to financial Bills .—(1)  A Bill or amendment shall not be introduced into, 
or moved in , the Legislative Assembly except on the r ecommendation of the Lieutenant  Governor, if such 
Bill or amendment makes provision for any of the following matters, namely :— 
(a)    the imposition, abolition, remission, alteration or regulation of any tax ; 
(b)   the amendment of the law with respect to any financial obligations under taken or to be 
undertaken by the Government of the Capital;  
(c)    the appropriation of moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital;  
(d)   the declaring of any expenditure to be expenditure charged on the Consolidated F und of the 
Capital or the incr easing of the amount of any such expenditure;  
1[(e) the receipt of money on account of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital or the Public 
Account of the Capital or the custody or issue of such money or the audit of the a ccounts of the 
Capital :] 
Provided that no recommendation shall be required under th is sub -section for the moving of  an 
amendment making provision for the reduction or abolition of any tax.  
(2) A Bill or amendment shall not be deemed to make provision for any of the matters aforesaid by 
reason only that it provides for the imposition of fines or other pecuniary penalties, or for the demand or 
payment of fees for licences or fees for services rendered, or by reason that it provides for the imposition, 
abolition, remission, alteration or regul ation of any tax by any local authority or body for local purposes.  
(3) A Bill which, if enacted and brought into operation, would involve expenditure from the 
Consolidated Fund of the Capital shall not be passed by the Legislative Assembly unless the Lieu tenant 
Governor has recommended to that Assembly the consideration of the Bill.  
23.  Procedure as to lapsing of Bills. —(1)   A Bill pending in the Legislative Assembly shall not 
lapse by reason of the prorogation of the Assembly.  
(2)   A Bill which is pending in the Legisl ative Assembly shall lapse on a dissolution of the 
Assembly.  
24. Assent to Bills .—When a Bill has been passed by the Legislative Assembly, it shall be presented 
to the Lieutenant Governor and the Lieutenant Governor shall declare eithe r that he assents to the Bill or 
that he withholds assent therefrom or that he reserves the Bill for the  consideration of the President : 
Provided that the Lieutenant Governor may, as soon as possible after the presentation of the Bill to 
him for assent, re turn the Bill if it is not a Money Bill together with a message requesting that the 
Assembly will consider the Bill or any specified provisions thereof, and, in particular, will consider the 
desirability of introducing any such amendments as he may recomme nd in his message and, when a Bill 
is so returned, the Assembly will reconsider the Bill accordingly,   and if the Bill is passed again with or 
without amendment and presented to the Lieutenant Governor for assent, the Lieutenant Governor shall 
declare eith er that he assents to the Bill or that he reserves the Bill for the  consideration of the President:  
Provided further that the Lieutenant Governor shall not assent to, but shall reserve for the 
consideration of the President, any Bill which ,— 
(a) in the opi nion of the Lieutenant Governor   would, if it became law, so derogate from the 
powers of the High Court as to endanger the position which that Court is, by the Constitution, 
designed to fill; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2001, s. 6, for clause ( e) (w.e.f.10 -5-2006).  9 
 (b) the President may, by orde r, direct to be reserved for hi s consideration; or  
(c) relates to matters referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 7 or section 19 or section 34 or                  
sub-section ( 3) of section 43.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and section 25, a Bill shall be deemed to be  a Money 
Bill if it contains only provisions dealing with all or any of the matters specified in sub -section  (1) of 
section 22 or any matter incidental to any of those matters and, in either case, there is endorsed thereon 
the certificate of the Speaker of  the Legislative Assembly signed by him that it is a Money Bill.  
25. Bills reserved for consideration .—When a Bill is reserved by the Lieutenant Governor for the 
consideration of the President, the President shall declare either that he assents to the Bill  or that he 
withholds  assent therefrom : 
Provided that where the Bill is not a Money Bill, the President may direct the Lieutenant Governor to 
return the Bill to the Legislative Assembly together with such a message as is mentioned in the first 
proviso  to section 24 and, when a Bill  is so returned, the Assembly shall reconsider it accordingly within 
a period of six months from the date of receipt of such message and, if it is again passed by the Assembly 
with or without amendment, it shall be presented again to the President for his consideration.  
26.  Requirement s as to sanction, etc .—No Act of the Legislative Assembly, and no provision in 
any such Act, shall be invalid by reason only that some previous sanction or recommendation required by 
this Act was not given, if assent to that Act was given by the Lieutenant Governor, or, on being re served 
by the Lieutenant  Governor  for the c onsideration of the President, by the President.   
27.   Annual financial s tatement .—(1)  The Lieutenant Governor shall in respect of e very financial 
year cause to be  laid before the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, a 
statement of the estimated receipts and expenditure of the Capital for that year, in this Part referred to as 
the “annual financial statement” . 
(2) The estimates  of expenditure embodied in the annual financial sta tement shall show                
separately — 
(a)    the sums required to meet expenditure described by this Act a s expenditure charged upon 
the C onsolidated Fund of the Capital; and  
(b)   the sums required to meet other expenditure proposed to be made from  the Consolidated 
Fund of the Capital,  
and shall distinguish expenditure on revenue account from other expenditure.  
(3)  Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, the following 
expenditure shall be expenditure charged on t he Consolidated Fund of the Capital :— 
(a)    the emoluments and allowances of the Lieutenant Governor and other expenditure relating 
to his office as determined by the Presid ent by general or special order ; 
(b)   the charges payable in respect of loans adv anced to the Capital from the Consolidated Fund 
of India including interest, sinking fund charges and redemption charges, and other expenditure 
connected therewith;  
(c)    the salaries and allowances of the Speaker and the Deputy Speaker of the Legislative  
Assembly;  
(d)   expenditure in respect of  the salaries and allowances of Judges of the High Court of Delhi;  
  10 
 (e)    any sums required to satisfy any jud gment, decree or award of any court or arbitral tribunal;  
(f)    any other expenditure declared by the Constitution or by law made by Parliament or by the 
Legislative Assembly to be so charged.   
28. Procedure in Legislative Assembly with respect to estimates .—(1) So much of the estimates as 
relates to expenditure charged u pon the Consolidated Fund of the Capital shall not be submitted to the 
vote of the Legislative Assembly, but nothing in this sub -section shall be construed as preventing the 
discussion in the Legislative Assembly of any of those  estimates.   
(2) So, much of  the said estimates as relates to other expenditure shall be submitted in the form of 
demands for grants to the Legislative Assembly, and  the Legislative Assembly shall have power to assent, 
or to refuse to assent, to any demand, or to assent to any demand  subject to a reduction of the amount 
specified therein.  
(3) No demand for a grant shall be made except on the recommendation of the Lieutenant Governor.  
29. Appropriation Bills .—(1) As soon as may be after the grants under section 28 have been made 
by the  Legislative   Assembly, there shall be introduced a Bill to provide for the appropriation out of the 
Consolidated Fund of the Capital  of all moneys required to meet — 
(a)   the grants so made by the A ssembly,  and 
(b)   the expenditure charged on the Consolidated Fund of the Capital but not exceeding in any 
case the amount shown in the statement previously laid before the assembly.  
(2) No amendment shall be proposed to any such Bill in the Legislative Assembly which will hav e the 
effect of varying the amount or altering the destination of any grant so made or of varying the amount of 
any expenditu re charged on the Consolidated F und of the Capital and the decision of the person presiding 
as to whether a n amendment is inadmissi ble under this sub -section shall be final.  
(3)  Subject to the other provisions of this Act, no money shall be withdrawn from the Consolidated 
Fund of the Capital except under appropriation made by law passed in accordance with the provisions of 
this secti on. 
30. Supplementary, additional or excess grants .—(1) The Lieutenant Governor shall ,— 
(a) if the amount authoris ed by any law made in acc ordance with the provisions of s ection 29 to 
be expended for a particular service for the current financial year is found to be insufficient for the 
purposes of that year or when a need has arisen during the current financial year for supplementary or 
additional expenditure upon some new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement for 
that year , or 
(b) if any money has been spent on any service during a financial year in exce ss of the amount 
granted for that  service and for that year,  
cause to be laid before the Legislative Assembly, with the previous sanction of the President, another 
statement showing t he estimated amount of that expenditure or cause to be presented to the Legislative 
Assembly with such previous sanction a demand for such excess, as the case may be.  
(2)  The provisions of section s 27, 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to any such statement and 
expenditure or demand and als o to any law to be made authoris ing the appropriation of moneys out of the 
Consolidated Fund of the Capital to meet such expenditure or the grant in respect of such demand as they 
have effect in relation to the an nual financial statement and the expenditure mentioned therein or to a 
demand for a grant and the  law to be made for the authori sation of appropriation of moneys out of the 
Consolidated Fund of the Capital to meet such expenditure or grant.  
  11 
 31.  Vote s on account. —(1) Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the 
Legislative Assembly shall have power to make any grant in advance in respect of the estimated 
expenditure for a part of any financial year pending the completion of th e procedure prescribed in              
section 28 for the voting of such grant and the passing of the law in accordance with the provisions of                   
section 29 in relation to that expenditure and the Legislative Assem bly shall have power to auth orise by 
law the  withdrawal of moneys from the C onsolidated Fund of the Capital for the purposes for which the 
said grant is made.  
(2) The p rovisions of sections 28 and 29 shall have effect in relation to the making of any grant under 
sub-section ( 1) or to  any law to be made under that sub -section as they have effect in relation to the 
making of a grant with regard to any expenditure mentioned in the annual financial statement and the  law 
to be made for the authoris ation of appropriation of moneys, out of t he Consolidated Fund of the Capital 
to meet such expenditure.  
32. Authoris ation of expenditure pending its sa nction by Legislative Assembly. —
Notwithstanding anything in the foregoing provisions of this Part, the Lieutenant Governor may authori se 
such expen diture from the Consolidated Fund of the Capital as he deems necessary for a period of not 
more than six months beginning with the date of the constitution of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital, 
pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative  Assembly.  
33. Rules of proced ure.—(1)   The Legislative Assembly may make rules for regulating, subject to 
the provisions of this Act, its procedure and the conduct of its business:  
Provided that the Lieutenant Governor shall, after consultation with the Speaker of the Legislative 
Assembly and with the approva l of the President, make rules — 
(a)    for securing the timely completion of financial business;  
(b)   for regulating the procedure of, and the conduct of business in, the Legislative   Assembly in 
relation to any financial matter or to any Bill for the appropriation of moneys out  of the Consolidated 
Fund of  the Capital;  
(c)    for prohibiting the discussion of, or the asking of questions on, any matter which affects the 
discharge of the functions of t he Lieutenant Governor in so far as he is required by or under this Act 
or any law to act in his discretion.  
(2)   Until rules are made under sub -section  (1), the rules of procedure and standing orders with 
respect to the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttar Pradesh in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall have effect in relation to the Legislative Assembly subject to such 
modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Lieutenant Governor.  
34.  Official language or l anguages of the Capital and languages or languages to b e used in 
Legislative Assembly. —(1) The Legislative Assembly may by law adopt any one or more of the 
languages in use in the Capital or    Hindi as the official language or languages to be used for all or any of 
the off icial purposes of the Capital : 
Provided that the President may by order direct — 
(i)   that the official language of the Union shall be adopted for such of the official purposes of the 
Capital a s may be specified in the order ;  
(ii) that any other language shall also be adopted throughout the Capital or such part thereof for 
such of the official purposes of the Capital as may be specified in the order, if the President is 
satisfied that a substantial proportion of the population of the Cap ital desires the use of that other 
language for all or any of such purposes.  12 
 (2)   The b usiness in the Legislative Assembly shall be transacted in the official language or 
languages of the Ca pital or in Hindi or in English : 
Provided that the Speaker of the  Legislative Assembly or person acting as such, as the case may be, 
may permit any member who cannot adequately express himself in any of the languages aforesaid to 
address th e Assembly in his mother -tongue.  
 35.   Language t o be used for Bills, Acts, etc. —Notwithstanding anything contained in section 34, 
until Parliament by law otherwise provi des, the authoritative texts — 
(a)    of all Bills to be introduced or amendments thereto to be moved in the Legislative 
Assembly;  
(b)  of all Acts passed by the Legis lative Assembly; and  
(c)    of all orders, rules, regulations and bye -laws issued under any law made by the Legislative 
Assembly,  
shall be in the English l anguage :  
Provided that where the Legislative Assembly has prescribed any language other than the English 
language for use in Bills introduced in, or Acts passed by, the Legislative Assembly or in any order, rule, 
regulation or bye -law issued under any law made by the Legislative Assembly, a translation of the same 
in the English language published und er the authority , of the Lieutenant Governor in the Official Gazette 
shall be deemed to be the authoritati ve text thereof in the English l anguage.  
36.  Restriction on discussi on in the Legislative Assembly. —No discussion shall take place in the 
Legislative  Assembly with  respect to the conduct of any J udge of t he Su preme Court or of a High C ourt 
in the discharge of his duties.  
37.  Courts not to inquire into proce edings of Legislative Assembly. —(1) The validity of any 
proceedings in the Legislative Assembly shall not be called in question on the ground of any alleged 
irregularity of procedure.  
(2)  No officer or member of the Legislative Assembly in whom powers are vested by or under this 
Act for regulating procedure or the conduct of business,  or for maintai ning order in  the Legislative 
Assembly shall be subject to the jurisdiction of any court in respect of the exercise by him of those 
powers.   
PART III 
DELIMITATION OF CONSTITUENCIES  
38.   Election Commi ssion to delimit constituencies .—(1) The Election Commission shall, in the 
manner herein provided, distribute the seats assigned to the Legislative Ass embly under section 3 to 
single -member territorial constituencies and delimit them having regard to the  following provisions, 
namely:— 
(a)      all consti tuencies shall, as fa r as practicable, be delimited in such manner that the ratio 
between the population of each of such constituencies and the total population of the Capital is the 
same; and  
(b)     constituencies  in which seats are reserved for the Sched uled Castes shall, as far as 
practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their population to the total population is 
comparatively large.  
(2)   The Election Commission shall — 
(a)   publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies in the Official Gazette and also in 
such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting objections and 
suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will be 
further considered by it;  13 
 (b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified;  
(c)  after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before 
the date so specified, de termine by one or more orders  the delimitation of constituencies and cause 
such order or  orders to be published in the O fficial Gazette; and upon such publication, the order or 
orders shall have the full force  of law and shall not be called in question in any court.  
39. Power  of Election Commission to maintain delimitation ord ers up -to-date.—The Election 
Commission may, from time to time, by notific ation in the Official Gazette ,— 
(a)   correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 38 or any error arising therein 
from inadvertent slip or omission; and  
(b)  where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any such order are or is 
altered, make such amendments as appear to i t to be necessary or expedient for bringing such order 
up-to-date.  
40.  Elections to  the Legis lative Assembly. —(1)   For the purpose of constituting the Legislative 
Assembly, a general election will be held as soon as may be, after the delimitation of   all the assembly 
constituencies under section 38.  
(2)   For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Lieutenant Governor shall, by one or more notifications 
published in the Official Gazette, call upon all the said assembly constituencies to elect members in 
accordance with the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951  (43 of 1951) , and of the 
rules and orders made or issued there under as applicable under sub -section ( 3). 
(3)   The Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) , the Representation of the People               
Act, 1951  (43 of 1951) ,  the rules and orders made or issued under the said Acts and all   other laws for the 
time being in force relating to elections shall apply with necessary modifications (including modifi cations 
for construing references therein to a   State , State  Government and Governor as including references to 
the Capital, Government of the Capital and Lieutenant Governor, respectively)  to, and in relation to, the 
general election referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
PART IV 
CERTAIN PROVISIONS RELATING TO LIEUTENANT  GOVERNOR AND MINISTERS  
 41.  Matters in which Lieutenant Governor to act in his discretion .—(1)   The Lieutenant 
Governor shall act in his discretion in a matter — 
(i)  which falls outside the purview of the powers conferred on the Legislative Assembly but in 
respect of which powers or functions are entrusted or delegated to him by the President ; or 
(ii) in which he is required by or under any law to act in his discretion  or to exercise any judicial 
or quasi -judicial functions.  
(2)   If any question arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects w hich the 
Lieutenant Governor is by or under any law required to act in his discretion, the decision of the 
Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.  
(3)   If any question  arises as to whether any matter is or is not a matter as respects w hich the 
Lieutenant Governor is required by any law to exercise any judicial or quasi -judicial functions, the 
decision of the  Lieutenant Governor thereon shall be final.  
42.   Advice by Ministers. —The question whether any, and if so what, advice was tendered by 
Ministers to the Lieutenant Governor shall not be inquired into in any court.  14 
 43. Other provisions as to Ministers .—(1) Before a Minister  enters upon his office, the Lieutenant 
Governor shall administer to him the oaths of office and of secrecy according to the forms set out for the 
purpose in the Schedule.  
(2) A Minister who, for any period of six consecutive months, is not a mem ber of the Legislative 
Assembly  shall, at the expiration of that period, cease to be a Minister.  
(3) The salaries and allowances of Ministers shall be such as the Leg islative Assembly may from time 
to time by law determine  and until the Legislativ e Assembly so determine s, shall be determined by the 
Lieutenant Governor with the approval of the President.  
44. Conduct of business .—(1) The President shall make rules — 
(a) for the allocation of business to the Ministers in so far as it is business with r espect to which 
the Lieutenant Governor is required to  act on the aid and advice of his Council of Ministers; and  
(b) for the more convenient transaction of busin ess with the M inisters, including the procedure to 
be adopted in the case of a difference of o pinion between the Lieutenant Governor and the Council of 
Ministers or a Minister.  
(2)  Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all executive action of  the Lieutenant Governor whether 
taken on the advi ce of his Ministers or otherwise shall be expressed to be taken in the name of the 
Lieutenant Governor.  
(3)  Orders and other instruments made and executed in the name of the Lieutenant Governor shall be 
authenticated in such manner as may be specified in rules to be made by the Lieutenant Governor and the 
validity of an order or instrument w hich is so authenticated shall not be called in question on the ground 
that it is not an order or instrument made or executed by the Lieutenant Governor.  
45. Duties of Chief Minister as respects the furnishing of informa tion to the Lieutenant 
Governor, etc. —It shall be the  duty of the Chief Minister — 
 (a)  to communicate to the Lieutenant Governor all decisions of the Council of Ministers relating 
to the administration of the affairs of the Capital and proposals for legislation;  
(b) to furnish such information relating to the administration of the affairs of t he Capital and 
proposals for legislation as Lieutenant Governor may call for ; and 
(c) if the Lieutenant Governor so requires, to submit for the consideration of the Council of 
Ministers any matter on which a decision has been taken by a Minister but which has not been 
considered by the Council.   
PART V 
MISCELLANEOUS AND TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS  
46.  Consolidated  Fund of the Capital. —(1)  As from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all reve nues received in the Capital by the 
Government of India or the Lieutenant Governor in relation to any matter with respect to which the 
Legislative Assembly has power to make laws, and all grants made and 1[all loan s advance d to the Capital 
from the Consolidate d  Fund of  India and all loans  raised by the Government of India or by the 
Lieutena nt Governor upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital]  and all moneys received 
by the Capital in repayment of loans shall form one Consoli dated F und to be entitled “the C onsolidated 
Fund of the National Capit al Territory of Delhi”  (referred to in this Act as the Consolidated Fund of the 
Capital).  
(2)  No moneys out of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital shall be appropriated except in 
accordance w ith and for the purposes and in the manner provided in this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 o f 2001, s. 7, for “all loans advanced to the Capital from the Consolidated Fund of India” (w.e.f. 10 -5-2006).  15 
 (3)  The c ustody of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital, the p ayment of moneys into such Fund , the 
withdrawal of money s there from and all other matters connected with or ancillary to those m atters shall 
be regulated by rules made by the Lieutenant Governor with the approval of the President.  
1[46A. Public A ccount of the Capital and money s credited to it .—(1) As from such date as the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, all other public 
moneys received by or on behalf of the Lieutenant Governor shall be credited to a public account entitled 
“the Public Accou nt of the Capital ”. 
(2) The custody of public moneys, other than those credited to the Consolidated Fund of the Capital 
or the Contingency Fund of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, received by or on behalf of the 
Lieutenant Governor, their payment into the Public Account of the Capital and the withdrawal of moneys 
from such account and all other matters connected with or ancillary to matters aforesaid shall be regulated 
by rules made by the Lieutenant Governor with  the approval of the President. ] 
47. Contingency Fund of  the Capital. —(1) There shall be established a Contingency Fund in the 
natur e of an imprest to be entitled “ the Contingency Fund  of the National Capital Territory of Delhi” into 
which shall be paid from and out of the Consolidated Fund  of the Capital such sums as may, fro m time to 
time, be determined by law made by the Legislative Assembly; and the said F und shall be he ld by the 
Lieutenant Governor to enable advances to be made by him out of such Fund.  
(2) No advance s shall be made out of the Contingency Fund referred to in sub -section ( 1) except for 
the purposes of meeting unforeseen expenditure  pending authoris ation of such expenditure by the 
Legislative Assembly under appropriations made by law.  
(3)  The Lieutenant Governor may make r ules regulating all matters connected with or ancillary to the 
custody of, the payment of moneys into, and the withdrawal of moneys from , the aforesaid Contingency 
Fund.  
2[47A. Borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital .—(1) The executive 
power of the Union extends to borrowing upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of the Capital, 
within such limits, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by Parliament by law and to the giving of 
guarantee within such limits, if any, as ma y be so fixed:  
Provided that the powers exercisable by the Government of India under this sub -section shall also be 
exercisable by the Lieutenant Governor subject to such conditions, if any, as the Government of India 
may think fit to impose.  
(2) Any sums required for the purpose of invoking a guarantee shall be charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of the Capital.  
47B. Form of accounts of the Capital. —The accounts of the Capital shall be kept in such form as 
the Lieutenant Governor may, after obtaining advice o f the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
with the approval of the President, prescribe by rules.]  
48.  Audit r eports .—The reports of  the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India relating to the 
accounts of the Capital for any period subsequent to the date referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 46 
shall be submitted to the Lieutenant Governor who shall cause them to be laid before the Le gislative 
Assembly.  
49. Relation of Lieutenant Governor and his Ministers to President .—Notwithstanding anything 
in this Act, the Lieutenant Governor and his Council of Ministers shall be under the general control of, 
and comply with such particular direc tions, if any, as may from time to time be given by , the President.  
50. Period of order made under article 239A B and approval thereof by Parliament .—(1)   Every 
order made by the President under article 239 AB shall expire at th e end of one year from the date of issue 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2001, s. 8 (w.e.f. 10 -5-2006).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -5-2006).  16 
 of the order and the provisions of clauses ( 2) and ( 3) of article 356 shall , so far as may be , apply to  such 
order as they apply to  a Proclamation issued un der clause ( 1) of a rticle 356.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything  contained in sub -section ( 1), the President may extend the duration of 
the aforesaid order for a further period not exceeding two years from the date of expiry of the order under 
sub-section ( 1) subject to the condition that every extension of the said or der for any period beyond the 
expiration of one year shall be approved by resolutions of both Houses of Parliament.  
51. Authoris ation of expenditure by President .—Where the Legislative Assembly is dissolved or 
its functioning as such Assembly remai ns suspe nded, on account of an  order made by the President under 
article 239 AB, it shall be compete nt for the President to authoris e when the House of the People i s not in 
session expenditure fro m the Con solidated Fund of the Capital p ending the sanction of such e xpenditure 
by Parliament.  
52. Contracts and s uits.—For the removal of doub ts it is hereby declared that — 
 (a)  all contracts in connection with the administration of the Capital are contracts made in the 
exercise of the executive power of the Union; and  
(b)  all suits and proceedings in connection with the administration of the Capital shall be 
instituted by or against the Government of India.   
53. Power of  President to remove difficulties .—(1)  If any difficulty arises in relation to the 
transition from th e provisions of any law repealed by this Act or in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act and in particular in relation to the constitution of the Legislative Assembly, the President may by 
order do anything not inconsistent with the provisions of the  Constitution or of this Act which appear to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the pur pose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order under this sub -section  shall be made after the expiry o f the three years from 
the date  of constitution of the f irst Legislative Assembly.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
54. Laying of Rules before Legislative Assembly .—Every rule made by the Lieutenant Governor 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as it is made, before the Legislative Assembly.  
55.  [Amendment of  section  27A of Act 43 of 1950. ]—Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act , 
2001 (30  of 2001), s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f.  3-9-2001).  
56.  Repeal of Act 19 of 1966 .—The Delhi Administration Act, 1966 is hereby repealed.   17 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See Sections 4, 12 and 43)  
FORMS OF OATHS OR AFFIRMATIONS  
I 
 Form of oath or affirmation to be made by a candidate for elect ion to the Legislative Assembly: — 
  “I, A.  B., having been nominated as a candidate to fill seat in the Legislative Assembly            
                           
                that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India 
as by  law established and that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India .”  
II 
 Form of oath or affirmation to  be made by a member  of the Legislative Assembly: — 
  “I, A. B ., having been elected a member of the Legislative Assembly            
                           
                that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as 
by law established , that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of India and that I will  
faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am a bout to enter. ”  
III 
 Form of oath  of office for a member of  the Council  of Ministers :— 
 “I, A.  B.,                             
                  that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the 
Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and integrity of 
India, that I will faithfully and conscientiously discharge my duties as a Minister, and that I will 
do right to all manner of people in accordance with  the Constitution and the law without fear or  
favour, affection or ill-will” . 
IV 
 Form of oath of secrecy for a member of the Council of Mini sters:— 
 “I, A.  B.,                            
                that I will not directly  or indirectly communicate or 
reveal to any person or persons any matter which shall be brought under my consideration or shall 
become known to me as a Minister except as may be required for the due discharge of my duties 
as such Minister ”.  
--------------------------The Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE INDO -TIBETAN BORDER POLICE FORCE ACT, 1992  
_______  
ARRA NGENMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Persons subject to this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF THE FORCE AND CONDITIONS OR SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF THE FORCE  
4. Constitution of the Force.  
5. Control, direction , etc.  
6. Enrolment.  
7. Liability for service outside India.  
8. Resignation and withdrawal from the post.  
9. Tenure of service under the Act.  
10. Termination of service  by Central Government.  
11. Dismissal, removal or reduction by the Director -General and by other officers.  
12. Certificate of termination of service.  
13. Restrictions respecting right to form association , freedom of speech, etc.  
14. Remedy of aggrieved persons other than officers.  
15. Remedy of aggrieved officers.  
 
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES  
16. Offences in relation to the enemy or terrorist and punishable with death.  
17. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death.  
18. Offences punishable more severely on active duty than a t other times.  
19. Mutiny.  
20. Desertion and aiding desertion.  
21. Absence without leave.  
22. Striking or threatening superior officers.  
23. Disobedience to superior officer.  
24. Insubordination an d obstruction . 
25. False answers on enrolment.  
26. Unbecoming conduct.  
27. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct.  
28. Ill-treating a subordinate.  
29. Intoxication.  
30. Permitting escape of person in custody.  
31. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement.  
32. Escape from custody.  
33. Offences in respect of property.  
34. Extortion and exaction.  
35. Making away with equipment.  
36. Injury to property.  2 
 SECTIONS  
37. False accusations.  
38. Falsifying official documents and false declarations.  
39. Signing in blank and failure to report.  
40. Offences relating to Force Court.  
41. False evidence.  
42. Unlawful detention of pay.  
43. Violation of good order an d discipline.  
44. Miscellaneous offences.  
45. Attempt.  
46. Abetment of offences that have been committed.  
47. Abetment of offences  punishable with death and not C ommitte e. 
48. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed.  
49. Civil offences.  
50. Civil offences not triable by a Force Court.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENTS  
51. Punishment awardable by Force  Courts.  
52. Alternative punishments awardable by Force Courts.  
53. Combination of punishment s. 
54. Retention in the force of a person convicted on active duty.  
55. Punishments otherwise than by Force Courts.  
56. Minor punishments.  
57. Limit of punishments under section 56.  
58. Punishment of persons of or below the rank of Commandant by Inspectors -General and others.  
59. Review of proceedings.  
60. Collective fines.  
CHAPTER V  
DEDUCTIONS FROM PAY AND ALLOWANCES  
61. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons subject to this Act.  
62. Pay and allowances  during  trial. 
63. Limit of certain deductions.  
64. Deduction from public money due to a person.  
65. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct.  
66. Remission of deduction s. 
67. Provision for dependants of prisoner of war from his remitted deduction s and pay and allowances.  
68. Period during which a person is dedmed to be a prisoner of war.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
69. Custody of offenders.  
70. Duty of commanding office r in regard to detention.  
71. Interval between committal and trial.  
72. Arrest by civil authorities.  
73. Capture of deserters.  
74. Inquiry into absence without leave.  
75. Force Police Officers.  
  3 
 CHAPTER VII  
FORCE  COURTS  
SECTIONS  
76. Kinds of Force Courts.  
77. Power to convene a General Force Court.  
78. Power to convene a Petty Force Court.  
79. Contents of warrants issued under sections 77 and 78.  
80. Composition of a General Force Court.  
81. Composition of a Petty Force Court.  
82. Summary Force Court.  
83. Dissolution of a Force Court.  
84. Power  of a General Force Court.  
85. Power of a Petty Force Court.  
86. Power of a Summary Force Court.  
87. Prohibition of second trial.  
88. Period of limitation for trial.  
89. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act.  
90. Application of Act during term of sentence.  
91. Place of tri al. 
92. Choice between criminal court and Force Court.  
93. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
PROCEDURE OF FORCE  COURTS  
94. Presiding officer.  
95. Judge Attorneys.  
96. Challenge.  
97. Oaths of member, Judge Attorney and witness.  
98. Voting by member s. 
99. General rule as to evidence.  
100. Judicial notice.  
101. Summoning witness es. 
102. Documents exempted from production.  
103. Commissions for examination of witness es. 
104. Examination of a witness on commission.  
105. Conviction for offences not charged.  
106. Presumption as to signatur es. 
107. Enrolment paper.  
108. Presumption as to certain documents.  
109. Reference by accused to Government officer.  
110. Evidence of previous convictions and general character.  
111. Lunacy of accused.  
112. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused for tri al. 
113. Transmission to Centra l Government of orders under section 112.  
114. Release of lunatic accused.  
115. Delivery of lunatic accused to relative s. 
116. Order for custody an d disposal of property pending trial. 
117. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed.  
118. Powers of Force C ourt in relation to proceedings under this Act.  
119. Tender of pardon to accomplie s. 
120. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon.  4 
 CHAPTER IX  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
SECTIONS  
121. Finding and sentence not valid unless confirmed.  
122. Power to confirm finding  and sentence of General Force Court.  
123. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Force Court.  
124. Limitation of powers of confirming authority.  
125. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences.  
126. Confirming of findings and sentences on b oard a ship.  
127. Revision of finding or sentence . 
128. Finding and sentence of a Summary Force Court.  
129. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Force Court.  
130. Alteration of finding or sentence in certain cases.  
131. Remedy against order, finding or sentence of Force Court.  
132. Annulment of proceedings . 
CHAPTER X  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCE S, PARDONS, REMISSION S, ETC.  
133. Form of sentence of death.  
134. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment.  
135. Execution of sentence of imprisonment.  
136. Temporary custody of offender.  
137. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases.  
138. Conveyance  of prisoner from place to place.  
139. Communication of certain orders to prison officers.  
140. Execution of sentence of fine.  
141. Informality or error in the order or warrant.  
142. Pardon and remission.  
143. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole or remission.  
144. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment.  
145. Orders pending suspension.  
146. Release on suspension.  
147. Computation of period of suspension.  
148. Order after suspension.  
149. Reconsideration of case after suspension.  
150. Fresh sentence after su spension.  
151. Scope of power of suspension.  
152. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
153. Rank structure.  
154. Power s and duties conferable and impos able on members of the Force.  
155. Protection for acts of members of the Force.  
156. Power to make  rules.  
157. Provisions as to exi sting Indo -Tibetan Border Police Force.  
 
 5 
 THE INDO -TIBETAN BORDER POLICE FORCE ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 35 OF 1992  
               [1st September,  1992 .]   
An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for ensuring 
the security of the borders of India a nd for matters connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Indo -Tibetan Border Police 
Force  Act, 1992.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notific ation, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “active duty” , in relation to a person subject to this Act, means any duty as a member of the 
Force during the period in which such person is attached to, or form s part of, a unit of the Force — 
(i) which is engaged in operations against an enemy, or  
(ii) which  is operating at a picket or engaged on patrol or other guard d uty along the borders 
of India,  
and includes duty by such person during any period declared by the Central Government by order as a 
period of active duty with reference to any area in which any  person or class of persons subject to this Act 
may be serving;  
(b) “battalion”  means a unit of the Force constituted as a batta lion by the Central Government;  
(c) “civil offence”  means an offence which is triable by a criminal court;  
(d) “civil prison”  means any jail or place used for the detention of any criminal prisoner under the 
Prisons Act, 1894 (9 of 1894), or under any other law for the time being in force;  
(e) “commanding officer” , used in relation to a person subject to this Act, means an officer for the 
time being in command of  the unit or any separate portion of the Force to which such  person belongs 
or is attached;  
(f) “criminal court”  means a court of ordinary criminal justice  in an y part of India and includes a 
Court of a special Judge appointed under the Criminal Law Am endment Act, 1952 (46 of 1952);  
(g) “Deputy Inspector -General” and “ Addi tional Deputy Inspector -General”  mean respectively a 
Deputy Inspector -General and an Ad ditional Deputy Inspector -General of the Force appointed under 
section 5;  
(h) “Director -General” and “Additional Director -General”  mean respectively the                
Director -General and an Additional Director -General of the Force appointed under section  5; 
(i)  “enemy”  includes all armed mutineers, armed rebels, armed rioters, pirates and any person in 
arms against whom it is the duty of any person subj ect to this Act to take action;  
(j) “enrolled person”  means an under -officer or other person enrolled u nder this Act;  
(k) “Force”  means the In do-Tibetan Border Police Force;  
(l) “Force Court”  means a C ourt referred to in section 76;  
(m) “Force custody”  means the arrest or confinement of a member of the Force according t o 
rules;  
(n) “Inspector -General”  means the Inspector -General of the F orce appointed under section 5;  
                                                           
1. 30th May, 1994, vide notification No. S.O. 414(E), dated 28th May, 1994, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,                  
sec. 3( ii). 
 6 
 (o) “Judge Attorney -General”, “Additional Judge Attorney -General”, “ Deputy Judge               
Attorney -General” and “ Judge Attorney”  mean respectively the Judge Attorney -General, an 
Addi tional Judge Attorney -General, a Deputy Judge Attorney -General and a Judge Attorney of the 
Force appointed in the appropriate rank by the Central Government;  
(p) “member of the Force”  means an officer , a subordinate officer, an under -officer or other 
enrol led person;  
(q) “notif ication”  means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(r) “offence”  means any act or omission punishable under this Act and include s a civil offence;  
(s) “officer”  means a person appointed or in pay as an officer of the Force, but does not include a 
subordina te officer or an under -officer;  
(t) “prescribed”  means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(u) “rule”  means a rule made under this Act;  
(v) “subordinate of ficer”  means a person appointed or in pay as a Subedar Major, a Subedar or a 
Sub-Inspector of the Force;  
(w) “superior officer” , when used in relation to a per son subject to this Act, means — 
(i) any  member of the Force to whose command such person is for the time being subjec t in 
accordance with the rules;  
(ii) any officer of a higher rank or class or of a higher grade in the same class,  
and includes, when such person is not an officer, a s ubordinat e officer or an under -officer of  a higher 
rank, class or grade;  
(x) “under -officer”  means a Head Constable, a Naik or a Lance Naik of t he Force;  
(y) “unit”  includes— 
(a) any body of officers and other members of the Force for which a separate a uthorised 
establishment exists;  
(b) any separate body of persons subject to this Act employed on any service and not attached 
to a unit as aforesa id; 
(c) any other separate body of persons composed wholly or partly of persons subject to this 
Act and specified as a unit by the Central Government;  
(z) all words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860), the Army Act, 1950 (4 5 of 1950) or the National Security Guard Act,                 
1986 (47 of 1986), shall have  the meanings respectively assigned to t hem in that Code or those Acts.  
(2) In this Act, references to any law not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be 
construed as references to the correspond ing law in force in that State.  
3. Persons subje ct to this Act. —(1) The following persons appointed (whether on deputation or in 
any other manner) in the Force shall be subject to this Act,  wherever they may be, namely: — 
(a) officer s and subordinate officers; and  
(b) under -officers and other p ersons enrolled under this Act.  
(2) Every person subject to this Act shall remain so subject until repatriated, retired, released, 
discharged, removed or dismissed from the Force in accordance with the provis ions of this Act and the 
rules.  
  7 
 CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTI ON OF THE FORCE AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF THE MEMBERS OF  THE FORCE  
4. Constitution of the Force .—(1) There shall be an armed force of the Union called the                                 
Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force for ensuring the security of the borders of India and performing such 
other duties as may be entrusted t o it by the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Force shall be constituted in such manner as may be 
prescribed and the conditions of service of the member s of the Force shall be such as may be prescribed.  
5. Control, direction, etc .—(1) The general superintendence, direction and control of the Force shall 
vest in, and be exercised by, the Central Government and subject thereto, and to the provisions of this  Act 
and the rules, the command and supervision of the Force shall vest in an officer to be appointed by the 
Central Government as the  Director -General of the Force.  
(2) The Director -General shall, in the discharge of his duties under this Act, be assisted  by such 
number of Additional Directors -General, Inspectors -General, Deputy Inspectors -General, Additional 
Deputy Inspectors -General, Commandants and other officers as may be appointed by the Ce ntral 
Government.  
6. Enrolment. —The persons to be enrolled to  the Force, the mode of enrolment, and the procedure 
for enrolment shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
7. Liability for service outside India .—Every member of the Force shall be liable to serve in any 
part of In dia as well as outside India.  
8. Resignation  and withdrawal from the pos t.—No member of t he Force shall be at liberty, — 
(a) to resign his appointment during  the term of his engagement; or  
(b) to withdraw himself from all or any o f the duties of his appointment,   
except  with the previous permission in writi ng of the prescribed authority.  
9. Tenure of service under the Act .—Every person subject to this Act shall hold office during  the 
pleasure of the President.  
10. Termination of service by Central Government. —Subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules, the Central Government may dismiss or remove from the service any p erson subject to this Act.  
11. Dismissal, removal or reduction by the Director -General and by other officers .—(1) The 
Director -General, any Additional Director -General or Inspector -General may dismiss or remove from the 
service or reduce to a lower grade or rank or ranks any person subject to this Act other than an officer.  
(2) An officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy Inspector -Gener al or any prescribed officer 
may dismiss or remove from the service any person under his command other than an officer or a 
subordinate officer of such rank  or ranks as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any such officer as is mentioned in sub -section ( 2) may reduce to a lower grade or rank or ranks 
any person under his command except an of ficer or a subordinate officer.  
(4) The exercise of any power under this section shall be subject to the provisions of this Act and the 
rules.  
12. Certificate of termination of serv ice.—A subordinate officer, or an under -officer or other 
enrolled person who is retired, discharged, released, removed or dismissed from the service shall be 
furnished by the officer, to whose command he is subject, with a certificate in Hindi or English l anguage 
setting forth — 
(a) the aut hority terminating his service;  
(b) the cause for such termination; and  
(c) the full peri od of his service in the Force.  8 
 13. Restrictions respecting right to form association, freedom of speech, etc. —(1) No person 
subject to this Act shall, without the previous sanction in writing of the Central Government or of the 
prescribed authority, — 
(a) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any trade union, labour union, political 
association or with any class of trade uni ons, labour unions or political associations; or  
(b) be a member of, or be associated in any way with, any society, institution, association or 
organisation that is not recognised as part of the Force or is not of a purely social, recre ational or 
religiou s nature; or  
(c) communicate with the press or publish or cause to be published any book, letter or other 
document except where such communication or publication is in the bona fide discharge of his duties 
or is of a purely literary, artistic or scientific  characte r or is of a prescribed nature.  
Explanation. —If any question arises as to whether any society, institution, association or organisation 
is of a purely social, recreational or religious nature under clause ( b) of this sub -section, the decision of 
the Central Gov ernment thereon shall be final.  
(2) No person subject to this Act shall participate in, or address, any meeting or take part in any 
demonstration organised by any  body of persons for any political purposes or for such other purposes as 
may be  prescribed.  
14. Remedy of aggrieved persons other than officers. —(1) Any person subject to this Act other 
than an officer who deems himself wronged by any superior or other officer may complain to the officer 
under whose command he is serving.  
(2) When t he officer complained against is the officer to whom any complaint should, under                   
sub-section ( 1), be preferred, the aggrieved person may complain to such officer ’s next superior officer.  
(3) Every officer receiving any such complaint sha ll make as complete an investigation into it as may 
be possible for giving full redress to the complainant, or when necessary, refer the com plaint to a superior 
authority.  
(4) The Director -General may revise any decision made under any of the foregoing sub-sections, but, 
subject thereto, such decision shall be final.  
15. Remedy of aggrieved officers. —Any officer who deems himself wronged by his commanding 
officer or any other superior officer and who, on due application made to his commanding officer or such 
other superior officer, does not receive the redress to which he considers himself entitled, may complain 
to the Director -General or the Central Gov ernment through proper channel.  
CHAPTER III  
OFFENCES  
16. Offences in relation to the enemy or terrorist  and punishable with death. —Any person 
subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) shamefully abandons or delivers up any post, place or guard, committed to his charge or 
which it is his duty to defend; or  
(b) intent ionally uses any means to compel or induce any person subject to this Act or to any 
other law relating to military, naval, air force or any other armed force of the Union to abstain from 
acting against the enemy or to discourage such person from acting aga inst the enemy; or  
(c) in the presence of the enemy o r terrorist, shamefully casts away his arms, ammunition, tools 
or equipment or misbehaves in such manner as to show cowardice; or  
(d) treacherously  holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, the enemy, 
terrorist or any perso n in arms against the Union; or  
(e) directly or indirectly assists the enemy or terrorist with money, arms ammunition, stores or 
supplies or in any other manner w hatsoever; or  9 
 (f) in time of active operation against the enemy or terrorist, intentionally occasions a false alarm 
in action, camp, quarters or spreads or causes to be spread reports calculated to create alarm or 
despondency; or  
(g) in time of action leav es his commanding officer or other superior officer or his post, guard, 
picket, patrol or party without being regularly relieved or without leave; or  
(h) having been captured by the enemy or made a prisoner of war, voluntarily se rves with or aids 
the enem y; or 
(i) knowingly harbours or protects an enemy, not being a prisoner; or  
(j) being a sentry in time of active operation against the enemy or alarm, sleeps upon  his post or is 
intoxicated; or  
(k) knowingly does any act calculated to imperil the success of the Force or the military, naval or 
air force of India or any forces co -operating therewith or any part of such forces,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer death or such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
17. Offences in relation to the enemy and not punishable with death .—Any person subject to this 
Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is taken prisoner or captured by the enemy, by want of due precaution or through 
disobedience of orders, or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken prisoner or so captured fails to 
rejoin his  service when able to do so; or  
(b) without due authority holds correspondence with, or communicates intelligence to, the enemy 
or any person in league with the enem y or having come by the knowledge of any such 
correspondence or communication, wilfully omits to discover it immediately to his commanding 
officer or other superior officer,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term  which may extend to 
fourteen years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
18. Offences punishable more severely on active duty than at other times .—Any person subject to 
this Act who commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) forces a safeguard, or forces or uses  criminal force to a sentry; or  
(b) breaks into any house or other  place in search of plunder; or  
(c) being a sentry sleeps upon h is post, or is intoxicated; or  
(d) without orders from his superior officer leaves his guard, picket, patrol or post; or  
(e) intentionally or through neglect occasions a false alarm in camp or quarters, or spreads or 
causes to be spread reports calculated to create unnec essary alarm or despondency; or  
(f) makes known the parole, watchward or  countersign to any person not entitled to receive it; or 
knowingly gives a parole, watchward or a countersign d ifferent from what he received,  
shall, on conviction by a  Force Court, — 
(i) if he commits any such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment a s is in this Act mentioned; and  
(ii) if he commits any such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven ye ars or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
19. Mutiny .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the foll owing offences, that is to 
say,— 
(a) begins, incites, causes or conspires with any other person to cause any mutiny in the Force or 
in the military, naval or airforce of India or any fo rces co -operating therewith; or  
(b) joins in any such mutiny; or  10 
 (c) being present at any such mutiny, does not use his utmost ende avours to suppress the same; or  
(d) knowing or having reason to belie ve in the existence of any such mutiny, or of any intent ion 
to mutiny or of any such conspiracy, does not, without delay, give information thereof to his 
commanding office r or other superior officer; or  
(e) endeavours  to seduce any person in the Force or in the military, naval or air force of India or 
any forces co -operating therewith from his d uty or allegiance to the Union,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer death or such  less punishment as is  in this Act 
mentioned.  
20. Desertion and aiding desertion. —(1) Any person subject to this Act who deserts or attempts to 
desert the service shall, on conviction by a Force Court, — 
(a) if he commits the offence when on active duty or when under orders for  active duty, be liable 
to suffer death or such less punishment a s is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if he commits the offence under any other circumstances, be liable to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to seven years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who knowingly harbours any such deserter shall, on conviction by 
a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years or such less 
punishme nt as is in t his Act mentioned.  
(3) Any person subject to this Act who, being cognizant of any desertion or attempt at desertion of a 
person subject to this Act, does not forthwith give notice to his own or some other superior officer, or take 
any steps in his power to  cause such person to be apprehended, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be 
liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less punishme nt as is in 
this Act mentioned.  
(4) For the purposes o f this Act, a person deserts, — 
(a) if he absents from his unit or the place of duty at any time with the intention of not reporting 
back to such unit or place, or who, at any time and under any circumstances when absent from his 
unit or place of duty, does any act which shows that he h as an intention of not reporting to such unit 
or place of duty;  
(b) if he absents himself without leave with intent to avoid any active duty.  
21. Absence without leave .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follow ing 
offences, that is to say,— 
(a) absents himself without leave; or  
(b) without sufficient cause ove rstays leave granted to him; or  
(c) being on leave of absence and having received information from the appropriate authority that 
any battalion or part thereof or any other unit of  the Force, to which he belongs, has been ordered on 
active duty, fails, without sufficient cau se, to rejoin without delay; or  
(d) without sufficient cause fails to appear at the time fixed at the parade or place appointed for 
exercise or duty; or  
(e) whe n on parade, or on the line of march, without sufficient cause or without leave from his 
superior officer, quits the parade or line of march; or  
(f) when in camp or elsewhere, is found beyond any limits fixed, or in any place prohibited, by 
any general, lo cal or other order, without a pass or written leav e from his superior officer; or  
(g) without leave from his superior officer or without due cause , absents himself from any school 
or training institution when duly ordered to attend there,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less punishment as is in th is Act mentioned.  11 
 22. Striking or threatening superior officers. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of 
the follow ing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) uses criminal force to or assaults his superior officer; or  
(b) uses threateni ng language to such officer; or  
(c) uses insubordinate language to such officer,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, — 
(i) if such officer is at the time in the execution of his office or, if the offence is committed on 
active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such 
less punishment a s is in this Act mentioned; and  
(ii) in other case s, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years or 
such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned:  
Provided that in the case of an offence specified in clause ( c) the imprisonme nt shall not exceed five 
years.  
23. Disobedience  to superior officer. —(1) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys in such 
manner as to show a wilful defiance of authority any lawful command given personally by his superior 
officer in the execution of his office whether the same is given orally, or i n writing or by signal or 
otherwise, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to fourteen years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) Any person subject to this Act who disobeys any lawful command given by his superior officer 
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, — 
(a) if he commits such offence when on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to fourte en years or such less punishment a s is in thi s Act mentioned ; and 
(b) if he commits such offence when not on active duty, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
24. Insubordination and obstruction .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
follow ing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being concerned in any quarrel, affray or disorder, refuses to obey any officer, though of 
inferior rank, who orders him into arrest, or uses criminal force to, or assaults, any such officer;  or 
(b) uses criminal force to, or assaults, any person, whether subject to this Act or not, in whose 
custody he is lawfully placed, and whether he is or is not his superior officer; or  
(c) resists an escort whose duty it is to a pprehend him or to have  him in charge; or  
(d) breaks out of  barracks, camp or quarters; or  
(e) neglects to obey any general, local or other order; or  
(f) impedes the Force Police referred to in section 75 or any person lawfully acting on his behalf, 
or wh en called upon, refuses to assist in the execution of his duty a Force Police or any person  
lawfully acting on his behalf,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend, in 
the case of the offences spec ified in clauses ( d) and ( e), to two years, and in the case of the offences 
specified in the other clauses, to ten years, or in either case such less punishment as is in this Act 
mentioned.  
25. False answers on enrolment. —Any person having become subject to this Act who is discovered 
to have made at the time of enrolment a wilfully false answer to any question set forth in the prescribed 
form of enrolment which has been put to him by the enrolling officer before whom he appears for the 
purpose of being enr olled, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned .  12 
 26. Unbecoming conduct. —Any officer or subordinate officer who behaves in a manne r 
unbecoming of his position and the character expected of him shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be 
liable to be dismissed or to suffer such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
27. Certain forms of disgraceful conduct .—Any person subject to t his Act who commits any of the 
follo wing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) is guilty of any disgraceful conduct of a cruel,  indecent or unnatural kind; or  
(b) malingers or feigns or produces disease or infirmity in himself or intentionally delays his cure 
or aggravat es his disease or infirmity; or  
(c) with intent to render himself or any other person unfit for service, voluntarily causes hurt to 
himself or that person,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may  extend to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
28. Ill -treating a subordinate .—Any officer, subordinate officer or under -officer, who uses criminal 
force to , or otherwise ill -treats, any person subject to this Act, being his subordinate in rank or position, 
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishme nt as is in this Ac t mentioned.  
29. Intoxication. —(1) Any person subject to this Act who is found in a state of intoxication, whether 
on duty or not, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to six months or such les s punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), a person shall be deemed to be in a state of intoxication if, 
owing to the influence of alcohol or any drug whether alone, or any combination with any other 
substance, he is  unfit to be entrusted with his duty or with any duty which he may be called upon to 
perform or, behaves in a disorderly manner or in a manner likely to bring discredi t to the Force.  
30. Permitting escape of person in custody .—Any person subject to this Ac t who commits any of 
the foll owing offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when in command of a guard, picket, patrol, detachment or post, releases without proper 
authority, whether wilfully or without reasonable excuse, any person committed to his charge, or 
refus es to receive any pris oner or person so committed; or  
(b) wilfully or without reasonable excuse allows to escape any person who is committed to his 
charge, or whom i t is his duty to keep or guard,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable, if he has  acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he has not acted 
wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or such less punishme nt as is 
in this Act mentioned.  
31. Irregularity in connection with arrest or confinement. —Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
 (a) unnecessarily  detains a person in arrest or confinement without bringing him to trial, or fails 
to bring his case before the proper authority for investigation; or  
(b) having committed a person to Force custody fails without reasonable cause to deliver at the 
time of  such committal, or as soon as p racticable, and in any case within forty -eight hours thereafter, 
to the officer or other person into whose custody the person arrested is committed, an account in 
writing signed by himself of the offence with which the person so committed is charged,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
one year or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
32. Escape from custody .—Any person subject to this Act who, bein g in lawful custody, escapes or 
attempts to escape, shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  13 
 33. Offences in respect of property .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) commits theft of any property belonging to the Government, or to any Force mess, band or 
institution, or to any person subject to this Act; or  
(b) dishonestly  misappropriates or converts to his own use any such property; or  
(c) commits criminal breach of trust in r espect of any such property; or  
(d) dishonestly receives or retains any such property in respect of which any of the offences under 
clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) has been committed, knowing or having reason to believe the commission of 
such off ence; or  
(e) wilfully destroys or injures any property of the Government entrusted to him; or  
(f) does any other thing with intent to defraud, or to cause wrongful gain to one person or 
wrongful loss to another person,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten 
years or such less punish ment as is in this Act mentioned.  
34. Extortion and exaction. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) commits extortion; o r 
(b) without  proper authority exacts from any person money, provisions or service,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extent to ten 
years or such less punishment as in this Act mentioned.  
35. Making away with e quipment. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
 (a) makes away with, or is concerned in making away with, any arms, ammunition, equipment, 
instruments, tools, clothing or any other thing being the prope rty of the Government issued to him for 
his use or entrusted to him; or  
(b) loses by neglect anyth ing mentioned in clause ( a); or 
(c) sells, pawns, destroys or defaces any medal or decoration granted to him,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend, in 
the case of the offences specified in clause ( a), to ten years, and in the case of the offences specified in the 
other clauses, to five years, or in either case such less punishme nt as is in thi s Act mentioned.  
36. Injury to property. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) destroys or injures any property mentioned in clause ( a) of section 35, or any property 
belonging to any Force mess, ban d or institution, or to any person subject to this Act ; or 
(b) commits any act which causes damage to, or destruction of, any propert y of the Government 
by fire; or  
(c) kills, injures, makes away with, ill -teats or loses any, animal entrusted to him,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable, if he has acted wilfully, to suffer imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to ten years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and if he has acted 
without reasonable excuse, to suffer impris onment for a term which may extend to five years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
 14 
 37. False accusations. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the follow ing offences, 
that is to say, — 
(a) makes a false accusation against a ny person subject to this Act, knowing or having reason to 
believe such accusation to be false; or  
(b) in making a complaint against any person subject to this Act makes any statement affecting 
the character of such person, knowing or having reason to bel ieve such statement to be false, or 
knowingly and wilfully suppresses any material facts,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentione d. 
38. Falsifying official documents and false declarations .—Any person subject to this Act who 
commits any of the following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) in any report, return, list, certificate, book or other document made or signed by him, or of the 
contents of which it is his duty to ascertain the accuracy, knowingly makes, or is privy to the making 
of, any fa lse or fraudulent statement; or  
(b) in any document of the description mentioned in clause ( a) knowingly makes, or is privy to 
the making of, any  omiss ion, with intent to defraud; or  
(c) knowingly and with intent to injure any person, or knowingly and with intent to defraud, 
suppresses, defaces, alters or makes away with any document which it is his duty to preserve or 
produ ce; or  
(d) where it is h is official duty to make a declaration respecting any matter, knowingly makes a 
false declaration; or  
(e) obtains for himself, or for any other person, any pension, allowance or other advantage or 
privilege by a statement which is false, and which he eith er knows or believes to be false or does not 
believe to be true, or by making or using a false entry in any book or record, or by making any 
document containing a false statement, or by omitting to make a true entry or document containing a 
true statement,   
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to        
ten years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
39. Signing in blank and failure to report. —Any person subject to this Act who co mmits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) when signing any document relating to pay, arms, ammunition, equipment, clothing, supplies 
or stores, or any property of the Government fraudulently leaves in blank any material part for which 
his signature is a voucher; or  
(b) refuses or by culpable neglect omits to make or send a report or return which it is his duty to 
make or send,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three year s or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
40. Offences relating to Force Court .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the 
following offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being duly summoned or ordered to attend as a witness before a Force Court, wilfully or 
without reasonable excuse, makes default in attending; or  
(b) refuses to take an oath or make an affirmation legally required by a Force Court to be taken or 
made; o r  
(c) refuses to produce or deliver any document in his power or control legally required by a Force 
Court to be produced or delivered by him; or  
(d) refuses, when a witness, to answer any question which he is by law bound to answer; or  15 
 (e) is guilty of  contempt of the Force Court by using insulting or threatening language, or by 
causing any interruption or disturbance in the proceedings of such Court , 
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
41. False evidence .—Any person subject to this Act who, having been duly sworn or affirmed before 
any Force Court or other court competent under this Act to administer an oath or affirmation,  makes any 
statement which is false, and which he either knows or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, 
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
seven years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
42. Unlawful detention of pay .—Any officer, subordinate officer or under -officer who, having 
received the pay of a person subject to this Act unlawfully detains or refuses to pay the same when due, 
shall, on conviction by a F orce Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
43. Violation of good order and discipline .—Any person subject to this Act who is guilty of any act 
or omission whic h, though not specified in this Act, is prejudicial to good order and discipline of the 
Force shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to seven years or such less punishme nt as is in this Act menti oned.  
44. Miscel laneous offences. —Any person subject to this Act who commits any of the following 
offences, that is to say, — 
(a) being in command at any post or on the march, and receiving a complaint that any one under 
his command has beaten or other wise maltreated or oppressed any person, or has disturbed any fair or 
market, or committed any riot or trespass, fails to have due reparation made to the injured person or to 
report the c ase to the proper authority; or  
(b) by defiling any place of worship, or otherwise, intentionally insults the religion, or wounds the 
religious feelings of any person; or  
(c) attempts to commit suicide, and in such attempt does any act towards the  commission of such 
offence; or  
(d) being below  the rank of subordinate officer, when off duty, appears without proper authority, 
in or about camp, or in or about, or when going to, or returning from, any town or bazar, carrying a 
rifle, swor d or other offensive weapon; or  
(e) directly or indirectly ac cepts or obtains, or agrees to accept, or attempts to obtain, for himself 
or for any other person, any gratification as a motive or reward for procuring the enrolment of any 
person, or leave of absence, promotion or any other advantage or indulgence fo r any person in the 
service; or  
(f) commits any offence against the property or person of any inhabitant of, or resident in, the 
country in which he is serving,  
shall, on conviction by a Force Court, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend  to 
seven years or such less punishment as is in t his Act mentioned.  
45. Attempt. —Any person subject to this Act who attempts to commit any of the offences specified 
in sections 16 to 44 (both inclusive) and in such attempt does any act towards the commis sion of the 
offence shall, on conviction by a Force Court, where no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishme nt of such attempt, be liable, — 
(a) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with death, to suffer imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned; and  
(b) if the offence attempted to be committed is punishable with imprisonment, to suffer 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one -half of the longest term provided for that offence 
or such less punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  16 
 46. Abetment of offences that have been committed .—Any person subject to this Act who abets the 
commission of any of the offences specified in sections 16 to 44 (both inclusive)  shall, on conviction by a 
Force Court, if the act abetted is committed in consequence of the abetment and no express provision is 
made by this Act for the punishment of such abetment, be liable to suffer the punishment provided for 
that offence or such le ss punishme nt as is in this Act mentioned.  
47. Abetment of offences punishable with death and not Committ ee.—Any person subject to this 
Act who abets the commission of any of the offences punishable with death under sections 16, 19 and 
sub-section ( 1) of section 20 shall, on conviction by a Force Court, if that offence be not committed in 
consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the punishment of such 
abetment, be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen years or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
48. Abetment of offences punishable with imprisonment and not committed. —Any person 
subject to this Act who abets the commission of any of the offences specified in sections 16 to 44                 
(both inclusive) and punishable with imprisonment shall, on conviction by a Force Court, if that offence 
be not committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment , be liable to suffer imprisonment for a term which may extend to onehalf of 
the longest term provided for that offence or such less punishment as is in this Act mentioned.  
49. Civil offences. —Subject to the provisions of section 50, any person subject to  this Act who at any 
place in, or beyond, India commits any civil offence shall be deemed to be guilty of an offence against 
this Act and, if charged therewith under this section shall be liable to be tried by a Force Court and, on 
conviction, be punishabl e as follows, that is t o say,— 
(a) if the offence is one which would be punishable under any law in force in India with death, he 
shall be liable to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence, by the aforesaid law and such less 
punishment a s is in thi s Act mentioned; and  
(b) in any other case, he shall be liable to suffer any punishment, assigned for the offence by the 
law in force in India, or imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years, or such less 
punishment as is in this Act mentioned.   
50. Civil offences not triable by a Force Court. —A person subject to this Act who commits an 
offence of murder or culpable homicide not amounting to murder against, or of rape in relation to, a 
person not subject to this Act shall not be deemed to be gui lty of an offence against this Act and shall not 
be tried by a Force Court, unless he commits any of the said offences — 
(a) while on active duty; or  
(b) at any place outside India; or  
(c) at any place specified by the Central Government by notification, in this behalf.  
CHAPTER IV  
PUNISHMENTS  
51. Punishment awardable by Force Courts .—(1) Punishments may be inflicted in respect of 
offences committed by persons subject to this Act and convicted  by Force Courts according to the scale 
following, that is to say, — 
(a) death;  
(b) imprisonment which may be for the term of life or any other lesser term but excluding 
imprisonment for a term not exceeding three months in Force custody ; 
(c) dismiss al or r emoval from the service;  
(d) compulso ry retirement from the service;  
(e) imprisonment for a term not exceeding  three months in Force custody;  17 
 (f) reduction to the ranks or to a lower rank or grade or a place in the list of their rank in  the case 
of an under -officer;  
(g) reduction to next lower rank in case of an officer or subordinate officer:  
Provided that no officer shall be reduced to a rank lower than the one to wh ich he was initially 
appointed;  
(h) forfeiture of seniority of rank an d forfeiture of all or any part of the servic e for the purpose of 
promotion;  
(i) forfeiture of service for the purpo se of increased pay or pension;  
(j) fine , in respect of civil offences;  
(k) severe  reprimand or reprimand except in the case of persons below the rank of an                      
under -officer;  
(l) forfeiture of pay and allowances for a period not exceeding three months for an of fence 
committed on active duty;  
(m) forfeiture in the case of person sentenced to dismissal from the service of all arrears of pay 
and allowances and other public money due to him  at the time of such dismissal;  
(n) stoppage of pay and allowances until any proved loss or damage occasioned by the offence for 
whic h he is convicted is made good.  
(2) Each of the punishments specified in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be inferior in degree to 
every punishment p receding it in the above scale.  
52. Alternative punishments awardable by Force Courts. —Subject to the provis ions of this Act, a 
Force Court may, on convicting a person subject to this Act of any of the offences specified in           
sections 16 to 48 (both inclusive) award either the particular punishment with which the offence is stated 
in the said sections to  be punishable or, in lieu thereof, any one of the punishments lower in the scale set 
out in section 51 regard being had to the na ture and degree of the offence.  
53. Combination of punishments. —A Force Court may award in addition to, or without, any other 
punishment, the punishment specified in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 51, or any one or more of 
the punishments specified in clauses ( f) to ( n) (both inclusive) of that sub -section.  
54. Retention in the force of a person convicted on active duty.—When on active duty an enrolled 
person has been sentenced by a Force Court to imprisonment whether combined with dismissal or not, the 
prescribed officer may direct that such person may be retained to serve in the ranks, and such service shall 
be rec koned as pa rt of his term of imprisonment.  
55. Punishments otherwise than by Force Courts. —Punishments may also be inflicted in respect 
of offences committed by persons subject to this Act without the intervention of a Force Court in the 
manner stated in s ections 56, 58 and 59.  
56. Minor punishments. —(1) Subject to the provisions of section 57, a commanding officer of and 
above the rank of Commandant may, in the prescribed manner, proceed against a person subject to this 
Act, other than an officer or a sub ordinate officer, who is charged with an offence under this Act and 
award such person, to the extent prescribed, one or more of the following  punishments, that is to say, —  
(a) imprisonment in Force c ustody up to twenty -eight days;  
(b) detention up to twen ty-eight days;  
(c) confinement to the  lines up to twenty -eight days;  
(d) extra guards or duties;  
(e) deprivation of any special position or special  emoluments or any acting rank;  
(f) severe reprimand or reprimand;  18 
 (g) fine up to fourt een days ’ pay in any o ne month;  
(h) deductions from his pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any loss or 
damage occasioned by the of fence for which he is punished.  
(2) If any unit, training centre or other establishment of the Force is being temporarily commanded  by 
an officer of the rank of Second -in-Command or Deputy Commandant, such officer shall have full powers 
of a commanding office r specified in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Subject to the provisions of section 57, a Deputy Commandant or an Assistant Commandant, 
commanding a company or a detachment or an outpost, shall have the power to proceed against a person 
subject to this Act, other than an officer or a subordinate officer, who is charged with an offence under 
this Act and award such person to the extent prescri bed, one or more of the punishments specified in 
clauses ( a) to ( d) and ( h) of sub -section ( 1) provided that the maximum limit of punishment awarded 
under each of the clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) shall not exceed fourteen days.  
(4) A subordinate officer not be low the rank of Sub -Inspector who is commanding a detachment or an 
outpost shall have the powers to proceed against a person subject to this Act, other than a subordinate 
officer or an under -officer, who is charged with an offence under this Act and award such person to the 
extent prescribed, one or more of the punishment s specified under clauses ( c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) 
provided that the maximum limit of punishment awarded under clause ( c) shall not exceed fourteen days.  
57. Limit of punishments under section 56. —(1) In the case of an award of two or more of the 
punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 56, the punishments 
specified in clause ( c) or clause ( d) shall take effect only at the end of the puni shment specifi ed in           
clause ( a) or clause ( b). 
(2) When two or more of the punishments specified in clauses ( a), (b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 56 are awarded to a person conjointly, or when already undergoing one or more of the said 
punishments, the whole extent of the punishments shall not exceed in the aggregate forty -two days.  
(3) The punishments specified in c lauses ( a), (b) and  (c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 56 shall not be 
awarded to any person who is of the rank of an under -officer or was, at the time of committing the 
offence for which he is punished, of s uch rank.  
(4) The punishment specified in clause ( f) of sub -section (1) of section 56 shall not be awarded to any 
person belo w the rank of an under -officer.  
58. Punishment of persons of or below the rank of Commandant by Inspectors -General and 
others .—(1) An officer not below the rank of Inspector -General may, in the prescribed manner, proceed 
against an officer of or below the rank of Commandant who is charged with an offence under this Act and 
award one or more of the following  punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them w hose promotion depends upon length of 
service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding one year, but 
subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elec t to be tried by a Force Court;  
(b) severe reprimand  or reprimand;  
(c) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any proved loss or 
damage occasioned by the of fence of which he is convicted.  
(2) An officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy Inspector -General may, in the prescri bed 
manner, proceed against a person of or below the rank of Subedar -Major who is charged with an offence 
under this Act and award one or more of the following punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) forfeiture of seniority, or in the case of any of them whose p romotion depends upon the length 
of service, forfeiture of service for the purpose of promotion for a period not exceeding one year, but 
subject to the right of the accused previous to the award to elec t to be tried by a Force Court;  
(b) severe  reprimand or reprimand;  19 
 (c) deduction from pay and allowances of any sum required to make good any proved loss or 
damage occasioned by the of fence of which he is convicted.  
(3) An officer not below the rank of Commandant may, in the prescribed manner, pro ceed against a 
person of or below the rank of Subedar -Major who is charged with an offence under this Act and award 
any one or both of the following punishments, that is to say, — 
(a) severe reprimand or reprimand;  
(b) deduction from pay and allowances of a ny sum required to make good any proved loss or 
damage occasioned by the of fence of which he is convicted.  
59. Review of proceedings .—(1) In every case in which punishment has been awarded under            
section 58, certified true copies of the proceedings shall be forwarded, in the prescribed manner, by the 
officer awarding the punishment to the prescribed superior authority who may, if the punishment awarded 
appears to him to be illegal, unjust or excess ive, cancel, vary or remit the punishment and make such 
other direction as may be appropriate in  the circumstances of the case.  
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), a “superior authority”  means,— 
(a) any officer superior in command to such officer who h as awarded the punishment;  
(b) in the case of punishment awarded by Director -General, the Central Government.  
60. Collective fines .—(1) Whenever any weapon or part of a weapon, or ammunition, forming part of 
the equipment of a unit, is lost or stolen, a co mmanding officer not below the rank of the Commandant of 
that unit may, after making such enquiry as he thinks fit and subject to the rules, impose a collective fine 
upon the subordinate officers, under -officers and men of such unit, or upon so many of the m as, in his 
judgment, should be held resp onsible for such loss or theft.  
(2) Such fine shall be assessed as a percentage of  the pay of the individuals on whom it falls.  
CHAPTER V  
DEDUCTIONS FROM PAY AND ALLOWANCES  
61. Deductions from pay and allowances of persons subject to this Act. —(1) The following 
deductions may be made from the pay and allowances of an officer, that is to say, — 
(a) all pay and allowances due to an officer for every day he absents himself without leave, unless 
a satisfactory explanat ion has been given to,  and accepted by, the Inspector -General under whom he  
is for the time being serving;  
(b) all pay and allowances for every day while he is in custody on a charge for an offence for 
which he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court o r Force Court or by an officer exercis ing 
authority under section 58;  
(c) any sum required to make good the pay of any person subject to this Act which he has 
unlawfully retaine d or unlawfully refused to pay;  
(d) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction occasioned by the commission of an offence as may be determined by the Force Court by 
which he is convicted of such offence or by an officer exercis ing authority under section 58;  
(e) all pay and a llowances or dered by Force Court;  
(f) any sum required to be paid as fine awarded by a c riminal court or a Force Court;  
(g) any sum required to make good any loss, damage or destruction of public or Force property 
which, after due investig ation, appears to  the Inspector -General under whom the officer is for the time 
being serving, to have been occasioned by the wrongful act or neglige nce on the part of the officer;  
(h) all pay and allowances forfeited by order of the Central Government if the officer is fou nd by 
a court of inqu iry constituted by the Director -General in this behalf, to have deserted to the enemy, or 
while in enemy hands, to have served with, or under the orders of, the enemy, or in any manner to 20 
 have aided the enemy, or to have allowed himsel f to be taken prisoner by the enemy through want of 
due precaution or through disobedience of orders or wilful neglect of duty, or having been taken 
prisoner by the enemy, to have failed to rejoin his service  when it was possible to do so;  
(i) any sum requ ired by order of the Central Government to be paid for the maintenance of his 
wife or his legitimate or illegitimate child or step child towards the cost of any relief given by the said 
Govern ment to the said wife or child.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of  section 63, the following deductions may be made from the pay and 
allowances of a person subject to this Act, other than an officer, that is to say, — 
(a) all pay and allowances for every day of absence either on desertion or without leave, or as a 
prisoner of war unless a satisfactory explanation has been given and accepted by his commanding 
officer and for every day of imprisonment awarded by a criminal court, Force Court or an officer 
exercis ing authority under section 56;  
(b) all pay and allowanc es for every day while he is in custody on a charge for an offence of 
which he is afterwards convicted by a criminal court or Force Court or on a charge of absence without 
leave for which he is afterwards awarded imprisonment by an officer exercising autho rity under 
section 56;  
(c) all pay and allowances for every day on which he is in hospital on account of sickness 
certified by the medical officer attending on him to have been caused by an offence u nder this Act 
committed by him;  
(d) for every day on whic h he is in hospital on account of sickness certified by the medical officer 
attending on him to have been caused by his own misconduct or imprudence, such sum as may be 
specified by the  order of the Director -General;  
(e) all pay and allowances ordered by F orce Court or by an officer exercising authority under any 
of the sections 56 and  58 to be forfeited or stopped;  
(f) all pay and allowances for every day between his being recovered from the enemy and his 
dismissal from the service in consequence of his co nduct when being taken prisoner by, or w hile in 
the hands of the enemy;  
(g) any sum required to make good such compensation for any expenses, loss, damage or 
destruction caused by him to the Central Government or to any building or property or any private 
fund of the Force as may be awa rded by his commanding officer;  
(h) any sum required to pay a fine awarded by a criminal court, Force Court exercising 
jurisdiction under section 49 or an officer exercising authority under any  of the sections 56 and 60;  
(i) any sum required by order of the Central Government or any prescribed officer to be paid for 
the maintenance of his wife, or his legitimate child or illegitimate child or step child or towards the 
cost of any relief given by the said Government to the sai d wife or c hild. 
(3) For computation of time of absence or custody under this section, — 
(a) no person shall be treated as absent or in custody for a day unless the absence or custody has 
lasted, whether wholly in one day, or partly in one day and partly in another for si x consecutive hours 
or upwards;  
(b) any absence or custody for less than a day may be reckoned as absence or custody for a day if 
such absence or custody prevented the absentee from fulfilling any duty as member of the Force 
which was thereby thrown u pon some other person;  
(c) absence or custody for twelve consecutive hours or upward s may be reckoned as absence or 
custody for the whole of each day during any portion of which the p erson was absent or in custody;  
(d) a period of absence, or imprisonment, which commences before, and ends after, midnight may 
be reckoned as a day.  21 
 62. Pay  and allowances during trial. —In the case of any person subject to this Act who is in 
custody or under suspension from duty on a charge for an offence, the prescribed officer may direct that 
the whole or any part of the pay and allowances of such person sh all be withheld, pending the result of his 
trial on the charge against him, in order to give effect to the provisions of clause ( b) of                                     
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 61.  
63. Limit of certain deductions. —The total de ductions from the pay and allowances of a person 
made under clauses ( e) and ( g) to ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 61 shall not, except where he is 
sentenced to dismissal or removal, exceed in any one month one -half of his pay an d allowances for that 
month.  
64. Deduction from public money due to a person. —Any sum authorised by this Act to be 
deducted from the pay and allowances of any person may, without prejudice to any other mode of 
recovering the same, be deducted from any public money due to  him othe r than a pension.  
65. Pay and allowances of prisoner of war during inquiry into his conduct. —Where the conduct 
of any person subject to this Act when being taken prisoner by, or while in the hands of, the enemy, is to 
be inquired into under this Act or any  other law, the Director -General or any officer authorised by him 
may order that the whole or any part of the pay and allowances of such person shall be withheld pend ing 
the result of such enquiry.  
66. Remission of deductions. —Any deduction from pay and allowances authorised by this Act may 
be remitted in such manner and to such extent, and by such authority, as may from time to time be 
prescribed.  
67. Provision for dependents of prisoner of war from his remitted deductions and pay and 
allowances. —(1) In the case of all persons subject to this Act, being prisoners of war, whose pay and 
allowances have been forfeited under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 61 but in respect of whom a remissi on has been made under section 66, it shall be lawful for 
proper provisions to be made by the Central  Government or by the Director -General when so authorised 
by the Central Government out of such pay and allowances for any dependants of such persons and a ny 
such remission shall in that case be deemed to apply only to the balance thereafter remain ing of such pay 
and allowances.  
(2) It shall be lawful for proper provision to be made by the Central Government or by the                 
Director -General when so  authorised by the Central Government for any dependants of any person 
subject to this Act who is a prisoner of war, or is missing,  out of his pay and allowances.  
68. Period during which a person is deemed to be a prisoner of war. —For the purposes of         
section 67, a person shall be deemed to continue to be a prisoner of war until the conclusion of any 
inquiry into his conduct such as is referred to in section 65 and if he is dismissed from the service in 
consequence of such conduct, until the date of such dismissal.  
CHAPTER VI  
ARREST AND PROCEEDINGS BEFORE TRIAL  
69. Custody of offenders .—(1) Any person subject to this Act who is charged with an offence may 
be taken into Force custody under the  order of any superior officer.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything  contained in sub -section ( 1), an officer may order into Force custody 
any other officer, though such other officer may be of a higher rank, engaged in  a quarrel, affray or 
disorder.  
70. Duty of commanding o fficer in regard to detention. —(1) It shall be th e duty of every 
commanding officer to take care that a person under his command when charged with an offence is not 
detained in custody for more than forty -eight hours after the committal of such person into custody is 
reported to him, without the charge b eing investigated, unless investigation within that period seems to 
him to be impracticable havin g regard to the public service.  22 
 (2) The case of every person being detained in custody beyond a period of forty -eight hours, and the 
reasons therefor, shall be  reported by the commanding officer to the next higher officer or such other 
officer to whom an application may be made to convene a Force Court for the tr ial of the person charged.  
(3) In reckoning the period of forty -eight hours specified in sub -section  (1), Sunday s and other pub lic 
holidays shall be excluded.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make rules providing for the 
manner in which and the period for which any person subject to this Act may be taken into and detained 
in Force custody, pending the trial by any competent authority for an y offence committed by him.  
71. Interval between committal and trial .—In every case where any such person as is mentioned in 
section 69 and as is not on active duty, remains in such custody for a longer period than eight days 
without a Force Court for his trial being convened, a special report giving re asons for the delay shall be 
made by his commanding officer in the manner prescribed, and a similar report shall be forwarded at 
intervals of every eight days until a Force Court is convened or such p erson is released from custody.  
72. Arrest by civil authorities .—Whenever any person subject to this Act, who is accused of an 
offence under this Act, is within the jurisdiction of any magistrate or police officer, such magistrate or 
police officer shall aid in the apprehension and delivery to Force custody of such person upon receipt of a 
written application to that effect signed by his commanding officer or an officer authorised by the  
commanding officer in that behalf.  
73. Capture of deserters .—(1) Whenever any person subject to this Act deserts, the commanding 
officer of the unit to which he belongs or is attached, shall give information of the desertion to such civil 
authorities as, in his opinion, may be able to afford assistance towards the capture of the deserter; and 
such authorities shall thereupon take steps for the apprehension of the said deserter in like manner as if he 
were a person for whose apprehension a warrant had been issued by a magistrate, and shall deliver the 
deserter, when apprehen ded, into Force custody.  
(2) Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person reasonably believed to be subject to this 
Act, and to be a deserter or to be travelling without autho rity, and shall bring him without delay before the 
nearest magistrate, to be dealt with according to law.  
74. Inquiry into absence without leave. —(1) When any person subject to this Act has been absent 
from duty without due authority for a period of thirty  days, a court of inquiry shall, as soon as practicable, 
be appointed by such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed; and such court shall, on oath or 
affirmation administered in the prescribed manner, inquire respecting the absence of the perso n, and the 
deficiency, if any, in the property of the Government entrusted to his care, or in any arms, ammunition, 
equipment, instruments, clothing or necessaries; and if satisfied of the fact of such absence without due 
authority or other sufficient caus e, the court shall declare such absence and the period thereof and the said 
deficiency, if any, and the commanding officer of the unit to which the person belongs or is attached, 
shall make a record th ereof in the prescribed manner.  
(2) If the person declared absent does not afterwards surrender or is not apprehended, he shall, for the 
purposes of this A ct, be deemed to be a deserter.  
75. Force Police Officers. —(1) The Director -General or any prescribed officer may appoint persons 
(in this Act referred  to as Force Police) for discharging the functions specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3).  
(2) The duties of a person appointed under sub -section ( 1) are to take charge of persons confined for 
any offence, to preserve good order and discipline and to preve nt breaches of the same by persons servin g 
in, or attached to the Force.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 69, a person appointed under sub -section ( 1) may, 
at any time, arrest and detain for  trial any person subject to this Act who commits , or is charged with, an 
offence, and may also carry into effect any punishment to be inflicted in pursuance of a sentence awarded 
by a Force Court or by an officer exercising authority under section 56 but shall not inf lict any 
punishment on his own autho rity: 
Provided that no officer shall be so arrested or detained otherwise than on the order of another officer.   23 
 CHAPTER VII  
FORCE  COURTS  
76. Kinds of Force Courts .—For the purposes of this Act there shall be three kinds of Force Courts, 
that is to s ay,— 
(a) General Force Courts;  
(b) Petty Force Courts; and  
(c) Summary Force Courts.  
77. Power to convene a General Force Court .—A General Force Court may be convened by the 
Central Government or the Director -General or by any officer empowered in this beh alf by warrant of the 
Director -General.  
78. Power to Convene a Petty Force Court. —A Petty Force Court may be convened by an officer 
having power to convene a General Force Court or by an officer empowered in this behalf by warrant of 
any such officer.  
79. Contents of warrants issued under sections 77 and 78. —A warrant issued under section 77 or 
section 78 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the officer issuing it may think fit.  
80. Composition of a General Force Court. —A General Fo rce Court shall consist of not less than 
five officers.  
81. Composition of a Petty Force Court. —A Petty Force Court shall consist of not less than                 
three off icers.  
82. Summary Force Court. —(1) A Summary Force Court may be held by the command ing officer 
of any unit and he alone shall constitut e the Court.  
(2) The proceedings shall be attended throughout by two other persons who shall be officers or 
subordinate officers or one of either, and who shall not  as such, be sworn or affirmed.  
83. Diss olution of a Force Court. —(1) If a Force Court after the commencement of a trial is reduced 
below the minimum number of officers required by this Act, it shall be dissolved.  
(2) If, on account of the illness of the concerned Judge Attorney or, as the case  may be, Deputy Judge 
Attorney -General or Additional Judge Attorney -General or of the accused before the finding, it is 
impossible to continue the trial, the Force Court shall be dissolved.  
(3) The authority or officer who convened a Force Court may dissol ve the same if it appears to him 
that the exigencies of the service or necessities of discipline render it impossible or inexpedient to  
continue the said Force Court.  
(4) Where a Force Court is dissolved under this section, the accused may be tried again.  
84. Power of a General Force Court. —A General Force Court shall have the power to try any 
person subject to this Act for any offence punishable thereunder and to pass any  sentence authorised 
thereby.  
85. Power of a Petty Force Court. —A Petty Force Court sh all have the power to try any person 
subject to this Act other than an officer or a subordinate officer for any offence made punishable 
thereunder and to pass any sentence authorised by this Act other than a sentence of death or imprisonment 
for a term exc eeding two years.  
86. Power of a Summary Force Court. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), a 
Summary Force Court may try any offence punishable under th is Act.  
(2) When there is no grave reason for immediate action and reference can without de triment to 
discipline be made to the officer empowered to convene a Petty Force Court for the trial of the alleged 
offender, an officer holding a Summary Force Court shall not try without such reference any offence 
punishable under any of the sections 16, 19 and 49, or any offence against the officer holding the Court.  24 
 (3) A Summary Force Court may try any person subject to this Act and under the command of the 
officer holding the Court, except an of ficer or a subordinate officer.  
(4) A Summary Force Court  may pass any sentence which may be passed under this Act, except the 
sentence of death or of imprisonment for a term exceeding the limit specified in sub -section ( 5). 
(5) The limit referred to in sub -section ( 4) shall be, — 
(a) one year, if the officer hol ding the Force Court holds the rank not below that of a 
Commandant;  
(b) three months, in any other case.  
87. Prohibition of second trial. —(1) When any person, subject to this Act has been acquitted or 
convicted of an offence by a Force Court or by a criminal court or has been dealt with under section 56 or 
section 58, he shall not be liable to be tried again for the same offence by a Force Court or deal t with 
under the said sections.  
(2) When any person subject to this Act, has been acquitted or convi cted of an offence by a Force 
Court or has been dealt with under section 56 or section 58, he shall not be liable to be tried again by a 
criminal court for the sam e offence or on the same facts.  
88. Period of limitation for trial. —(1) Except as provided by  sub-section ( 2), no trial by a Force 
Court of any person subject to this Act for any offence shall be commenced after the expiration of a 
period of three years  from the date of such offence.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to a trial  for an offence of desertion or for any of 
the of fences mentioned in section 19.  
(3) In the computation of the p eriod of time mentioned in sub -section ( 1), any time spent by such 
person in evading arrest after the commission of the offence, shall be exclud ed. 
89. Trial, etc., of offender who ceases to be subject to this Act. —(1) Where an offence under this 
Act had been committed by any person while subject to this Act, and he has ceased to be so subject, he 
may be taken into and kept in Force custody and tr ied and punished for such offence as if he continued to 
be so subject.  
(2) No such person shall be tried for an offence, unless his trial commences within six months after he 
had ce ased to be subject to this Act:  
Provided that nothing contained in this su b-section shall apply to the trial of any such person for an 
offence of desertion or for any of the offences mentioned in section 19 or shall affect the jurisdiction of a 
criminal court to try any offence triable by such cou rt as well as by a Force Court.  
90. Application of Act during term of sentence. —(1) When a person subject to this Act is 
sentenced by a Force Court to imprisonment, this Act shall apply to him during the term of his sentence, 
though he is dismissed from the Force, or has otherwise ceased  to be subject to this Act, and he may be 
kept, removed, imprisoned and punished as if he conti nued to be subject to this Act.  
(2) When a person subject to this Act is sentenced by a Force Court to death, this Act shall apply to 
him till th e sentence is carried out.  
91. Place of trial .—Any person subject to this Act who commits any offence against it may be tried 
and punished for such  offence in any place whatever.  
92. Choice between criminal court and Force Court .—When a criminal court and a Force Court 
have each jurisdiction in respect of an offence, it shall be in the discretion of the Director -General or the 
Additional Director -General or the Inspector -General or the Deputy Inspector -General or the Additional 
Deputy Inspector -General within whose comma nd the accused person is serving or such other officer as 
may be prescribed, to decide before which court the proce edings shall be instituted, and  if that officer 
decides that they shall be instituted before a Force Court, to direct that the accused person  shall be 
detained in Force custody.  25 
 93. Power of criminal court to require delivery of offender .—(1) When a criminal court having 
jurisdiction is of opinion that proceedings shall be instituted before itself in respect of any alleged 
offence, it may, by w ritten notice, require the officer referred to in section 92 at his option, either to 
deliver over the offender to the nearest magistrate to be proceeded against according to law, or to 
postpone proceedings, pending a refer ence to the Central Government.  
(2) In every such case the said officer shall either deliver over the offender in compliance with the 
requisition, or shall forthwith refer the question as to the court before which the proceedings are to be 
instituted, for the determination of the Central Government whose order upon such reference shall be 
final.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PROCEDURE OF FORCE COURTS  
94. Presiding officer .—At every General Force Court or Petty Force Court, the senior member shall 
be the presiding officer.  
95. Judge Attorneys. —Every General Force Court shall , and every P etty Force Court may, be 
attended by a Judge Attorney or a Deputy Judge Attorney -General or an Additional Judge                     
Attorney -General, or, if no such officer is available, an officer approved by the Judg e Attorney -General or 
by any officer authorised in this behalf  by the Judge Attorney -General.  
96. Challenge. —(1) At all trials by a General Force Court or by a Petty Force Court, as soon as the 
Court is assembled, the names of the presiding officer and mem bers shall be read over to the accused, 
who shall thereupon be asked whether he objects to being tried by an y officer sitting on the Court.  
(2) If the accused objects to such officer, his objection and also the reply thereto of the officer 
objected to shal l be heard and recorded, and the remaining officers of the Court shall, in the absence of 
the challenged o fficer decide on the objection.  
(3) If the objection is allowed by one -half or more of the votes of the officers entitled to vote, the 
objection shall  be allowed, and the member objected to shall retire, and his vacancy may be filled in the 
prescribed manner, by another officer subject to the same right of the accused to object.  
(4) When no challenge is made, or when a challenge has been made and disall owed, or the place of 
every officer successfully challenged has been filled by another officer to whom no objection is made or 
allowed, the Cour t shall proceed with the trial.  
97. Oaths of member, Judge Attorney and witness .—(1) An oath or affirmation in t he prescribed 
manner shall be administered to every member of the Force Court and to the Judge Attorney, or, as the 
case may be, the Deputy Judge Attorney -General or the Additional Judge Attorney -General or the officer 
approved under section 95, before  the commencement of the trial.  
(2) Every person giving evidence before a Force Court shall be examined after being duly sworn or 
affirmed in the prescribed form.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall not apply where the witness is a child under twelve y ears 
of age and the Force Court is of opinion that though the witness understands the duty of speaking the 
truth, he does not understand the na ture of an oath or affirmation.  
98. Voting by members. —(1) Subject to the provisions  of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), every decision of 
a Force Court shall be passed by an absolute majority of votes; and where there is an equality of votes on 
either the finding or the sentence, the decision sha ll be in favour of the accused.  
(2) No sentence of death shall be passed by a General Force Court without the concurrence of at least 
two-thirds of the members of the Court.  
(3) In matters other than a challenge or the finding or sentence, the presiding officer shall have a 
casting vote.  
99. General rule as to evidence. —The India n Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) , shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, apply to all pr oceedings before a Force Court.  26 
 100. Judicial notice. —A Force Court may take judicial notice of any matter within the general 
knowledge of the me mbers as officer s of the Force.  
101. Summoning witnesses. —(1) The convening officer, the presiding officer of a Force Court, the 
Judge Attorney or, as the case may be, the Deputy Judge Attorney -General or the Additional Judge 
Attorney -General or the officer approved under  section 95 or the Commanding Officer of the accused 
person may, by summons under his hand, require the attendance, at a time and place to be mentioned in 
the summons, of any person either to give evidence or to produ ce any document or other thing.  
(2) In the case of a witness who is subject to this Act or any other Act relating to the armed forces of 
the Union, the summons shall be sent to his Commanding Officer and such officer shall  serve it upon him 
accordingly.  
(3) In the case of any other witness , the summons shall be sent to the magistrate within whose 
jurisdiction he may be, or resides, and such magistrate shall give effect to the summons as if the witness 
were required in the court of such a magistrate.  
(4) When a witness is required to produce  any particular document or other thing in his possession or 
power, the summons shall describ e it with reasonable precision.  
102. Documents exempted from production. —(1) Nothing in section 101 shall be deemed to affect 
the operation of sections 123 and 124  of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or to apply to any 
letter, postcard, telegram or other document in the custody of the p ostal or telegraph authorities.  
(2) If any document in such custody is, in the opinion of any District Magistrate, Chief Me tropolitan 
Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court of Sessions or High Court wanted for the purpose of any 
Force Court, such Magistrate or Court may require the postal or telegraph authorities, as the case may be, 
to deliver such document to such pers on as such Magistrate or Court may direct.  
(3) If any such document is, in the opinion of any other magistrate or of any Commissioner of Police 
or District Superintendent of Police, wanted for any such purpose, he may require the postal or telegraph 
author ities, as the case may be, to cause such search to be made for, and to detain such document pending 
the orders of any such District Magistrate, Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Chief Judicial Magistrate, 
Court of Sessions or High Court.  
103. Commissions for examination of witnesses. —(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Force 
Court, it appears to the Court that the examination of a witness is necessary for the ends of justice, and 
that the attendance of such witness cannot be procured without an amount of delay, expense or 
inconvenience which, in the circumstances of the case, would be unreasonable, such Court may address 
the Judge Attorney -General in order that a commission to take the evidence  of such witness may be 
issued.  
(2) The Judge Attorney -Gener al may then, if he thinks necessary, issue a commission to any 
Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class, within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction such witness resides, to tak e the evidence of such witness.  
(3) The Magistrate to whom the commission is issued, or, if he is the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, 
or Chief Judicial Magistrate, or such Metropolitan Magistrate, or Judicial Magistrate, as he appoints in 
this behalf, shall summon the witness before him or proceed to the pl ace where the witness is, and shall 
take down his evidence in the same manner, and may for this purpose exercise the same powers, as in the 
trials of warrant -cases under the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(4) When the witness resides in a tr ibal area or in any place outside India, the commission may be 
issued in the manner specified in Chapter XXIII of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
104. Examination of a witness on commission. —(1) The prosecutor and the accused person in a ny 
case in which a commission is issued under section 103 may respectively forward any interrogatories in 
writing which the court may think relevant to the issue, and the Magistrate executing the commission 
shall examine the wit ness upon such interrogatori es. 27 
 (2) The prosecutor and the accused person may appear before such Magistrate by counsel, or, except 
in the case of an accused person in custody, in person, and may examine , cross -examine, and re -examine, 
as the  case may be, the said witness.  
(3) After a  commission issued under section 103 has been duly executed, it shall be returned together 
with the deposition of the witness examined thereunder  to the Judge Attorney -General.  
(4) On receipt of a commission and  deposition returned under sub -section ( 3), the Judge                
Attorney -General shall forward the same to the Court at whose instance the commission was issued or, if 
such Court has been dissolved, to any other Court convened for the trial of the accused person; and the 
commission, the return t hereto and the deposition shall be open to inspection by the prosecutor and the 
accused person, and may, subject to all just exceptions, be read in evidence in the case by either the 
prosecutor or the accused, and shall form part o f the proceedings of the Court.  
(5) In every case in which a commission is issued under section 103, the trial may be adjourned for 
specified time reasonably sufficient for the executio n and return of the commission.  
105. Conviction for offences not charged .—A person charged befor e a Force Court — 
(a) with desertion may be found guilty of attempting to desert or  of being absent without leave;  
(b) with attempting to desert may be found guilty  of being absent without leave;  
(c) with using criminal force may be found guilt y of assault;  
(d) with using threatening language may be found guilty of us ing insubordinate language;  
(e) with any one of the offences specified in clauses ( a), (b), (c) and ( d) of section 33 may be 
found guilty of any other of these offences with whi ch he might have been charged;  
(f) with an offence punishable under section 49 may be found guilty of any other offence of 
which he might have been found guilty, if the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure,                  
1973 (2 of 1974), were applicable;  
(g) with any offence under this Act may, on failure of proof of an offence having been committed 
in circumstances involving a more severe punishment, be found guilty of the same offence as having 
been committed in circumstances involving a less severe punishme nt; 
(h) with any offence under this Act may be found guilty of having attempted or abetted the 
commission of that offence, although the attempt or abet ment is not separately charged.  
106. Presumption as to signatures. —In any proceeding under this Act, any application, certificate, 
warrant, reply or other document purporting to be signed by an officer in the service of the Government 
shall, on production, be presumed to have been duly signed by the person by whom and in the character in 
which it purports to have been signe d, until the contrary is shown.  
107. Enrolment paper. —(1) Any enrolment paper purporting to be signed by an enrolling officer 
shall, in proceedings under this Act, be evidence of the person enrolled having given the answers to 
questions whic h he is there in represented as having given.  
(2) The enrolment of such person may be proved by the production of the original or a copy of his 
enrolment paper purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the officer having the custody of the 
enrolment p aper or service record.  
108. Presumption as to certain documents .—(1) A letter, return or other document respecting the 
service of any person in, or the dismissal, removal or discharge of any person from, any unit of the Force, 
or respecting the circumstan ces of any person not having served in, or belonged to, any unit of the Force, 
if purporting to be signed by or on behalf of the Central Government or the Director -General, or by any 
prescribed officer, shall be evidence of the facts stated in such le tter, return or other document.  
(2) A Force List or Gazette purporting to be published by authority shall be evidence of the status and 
rank of the officers, subordinate officers therein mentioned, and of any appointment held by them and of 
the battalion, unit,  or branch of the Force to which they belong.  28 
 (3) Where a record is made in any battalion book in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made 
thereunder or otherwise in the discharge of official duties, and purports to be signed by the commanding 
officer or  by the officer whose duty it is to make such record, such record shall be eviden ce of the facts 
therein stated.  
(4) A copy of any record in any office of the Force purporting to be certified to be a true copy by the 
officer having custody of such book sha ll be evidence of such record.  
(5) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave , and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of any officer or other person subject to 
this Act, or an y unit of the Force, or has been apprehended by such officer or person, a certificate 
purporting to be signed by such officer, or by the commanding officer of the unit to which such person 
belongs or is attached, as the case may be, and stating the fact, d ate and place of such surrender or 
apprehension, and the manner in which he was dressed, shall be evi dence of the matters so stated.  
(6) Where any person subject to this Act is being tried on a charge of desertion or of absence without 
leave and such person has surrendered himself into the custody of, or has been apprehended by, a police 
officer not below the rank of an officer in charge of a police station, a certificate purporting to be signed 
by such police officer and stating the fact, date and pla ce of such surrender or apprehension and the 
manner in which he was dressed shall be evid ence of the matters so stated.  
(7) (a) Any document purporting to be a report under the hand of a Government scientific expert to 
whom this sub -section applies, upon any matter or thing duly submitted to him for examination or 
analysis and report in the course of any proceeding under this Act, may be used as evidence in any 
inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Act.  
(b) The Force Court may, if it thinks fit, su mmon and examine any such expert as to th e subject 
matter of his report.  
(c) Where any such expert is summoned by a Force Court and he is unable to attend personally, he 
may, unless the Court has expressly directed him to appear personally, depute an offic er who is 
conversant with the facts of the case to dep ose in the Court on his behalf.  
(d) This sub -section applies to the Government scientific experts , for the time being specified in               
sub-section ( 4) of section 293 of the Code of Criminal Pr ocedure, 197 3 (2 of 1974 ).  
109. Reference by accused to Government officer .—(1) If at any trial for desertion or absence 
without leave, over -staying leave or not rejoining when warned for service, the accused person states in 
his defence any sufficient or  reasonable excuse for his unauthorised absence, and refers in support thereof 
to any officer in the service of the Government, or if it appears that any such officer is likely to prove or 
disprove the said statement in the defence, the Court shall address  such officer and adjourn the 
proceedin gs until his reply is received.  
(2) The written reply of any officer so referred to shall, if signed by him, be received in evidence and 
have the same effect as if  made on oath before the Court.  
(3) If the court is di ssolved before the receipt of such reply or if the Court omits to comply with the 
provisions of this section, the convening officer may, at his discretion, annul the proceedings and order a 
fresh trial . 
110. Evidence of previous convictions and general cha racter.—(1) When any person subject to 
this Act has been convicted by a Force Court of any offence, such Force Court may inquire into, and 
receive, and record evidence of any previous convictions of such person, either by a Force Court or by a 
criminal cou rt, or any previous award of punishment under section 56 or section 58, and may further 
inquire into and record the general character of such person and such other ma tters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Evidence received under this section may be either oral, or in the shape of entries in, or certified 
extracts from, books of Force Courts or other official records; and it shall not be necessary to give notice 
before trial to the person tried that evidence as to his previous convictions or character will be rece ived.  29 
 (3) At a summary Force Court, the officer holding the trial may, if he thinks fit, record any previous 
convictions against the offender, his general character, and such other matters as may be prescribed, as of 
his own knowledge, instead of requirin g them to be proved under the foregoing provisions of this section.   
111. Lunacy of accused .—(1) Whenever, in the course of a trial by a Force Court, it appears to the 
Court that the person charged is by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of making his defence, or 
that he committed the act alleged but was by reason of unsoundness of mind incapable of knowing the 
nature of the act or knowing that it was wrong or contrary to law, the Court shal l record a finding 
accordingly.  
(2) The presiding officer o f the Court , or, in the case of a Summary Force Court, the officer holding 
the trial, shall forthwith report the case to the confirming officer, or to the authority empowered to deal 
with its finding under s ection 129, as the case may be.  
(3) The confirmin g officer to whom the case is reported under sub -section ( 2) may, if he does not 
confirm the finding, take steps to have the accused person tried by the same or another Force Court for the 
offence with which he was charged.  
(4) The authority to whom the fi nding of a Summary Force Court is reported under sub -section ( 2) 
and a confirming officer confirming the finding in any case so reported to him shall order the accused 
person to be kept in custody in the prescribed manner and shall report the case for the orders of the 
Central Government.  
(5) On receipt of a report under sub -section ( 4), the Central Government may order the accused 
person to be detained in a lunatic asylum or other suitable place of safe custody.  
112. Subsequent fitness of lunatic accused f or trial.—Where any accused person, having been 
found by reason of unsoundness of mind to be incapable of making his defence, is in custody or under 
detention under section 111, any officer prescribed in this behalf, may — 
(a) if such person is in custody u nder sub -section ( 4) of section 111, on the report of a medical 
officer that he is ca pable of making his defence, or  
(b) if such person is detained in a jail under sub -section ( 5) of section 111, on a certificate of the 
Inspector -General of Prisons, and if  such person is detained in a lunatic asylum under the said sub -
section, on a certificate of any two or more of the visitors of such asylum and if he is detained in any 
other place under that sub -section, on a certificate of the prescribed authority, that he is  capable of 
making his defence,  
take steps to have such person tried by the same or another Force Court for the offence with which he was 
originally charged or, if the offence is a civil offence, by a criminal court.  
113. Transmission to Central Government of orders under section 112. —A copy of every order 
made by an officer under section 112 for the trial of the accused shall forthwith be sent to the Central 
Government.  
114. Release of lunatic accused .—Where any person is in custody under sub -section ( 4) of                
section 111 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section, — 
(a) if such person is in custody under the said sub -section ( 4), on the report of a medical officer, 
or 
(b) if such person is detained under the said sub-section ( 5), on a certificate from any of the 
authorities mentioned in clause ( b) of section 112 that in the judgment of such officer or authority 
such person may be released without danger of his doing injury to himself or to any other person,  
the Central Government may order that such person be released or detained in custody or transferred to a 
public lunatic asylum if he has not alrea dy been sent to such an asylum.  
115. Delivery of lunatic accused to relatives. —Where any relative or friend of an y person who is in 
custody under sub -section ( 4) of section 111 or under detention under sub -section ( 5) of that section 
desires that he should be delivered to his care and custody, the Central Government may, upon application 
by such relative or friend an d, on his giving security to the satisfaction of that Government that the person 30 
 delivered shall be properly taken care of, and, prevented from doing injury to himself or to any other 
person, and be produced for the inspection of such officer, and at such times and places, as the Central 
Government may direct, order such person to be delive red to such relative or friend.  
116. Order for custody and disposal of property pending trial .—When any property regarding 
which any offence appears to have been committe d, or which appears to have been used for the 
commission of any offence, is produced before a Force Court during a trial, the Court may make such 
order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such property pending the conclusion of the trial, and if the  
property is subject to speedy or natural decay may, after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, 
order it to be  sold or otherwise disposed of.  
117. Order for disposal of property regarding which offence is committed. —(1) After the 
conclusion of a  trial before any Force Court, the Court or the officer confirming the finding or sentence of 
such Force Court, or any authority superior to such officer, or, in the case of a Summary Force Court 
whose finding or sentence does not require confirmation, an officer not below the rank of Additional 
Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the trial was held, may make such order as it or he 
thinks fit for the disposal by destruction, confiscation, delivery to any person claiming to be entitled to 
possessio n thereof, or otherwise, of any property or document produced before the Court or in its custody, 
or regarding which any offence appears to have been committed or which has been used for  the 
commission of any offence.  
(2) Where any order has been made unde r sub -section ( 1) in respect of property regarding which an 
offence appears to have been committed, a copy of such order signed and certified by the authority 
making the same may, whether the trial was held within India or not, be sent to a magistrate with in whose 
jurisdiction such property for the time being is situated, and such magistrate shall thereupon cause the 
order to be carried into effect as if it were an order passed by him under the provisions of the Code of 
Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) In this section, the term “property”  includes, in the case of property regarding which an offence 
appears to have been committed, not only such property as has been originally in the possession or under 
the control of any person, but also any property  into or for which the same may have been converted or 
exchanged, and anything acquired by such conversion or exchange whether immediately or otherwise.  
118. Powers of Force Court in relation to proceedings under this Act .—Any trial by a Force 
Court under  the provisions of this Act shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Force Court shall be deemed to be a 
court within the meaning of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
119. Tender of pardon to accomplies. —(1) With a view to obtaining the evidence of any person 
supposed to have been directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to an offence triable by a Force Court 
other than a S ummary Force Court under this Act, the commanding officer, the convening officer or the 
Force Court, at any stage of the investigation or inquiry into or the trial of, the offence, may tender a 
pardon to such person on condition of his making a full and tr ue disclosure of the whole of the 
circumstances within his knowledge relating to the offence and to every other person concerned, whether 
as principal or abet tor, in the commission thereof.  
(2) The commanding officer or the convening officer who tenders a pardon under sub -section ( 1) 
shall record — 
(a) his reasons for so doing;  
(b) whether the tender was or was not accepted by the person to whom it was made,  
and shall, on application made by the accused, furnish him with a co py of such record free of cost.  
(3) Every person accepting a tend er of pardon made under sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) shall be examined as a witness by the commanding officer of the accused and i n the 
subsequent trial, if any;  
(b) may be detained in Force custody unti l the termination of the trial. 31 
 120. Trial of person not complying with conditions of pardon. —(1) Where, in regard to a person 
who has accepted a tender of pardon made under section 119, the Judge Attorney, or as the case ma y be, 
the Deputy Judge Attorney -General or the Additional  Judge Attorney -General or the officer approved 
under section 95, certifies that in his opinion such person has, either by wilfully concealing anything 
essential or by giving false evidence, not complied with the conditions on which the tender was made, 
such person may be tried for the offence  in respect of which the pardon was so tendered or for any other 
offence of which he appears to have been guilty in connection with the same matter, and also for the 
offence of giving false evidence:  
Provided that suc h person shall not be tried jointly  with any of the other accused.  
(2) Any statement made by such person accepting the tender of pardon and recorded by his 
commanding officer o r Force Court may be given in evid ence against him at such trial.  
(3) At such trial, the accused shall be entitled to plead that he has complied with the condition upon 
which such tender was made; in which case it shall be for the prosecution to prove that the condit ion has 
not been complied with.  
(4) At such trial, the Force Court shall, before arraignment, ask the accused whether he pleads that he 
has complied with the conditions on which  the tender of pardon was made.  
(5) If the accused does so plead, the Court shall record the plea and proceed with the trial and it shall, 
before giving its finding on the charge, find whether or not the accused has complied with the conditions 
of the pardon, and, if it finds that he has so complied, it shall give a verdict of not guilty.  
CHAPTER IX  
CONFIRMATION AND REVISION  
121. Finding and sentenc e not valid unless confirmed. —No finding or sentence of a General Force 
Court or a Petty Force Court shall be valid except so far as it may be confirmed as provided by this Act.  
122. Power to confirm finding and sentence of General Force Court .—The findings and sentences 
of General Force Courts may be confirmed by the Central Government or by any officer empowered in 
this behalf by war rant of the Central Government.  
123. Power to confirm finding and sentence of Petty Force Court .—The findings and se ntences of 
a Petty Force Court may be confirmed by an officer having power to convene a General Force Court or by 
any officer empowered in this beh alf by warrant of such officer.  
124. Limitation of powers of confirming authority .—A warrant issued under sec tion 122 or  
section 123 may contain such restrictions, reservations or conditions as the authority issuing it may think 
fit.  
125. Power of confirming authority to mitigate, remit or commute sentences .—Subject to such 
restrictions, reservations or conditi ons, as may be contained in any warrant issued under section 122 or 
section 123, a confirming authority may, when confirming the sentence of a Force Court, mitigate or 
remit the punishment thereby awarded or commute that punishment for any punishment or pu nishments 
lower in the  scale laid down in section 51.  
126. Confirming of findings and sentences on board a ship .—When any person subject to this Act 
is tried and sentenced by a Force Court while on board a ship, the finding and sentence so far as not 
confi rmed and executed on board the ship, may be confirmed and executed in like manner as if such 
person had been tried at the port of disembarkation.  
127. Revision of finding o r sentence .—(1) Any finding or sentence of a Force Court which requires 
confirmatio n may be once revised by order of the confirming authority and on such revision, the Court, if 
so directed by the confirming authority, may  take additional evidence.  
(2) The Court , on revision, shall consist of the same officers as were present when the or iginal 
decision was passed unless any of those o fficers are unavoidably absent.  32 
 (3) In case of such unavoidable absence the cause thereof shall be duly certified in the proceedings, 
and the Court shall proceed with the revision, provided that, if a General Force Court, it still consists of 
five officers, or, if a Petty Force Court, of three officers.  
128. Finding and sentence of a Summary Force Court. —The finding and sentence of a Summary 
Force Court shall not require to be confirmed, bu t may be carried out forthwith.  
129. Transmission of proceedings of Summary Force Court. —The proceedi ngs of every Summary 
Force Court shall, without delay be forwarded to the officer not below the rank  of Additional Deputy 
Inspector -General within whose command the trial was held, or to the prescribed officer, and such officer, 
or the Director -General or any officer empowered by him in this behalf may, for reasons based on the 
merits of the case, but not on merely technical grounds, set aside the proceedings, or reduce the sentence 
to any other sentence whi ch the Court might have passed.  
130. Alteration of  finding or sentence in certain cases. —(1) Where a finding of guilty by a Force 
Court, which has been confirmed or which does not require confirmation, is found for any reason to be 
invalid or cannot be supported by the evidence, the authority which would have had power under              
section 142 to commute the punishment awarded by the sentence, if the finding had been valid may 
substitute a new finding and pass a sentence for the offence specified or involved in such finding:  
Provided that no such su bstitution shall be made unless such finding could have been validly made by 
the Force Court on the charge and unless it appears that the Force Court must have been satisfied of the 
facts establishing the said offence.  
(2) Where a sentence passed by a For ce Court which has been confirmed, or which does not require 
confirmation, not being a sentence passed in pursuance of a new  finding substituted under sub -section ( 1), 
is found for any reason to be invalid, the authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) may pass a valid 
sentence.  
(3) The punishment awarded by a sentence passed under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall not 
be higher in the scale of punishments than, or in excess of, the punishment awarded by, the sentence for 
which a new sentence is subst ituted under this section.  
(4) Any finding substituted, or any sentence passed, under this section shall, for the purposes of this 
Act and the rules, have effect as if it were a finding or sentence, as the  case may be, of a Force Court.  
131. Remedy against  order, finding or sentence of Force Court. —(1) Any person subject to this 
Act who considers himself aggrieved by any order passed by any Force Court may present a petition to 
the officer or authority empowered to confirm any finding or sentence of such Force Court, and the 
confirming authority may take such steps as may be considered necessary to satisfy itself as to the 
correctness, legality or propriety of the order passed or as to the regularity of any proceed ing to which the 
order relates.  
(2) Any pe rson subject to this Act who considers himself aggrieved by a finding or sentence of any 
Force Court which has been confirmed, may present a petition to the Central Government, the                
Director -General or any prescribed officer superior in comma nd to the one who conf irmed such finding or 
sentence,  and the Central Government, the Director -General, or the prescribed officer, as the case may be, 
may pass such order thereon as it or he thinks fit.  
132. Annu lment of proceedings. —The Central Government , the Director -General or any prescribed 
officer may annul the proceedings of any Force Court on the ground that they are illegal or unjust.  
CHAPTER X  
EXECUTION OF SENTENCES, PARDONS, REMISSIONS, ETC . 
133. Form of sentence of death. —In awarding a sentence  of death, a Force Court shall, in its 
discretion direct that the offender shall suffer death by being hanged by the neck until he be dead, or shall 
suffer  death by being shot to death.  
  33 
 134. Commencement of sentence of imprisonment. —Whenever any person is sentenced by a Force 
Court under this Act to imprisonment, the term of his sentence shall, whether it has been revised or not, 
be reckoned to commence on the day on which the original proceedings were signed by the presiding 
officer, or in the case of a  Summary Force Court, by the Court:  
Provided that — 
(i) if for any reason, beyond the control of the commanding officer or superior officer, the 
sentence of imprisonment cannot be executed in full or in part, the convict shall be liable to undergo 
the whole  or unexpired portion of sentence, as the case may be, when it becomes poss ible to carry out 
the same;  
(ii) the period of detention or confinement, if any, undergone by an accused person, during the 
investigation, inquiry or trial of the case in which he is sentenced and before the date on which the 
original proceedings were signed shall be set off against the term of his sentence and the liability of 
such person to undergo imprisonment shall be restricted to the remainder, if a ny of the term of his 
senten ce. 
135. Execution of sentence of imprisonment. —(1) Whenever any sentence of imprisonment is 
passed under this Act by a Force Court or whenever any sentence of death is commuted to imprisonment, 
the confirming officer or in case of a Summary Force Court th e officer holding the Court or such other 
officer as may be prescribed shall, save as otherwise provided in sub -sections ( 3) and ( 4), direct that the 
sentence shall be carried out by  confinement in a civil prison.  
(2) When a direction has been made under sub-section ( 1), the commanding officer of the person 
under sentence or such other officer as may be prescribed shall forward a warrant in the prescribed form 
to the officer in charge of the prison in which such person is to be confined and shall arrange f or his 
dispatch  to such prison with the warrant.  
(3) In the case of a sentence of imprisonment for a period not exceeding three months and passed 
under this Act by a Force Court, the appropriate officer under sub -section ( 1) may direct that the sentence 
shall be carried out by confinement in Force custod y instead of in a civil prison.  
(4) On active duty, a sentence of imprisonment may be carried out by confinement in such place as 
the officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy Inspector -General within whose command the person 
sentenced is serving or any prescribed officer  may from time to time appoint.  
136. Temporary custody of offender .—Where a sentence of imprisonment is directed to be 
undergone in a civil prison, the offender may be kept in Force cus tody or in any other fit place till such 
time as it is possible  to send him to a civil prison.  
137. Execution of sentence of imprisonment in special cases .—Whenever, in the opinion of an 
officer not below the rank of Additional Deputy I nspector -General wit hin whose command the trial is 
held, any sentence or portion of a sentence of imprisonment cannot for special reasons conveniently be 
carried out in Force custody in accordance with the provisions of section 135, such officer may direct that 
such sentence or portion of sentence shall be carried out by confinement in any c ivil prison or other fit 
place.  
138. Conveyance of prisoner from place to place. —A person under sentence of imprisonment may 
during his conveyance from place to place, or when on board a sh ip, aircraft, or otherwise, be subjected to 
such restraint as is necessary fo r his safe conduct and removal.  
139. Communication of certain orders to prison officers. —Whenever an order is duly made under 
this Act setting aside or varying any sentence, order  or warrant under which any person is confined in a 
civil prison, a warrant in accordance with such order shall be forwarded by the officer making the order or 
his staff officer or such other person as may be prescribed, to the officer in charge of the pri son in which 
such person is confined.  34 
 140. Execution of sentence of fine. —When a sentence of fine is imposed by a Force Court under 
section 49, a copy of such sentence signed and certified by the confirming officer, or where no 
confirmation is required, by  the officer holding the trial may be sent to any magistrate in India, and such 
magistrate shall thereupon cause the fine to be recovered in accordance with the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), as if it were a sentence of fin e imposed by such magistrate.  
141. Informality or error in the order or warrant. —Whenever any person is sentenced to 
imprisonment under this Act, and is undergoing the sentence in any place or manner in which he might be 
confined under a lawful order or warrant in pursuance of this Act, the confinement of such person shall 
not be deeme d to be illegal only by reason of informality or error in, or as respects, the order, warrant or 
other document, or the authority by which, or in pursuance whereof such person was brought into, or, is 
confined in any such place, and any such order, warrant  or document may be amended accordingly.  
142. Pardon and remission. —When any person subject to this Act has been convicted by a Force 
Court of any offence, the Central Government or the Director -General or, in the case of a sentence, which 
he could have c onfirmed or which did not require confirmation, an officer not below the rank  of 
Additional Deputy Inspector -General within whose command such person at the time of conviction was 
serving, or the prescribed officer may, — 
(a) either with or without conditio ns which the person sentenced accepts, pardon the person or 
remit the whole or any part  of the punishments awarded; or  
(b) mitigate the punishment awarded; or  
(c) commute such punishment for any less punishment or punishments mentioned in this Act; or  
(d) either with or without conditions which the person sentenced accepts, release the person on 
parole.  
143. Cancellation of conditional pardon, release on parole or remission. —(1) If any condition on 
which a person has been pardoned or released on parole or a punishment has been remitted is, in the 
opinion of the authority which granted the pardon, release or remission, not fulfilled, such authority may 
cancel the pardon, release or remission, and thereupon the sentence of the Court shall be carried into 
effect as if such pardon, release or remission had not been granted.  
(2) A person whose sentence of imprisonment is carried into effect under the provisions of                 
sub-section ( 1) shall undergo only the unexp ired portion of his sentence.  
144. Suspension of sentence of imprisonment. —(1) Where a person subject to this Act is sentenced 
by a Force Court to imprisonment, the Central Government, the Director -General or any of ficer 
empowered to convene a General Force Court may suspend the sentence whether or not the offender has 
already been committed  to prison or to Force custody.  
(2) The authority or officer specified in sub -section ( 1) may, in the case of an offender so sentenced 
direct that until the orders of such authority or officer have been obtained, the offender shall not be 
committed to prison or to Force custody.  
(3) The powers conferred by sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) may be exe rcised in the case of any such 
sentence which has been confirmed, reduced or commuted.  
145. Orders pending suspension .—(1) Where the sentence referred to in section 144 is imposed by 
a Force Court other than a summary Force Court, the confirming officer m ay, when confirming the 
sentence, direct that the offender be not committed to prison or to Force custody until the orders of the 
authority or officer specified in section 144 have been obtained.  
(2) Where a sentence of imprisonment is imposed by a Summar y Force Court, the officer holding the 
trial may make the direction referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
146. Release on suspension. —Where a sentence is suspended under section 144, the offender shall 
forthwith be released from custody.  35 
 147. Computation of peri od of suspension. —Any period during which the sentence is under 
suspension shall be reckoned as par t of the term of such sentence.  
148. Order after suspension. —The authority or officer specified in section 144 may, at any time 
while a sentence is suspended , order— 
(a) that the offender be committed to undergo the unexpi red portion of the sentence; or  
(b) that the sentence be remitted.  
149. Reconsideration of case after suspension. —(1) Where a sentence has been suspended, the case 
may at any time, and shall at intervals of not more than four months, be reconsidered by the authority or 
officer not below the rank of an Additional Deputy Inspector -General duly authorised by the authority or 
officer specified in section 144.  
(2) Where on such reconsideration by t he officer so authorised it appears to him that the conduct of 
offender since his conviction has been such as to justify a remission of the sentence, he shall refer the 
matter to the authority or of ficer specified in section 144.  
150. Fresh sentence after suspension. —Where an offender, while a sentence on him is suspended 
under this Act, is sentenced for any other offence, then — 
(a) if the further sentence is also suspended under this Act, the two sentences shall run 
concurrently;  
(b) if the further senten ce is for a period of three months or for and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall also be committed to prison or Force custody for the unexpired portion of the 
previous sentence, but both senten ces shall run concurrently; and  
(c) if the fur ther sentence is for a period of less than three months and is not suspended under this 
Act, the offender shall be so committed on that sentence only, and the previous sentence shall, subject 
to any order which may be passed under section 148 or section  149, continue to be suspended.  
151. Scope of power of suspension. —The powers conferred by sections 144 and 148 shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, the power of mitigation, remission and commutation.  
152. Effect of suspension and remission on dismissal. —(1) Where in addition to any other sentence 
the punishment of dismissal has been awarded by a Force Court, and such other sentence is suspended 
under section 144, then, such dismissal shall not take effect until so ordered by the authority or of ficer 
specified in section 144.  
(2) If such other sentence is remitted under section 148, the punishment of di smissal shall also be 
remitted.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
153. Rank structure. —(1) The  officers and other members of the Force shall be classified in 
accordance with their ranks in the following categ ories, namely: — 
(a) officers— 
(i) Director -General.  
(ii) Additional Director -General.  
(iii) Inspector -General.  
(iv) Deputy Inspector -General.  
(v) Addit ional Deputy Inspector -General.  
(vi) Commandant.  
(vii) Second -in-Command.  36 
 (viii) Deputy Commandant.  
(ix) Assistant Commandant.  
(b) subordinate officers — 
(i) Subedar -Major.  
(ii) Subedar/Inspector.  
(iii) Sub -Inspector.  
(c) under officers — 
(i) Head  Constable.  
(ii) Naik.  
(iii) Lance naik.  
(d) enrolled persons other  than under officers —constable.  
(2) The matters relating to inter se seniority of persons belonging to the same rank shall be 
determined in accordance with s uch rules as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything conta ined in this Act, the Director -General may, subject to 
confirmation of the Central Government as provided hereinafter, grant to an officer or a                  
Subedar -Major of the Force a rank, mentioned in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) as a local rank, whenever 
considered necessary by him in the interest of b etter functioning of the Force.  
(4) An officer of t he Force holding a local rank, — 
(a) shall exercise the command and be vested with the powers o f an officer holding  that rank;  
(b) shall cease to hold that rank if the grant of such rank is not confirmed within one month by the 
Central Government or when so  ordered by the Director -General or when he ceases to hold the 
appointment for which the rank was granted;  
(c) sha ll not be entitled to claim any seniority over other officers of the Force by virtu e of having 
held such rank; and  
(d) shall not be entitled to any extra pay and al lowances for holding such rank.  
Explanation I.—Assistant Commandant shall also include a Joint Assistant Commandant in case of 
personnel belonging to cadres of Motor Mechanic, Combatant Ministerial and Comba tant Stenographer of 
the Force.  
Explanation  II.—Sub-Inspector shall include an Assistant Sub -Inspector in case of personnel 
belonging to Co mbatant Ministerial cadre of the Force.  
154. Powers and duties conferrable and imposable on members of the Force .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, direct that, subject to such 
conditions and lim itations as may be specified in the order, any member of the Force may exercise or 
discharge such of the powers or duties under any Central Act as may be specified in the said order, being 
the powers and duties which, in the opinion of the Central Governme nt, an officer of the corresponding or 
lower rank is by such Central Act empowered to exercise or d ischarge for the said purposes.  
(2) The Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, confer 
or impose, with the con currence of the State Government concerned, any of the powers or duties which 
may be exercised or discharged under a State Act by a police officer upon a member of the Force who, in 
the opinion of the Central Government, holds a corresponding or higher ran k. 
(3) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sess ions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 37 
 in the order or both Houses agree that the order should not be made, the order shall thereaft er have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously done under that order.  
155. Protection  for acts of memb ers of the Force. —(1) In any suit or proceeding against any 
member of the Force for any act done by him in pursuance of a warrant or order of a competent authority, 
it shall be lawful for him to plead that such act was done by him under the auth ority of su ch warrant or 
order.  
(2) Any such plea may be proved by the production of the warrant or order directing the act, and if it 
is so proved the member of the Force shall thereupon be discharged from liability in respect of the act so 
done by him, notwithstanding any defect in the jurisdiction of the authority whic h issued such warrant or 
order.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any legal 
proceeding (whether civil or criminal) which may lawfully be brought against any member of the Force 
for anything done or intended to be done under the powers conferred by, or in pursuance of any provision 
of this Act or the rules, shall be commenced within three months after the act complained of was 
committed and not otherwise, and notice in writing of such proceeding and of the cause thereof shall be 
given to the defendant or his superior officer at least one month before the c ommencement of such 
proceeding.  
156. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for the 
purpose of carrying into eff ect the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the constitution , governance, comma nd an d discipline of the force;  
(b) the enrolment of persons to the Force and the recruitment  of other members of the Force;  
(c) the conditions of service (including deductions from pay and allow ances) of members of the 
Force;  
(d) the precedence, powers of comm and and authority of the officers, subordinate officers,              
under -officers and oth er persons subject to this Act;  
(e) the dismissal, removal, retirement, release or discharge from the service of persons subject to 
this Act;  
(f) the purposes and other matters required to be prescribed under section 13;  
(g) the amount and incidence of fine to be imposed under section 60;  
(h) the convening, constitution, adjournment, dissolution and sittings of Force Courts, the 
procedure to be observe d in trials by such Courts, the persons by whom an accused may be defended 
in such trials and the appe arance of such persons thereat;  
(i) the confirmation, revision and annulment of, and petitions against, the findings  and sentences 
of Force Courts;  
(j) the forms of orders to be made under the provisions of this Act relating to Force Courts and 
the awards and infliction of death, imprisonment and detenti on; 
(k) the constitution of authorities to decide for what persons, to what amounts and in what 
manner, p rovisions should be made for dependants under section 67 and the due carr ying out of such 
decisions;  
(l) the carrying into effect of sentences of F orce Courts;  
(m) any matter necessary for the purpose of carrying this Act into execution, as far as it relat es to 
the investigation, arrest, custody, trial and punishment of offences triabl e or punishable under this 
Act; 38 
 (n) the ceremonials to be observed and marks of r espect to be paid in the Force;  
(o) the convening of, the constitution, procedure and practice  of, courts of inquiry, the 
summoning of witnesses before them and the administ ration of oaths by such courts;  
(p) the recruitment and conditio ns of service of Judge Attorney -General, Additional Judge 
Attorney -General, Deputy Judge Attor ney-General and Judge Attorney;  
(q) the disposal of the private or regimental property, or any other dues including provident fund 
of persons subject to this Act who die or desert or are ascertained to be of unsound mind or while on 
active duty are officially reported as missing;  
(r) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is t o 
be, or may be, made by rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament,  while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the s uccessive sessions aforesaid, both Ho uses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under that rule.  
157. Provisions as to existing Indo-Tibetan Border Police Force. —(1) The Indo -Tibetan Border 
Police Force in existence at the commencement of this Act shall be d eemed to be the Fo rce constituted 
under this Act.  
(2) The members of the Indo -Tibetan Border Police Force in existence at the commencement of this 
Act shall be deemed to have been appointed or, as the case may be, e nrolled as such under this Act.  
(3) Anything done or any action taken before the commencement of this Act in relation to the 
constitution of the Indo -Tibetan Border Police Force referred to in sub -section ( 1), in relation to any 
person appointed or enrolled, as the case may be, thereto, shal l be as valid and as effective in law as if 
such thing or action was done or taken under this Act:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall render any person guilty of any offence in respect of 
anything done or omitted to be done by him before the commencement of this Act.  
--------------------------The Infant Milk Substitutes, Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE INFANT MILK SUBSTITUTES, FEEDING BOTTLES AND INFANT FOODS 
(REGULATION OF PRODUCTIO N, SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION) ACT , 1992  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Certain prohibitions in relation to infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles and infant foods.  
4. Prohibition of incentives for the use or sale of infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles.  
5. Donations of infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles or equipment of mate rials relating thereto.  
6. Information on containers and labels of infant milk substitutes of infant foods.  
7. Educational and other materials relating to feeding of infants to contain certain particulars.  
8. Health care system.  
9. Inducement to health worker for prom oting use of infant milk substitutes, etc.  
10. Special provision relating to employees of person who produces, supplies, distributes or sells 
infant milk substitutes, etc.  
11. Standards of infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles or infant foods.  
12. Powers of entry a nd search.  
13. Power to seize infant milk substitutes, etc., or containers thereof.  
14. Confiscation.  
15. Power to give option to pay cost in lieu of confiscation.  
16. Confiscation not to interfere with other punishment s. 
17. Adjudication.  
18. Giving of opportunity to the owner of the seized infant milk substitute o r feeding bottle or infant 
food or container thereof.  
19. Appeal.  
20. Penalty.  
21. Cognizance of offences.  
22. Offences by companies.  
23. Offences to be cognizable and bailable.  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
25. Application of Act  37 of 1954 not barred.  
26. Power to make rules.   2 
 THE INFANT MILK SUBSTITUTES, FEEDING BOTTLES AND INFANT FOODS 
(REGULATION OF PRODUCTIO N, SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION) ACT , 1992  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1992  
[29th December, 1992. ] 
An Act to provide for the regulation of production, supply and distribution  of infant milk 
substitutes, feeding bottles and infant foods with a  view to the protection and promotion of 
breast -feeding and ensuring  the proper use  of infant foods and for matter s connected 
therewith  or incidental the reto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Infant Milk Substitutes,  
Feeding Bottles and Infant Foods (Regulation of Production, Supply and  Distribution) Act, 1992.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central  Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
2[(a) “advertisement ” includes any notice, circular, label, wrapper or any other document  or 
visible representation or announcement made by means of  any light, sound, smoke or gas  or by means 
of electronic transmission or by audio or visual transmission ;] 
(b) “container ” means a box, bottle, casket, tin, can, barrel, case, tube, receptacle, sack, wrapper 
or other thing in which any infant milk substitute, feeding bottle or infant f ood is placed or packed for 
sale or distribution;  
(c) “feeding bottle ” means any bottle or receptacle used for the purpose of feeding infant milk 
substitutes, and includes a teat and a valve attached or capable of being attached to such bottle or 
receptacl e; 
(d) “health care system ” means an institution or organisation engaged, either directly or 
indirectly, in health care for mothers, infants or pregnant women, and includes a health worker in 
private practice, 3[a pharmacy , drug store  and any association of health workers] ; 
(e) “health worker ” means a person engaged in health care for mothers, infants or pregnant 
women;  
(f) “infant food ” means any food (by whatever name called) being marketed or otherwise 
represented as a complement to  mother ’s milk to meet the growing nutritional needs of the infant 
4[after the age of six months  and up to the age of two years] ; 
(g) “infant milk substitute ” means any food being marketed or otherwise represented as a partial 
or total replacement for moth er’s milk 5[for infant up to the age of two years] ; 
(h) “label ” means a display of written, marked, stamped, printed or graphic matter affixed to, or 
appearing upon, any container;  
(i) “prescribed ” means prescrib ed by rules made under this Act;  
6[(j) “promotion” means to employ directly or indirectly any method of encouraging any person 
to purchase or use infant milk substitute, feeding bottle or infant food. ] 
                                                           
1. 1st August 1993, vide notification No . G.S.R. 527(E), dated 31st July, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part I,        
sec. 3( i). 
2. Subs. by Act 38 of 2003, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 2,  ibid., for “but does not include a pharmacy or drug store” (w.e.f. 1-11-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “after the age of four months”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “, whether or not it is suitable for such replacement ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
6. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  3 
 (2) Any reference in this Act to any other enactment or any provision thereof, shall, in rela tion to an 
area in which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the 
corresponding law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
3. Certain prohibitions in relation to infant  milk substitutes, feeding bottles and infant foods .—
No person shall — 
(a) advertise, or take part in the publication of any advertisement, for the distribution, sale or 
supply of infant milk substitutes 1[, feeding bottles  or infant foods] ; or 
(b) give  an impression or create a belief in any manner that feeding of 2[infant milk substitutes 
and infant foods are]  equivalent to, or better than, mother's milk; or  
3[(c) take part in the promotion of infant milk substitutes , feeding bottles or infant foods .] 
4. Prohibition of incentives for use or sale of infant milk substitutes or 4[feeding bottles  or infant 
foods] .—No person shall — 
(a) supply or distribute samples of infant milk substitutes or 4[feeding bottles  or infant foods]  or 
gifts of utensils or other articles; or  
(b) contact any pregnant woman or the mother of an infant; or  
(c) offer inducement of any other kind,  
for the purpose of promoting the use or sale of infant milk substitutes or 4[feeding bottles  or infant foods] . 
5. Donations of infant milk substitutes or feeding or equipment or materials relating           
thereto .—Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 8, no person shall donate or distribute — 
(a) infant milk substitutes or 5[feeding bottles or infant foods] to any other person except to an 
orphanage;  
(b) any informational or educational equipment or material relating to infant milk substitutes or 
5[feeding bottles  or infant foods] : 
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to the donat ion or distribution, subject to such 
conditions and restrictions as may be prescribed, of such equipment or material through the health 
care system.  
6. Information on containers and labels of infant milk substitutes or infant foods .—(1) Without 
prejudice t o the provisions of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954) and the rules 
made thereunder, no person shall produce, supply or distribute any infant milk substitute or infant food 
unless every container thereof or any label affixed theret o indicates in a clear, conspicuous and in an 
easily readable and understandable manner, the words “important notice ” in capital letters in such 
language as may be prescribed and indicating thereunder the following particulars in the same language, 
namely: — 
(a) a statement “mother ’s milk is best for your baby ” in capital letters;  
(b) a statement that infant milk substitute or infant food should be used only on the advice of a 
health worker as to the need for its use and the proper method of its use;  
(c) a warning that infant milk substitute or infant food is not the sole source of nourishment of an 
infant;  
(d) the instructions for its appropriate preparation and a warning against the health hazards o f its 
inappropriate preparation;  
(e) the ingredients used ; 
(f) the composition or analysis;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2003, s. 3, for “or feeding bottles”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “infant milk substitutes is”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “feeding bo ttles”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
5. Subs. by s. 5, ibid.,  for “feeding bottles”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  4 
 (g) the storage conditions required;  
(h) the batch number, date of its manufacture and the date before which it is to be consumed, 
taking into account the climatic and storage conditions of the country;  
(i) such other par ticulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) No container or label referred to in sub -section ( 1) relating to 1[infant milk substitute or infant 
food] shall — 
(a) have pictures of an infant or a woman or both; or  
(b) have  pictures or other graphic material or phrases designed to increase the saleability of 
1[infant milk substitute  or infant food] ; or 
(c) use on it the word “humanised ” or “maternalised ” or any other similar word; or  
(d) bear on it such other particulars as may be prescribed.  
7. Educational and other materials relating to feeding of infants to contain certain 
particulars .—(1) 2[Every educational or other material  including advertisements or material relating to 
promotion of infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles and infant foods ], whether audio or visual, dealing 
with pre -natal or post -natal care or with the feeding of an infant and intended to reach pregnant wo men or 
mothers of infants shall include clear information relating to — 
(a) the benefits and superiority of breast -feeding;  
(b) the preparation for, and the continuance of, breast -feeding;  
(c) the harmful effects on breast -feeding due to the partial adoptio n of bottle feeding;  
(d) the difficulties in reverting to breast -feeding of infants after a period of feeding by infant milk 
substitute;  
(e) the financial and social implications in making use of infant milk substitutes and feeding 
bottles;  
(f) the health hazards of improper use of infant milk substitutes and feeding bottles;  
3[(fa) the date of printing and publication of such material and the name of the printer and 
publisher;]  
(g) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) No material referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be utilised to promote the use or sale of infant milk 
substitutes or 4[feeding bottles  or infant foods] . 
8. Health care system .—(1) No person shall use any health care system for the display of placards or 
posters relating to, or for the distribution of, materials for the purpose of promoting the use or sale of 
infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles or infant foods:  
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply to — 
(a) the donation or distribution of informationa l or educational equipment or material made in 
accordance with the proviso to clause  (b) of section 5;  and 
(b) the dissemination of information to a health worker about the scientific and factual matters 
relating to the use of infant milk substitutes or fe eding bottles or infant foods along with the 
information specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 7.  
(2) No person who produces, supplies, distributes or sells infant milk substitu tes or feeding bottles or 
infant foods shall make any payment to any person who works in the health care system for the purpose 
of promoting the use or sale of such substitutes or bottles or foods.  
(3) No person, other than a health worker , shall demonstrate feeding with infant milk substitutes or 
infant foods to a mother of an in fant or to any member of he r family and such health worker  shall also 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2003, s. 6, for “infant milk substitute”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “Every educational or other material”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid.,  for “feeding bottles”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  5 
 clearly explain to such mother or such other member the hazards of improper use of infant milk 
substitutes or feeding bottles or infant foods.  
(4) No person, other than an institution or  organisation, engaged in health care for mothers, infants or 
pregnant women, shall distribute infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles to a mother who cannot resort 
to breast -feeding and who cannot afford to purchase infant milk substitu tes or feeding b ottles.  
(5) An orphanage may purchase infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles at a price lower than their 
sale price for the purpose of utilising them in the said orphanage.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, such purchase s shall not amo unt to an 
inducement for promoting the use or sale of infant milk substitutes or feeding bottles.  
9. Inducement to health worker for promoting use of infant milk substitutes, etc .—(1) No person 
who produces, supplies, distributes or sells infant milk subst itutes or feeding bottles or infant foods shall 
offer or give, directly or indirectly, any financial inducements or gifts to a health worker or to any 
member of his family for the purpose of promoting the use of such substitutes or bottles or foods.  
1[(2) No producer, supplier or distributor referred to in sub -section ( 1), shall offer or give any 
contribution or pecuniary benefit to a health worker or any association of health workers, including 
funding of seminar, meeting, conference, educational course, c ontest, fellowship, research work or 
sponsorship.]  
10. Special provision relating to employees of person who produces, supplies distributes or sells 
infant milk substitutes, etc .—(1) No person who produces, supplies, distributes or sells infant milk 
substi tutes or feeding bottles or infant foods shall fix the remuneration of any of his employees or give 
any commission to such employees on the basis of the volume of sale of such substitutes or bottles or 
foods made by such employees.  
(2) The employees of suc h person shall not perform any function which relates to educating a 
pregnant woman or mother of an infant on pre -natal or post -natal care of the infant.  
11. Standards of infant milk substitutes, feeding bottles or infant foods .—(1) No person shall sell 
or otherwise distribute any infant milk substitute or infant food unless it conforms to the standards, 
specified for such substitute or food under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954), 
and the rules made thereunder and the container the reof has the relevant Standard Mark specified by the 
Bureau of Indian Standards established under section 3 of the Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986             
(63 of 1986) to indicate that the infant milk substitute or infant food conforms to such stan dards:  
Provided that where no standards have been specified for any infant milk substitute or infant food 
under the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954), no person shall sell or otherwise 
distribute such substitute or food unless he has o btained the approval of the Central Government in 
relation to such substitute or food and the label affixed to the container thereof under the rules made under 
that Act.  
(2) No person shall sell or otherwise distribute any feeding bottle unless it conforms  to the Standard 
Mark specified by the Bureau of Indian Standards referred to in sub -section ( 1) for feeding bottle s and 
such mark is affixed on its container.  
12. Powers of entry and search .—(1) Any food inspector appointed under section 9 of the 
Preventi on of Food Adulteration Act , 1954 (37 of 1954) (hereinafter referred to as the food inspector) or 
any officer not below the rank of a Class I officer authorised in this behalf by the State Government 
(hereinafter referred to as the authorised officer) may,  if he has any reason to believe that any provision of 
section 6 or section 11 has been or is being contravened, enter and search at any reasonable time any 
factory, building, business premises or any other place where any trade or commerce in infant milk 
substitutes or feeding bottles or infant foods is carried on or such substitutes or bottles or foods are 
produced, supplied or distributed.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this Act.  
13. Power to seize infant milk substitutes, etc., or containers thereof .—(1) If any food inspector or 
authorised officer has reason to believe that in respect of any infant milk substitut e or feeding bottle or 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2003, s. 8, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  6 
 infant food or container thereof, the provisions of this Act have been or are being contravened, he may 
seize such substitute or bottle or food or container.  
(2) No such substitute or food or bottle or container shall be retained by any food inspector or 
authorised officer for a period exceeding ninety days from the date of its seizure unless the approval of 
the District Judge, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such seizure has been made, has been 
obtained for such retenti on. 
14. Confiscation .—Any infant milk substitute or feeding bottle or infant food or container thereof, in 
respect of which any provision of this Act has been or is being contravened, shall be liable to 
confiscation:  
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court adjudging the confiscation that the 
person in whose possession, power or control any such substitute or bottle or food or container is found is 
not responsible for the contravention of the provisions of this Act, the court may, instead of making an 
order for the confiscation of such substitute or bottle or food or container, make such other order 
authorised by this Act against the person guilty of the breach of the provisions of this Act as it may think 
fit. 
15. Power to giv e option to pay cost in lieu of confiscation .—(1) Whenever any confiscation is 
authorised by this Act, the court adjudging it may, subject to such conditions as may be specified in the 
order adjudging the confiscation, give to the owner thereof an option t o pay in lieu of confiscation such 
cost not exceeding the value of the infant milk substitute or feeding bottle or infant food or container 
thereof in respect of which the confiscation is authorised as the court thinks fit.  
(2) On payment of the cost order ed by the court the seized infant milk substitute or feeding bottle or 
infant food or container shall be returned to the person from whom it was seized on the condition that 
such person shall, before making any distribution, sale or supply of such substitu te or bottle or food or 
container, give effect to the provisions of this Act.  
16. Confiscation not to interfere with other punishments .—No confiscation made or cost ordered 
to be paid under this Act shall prevent the infliction of any punishment to which t he person affected 
thereby is liable under the provisions of this Act or under any other law.  
17. Adjudication .—Any confiscation may be adjudged or costs may be ordered to be paid, — 
(a) without any limit, by the principal civil court of original jurisdicti on within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction such confiscation has been made or costs have been ordered to be paid, as the case 
may be;  
(b) subject to such limits as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf, by such 
other court, not be low a civil court having pecuniary jurisdiction exceeding five thousand rupees, as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise in this behalf.  
18. Giving of opportunity to the owner of the seized infant milk substitute or  feeding bottle or 
infant food or container thereof .—(1) No order adjudicating confiscation or directing payment of costs 
shall be made unless the owner of the infant milk substitute or feeding bottle or infant food or container 
thereof has been given a no tice in writing informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to 
confiscate such substitute or bottle or food or container and giving him a reasonable opportunity of 
making a representation in writing, within such reasonable time as may be specified  in the notice, against 
the confiscation and if he so desires, of being heard in the matter:  
Provided that where no such notice is given within a period of ninety days from the date of the seizure 
of the infant milk substitute or feeding bottle or infant f ood or container thereof, such substitute or bottle 
or food or container shall be returned after the expiry of that period to the person from whose possession 
it was seized.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), the provisions of the Code of C ivil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908), shall, so far as may be, apply to every proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
19. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision of the court adjudicating a confiscation or 
ordering the payment of costs may prefer an appeal to the court to which an appeal lies from the decision 
of such court.  7 
 (2) The appellate court may, after giving the appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such order 
as it thinks fit confirming, modifying or revising the decision or order appealed against or may send back 
the case with such directions as it may think fit for a fresh decision or adjudication, as the case may be, 
after taking additional evidence if necessary:  
Provided that an order enhancing any fine in lieu of confiscation o r for confiscating goods of greater 
value shall not be made under this section unless the appellant has had an opportunity of making a 
representation and if he so desires of being heard in his defence.  
(3) No further appeal shall lie against the order of t he court made under sub -section ( 2). 
20. Penalty .—(1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 3, 4, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 or         
sub-section ( 2) of 1[section 11  and the rules made under section 26 of the Act]  shall be punishable with 
imprisonment  for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 6 or sub -section ( 1) of 1[section 11  and the 
rules made under section 26 of the Act]  shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine  which shall not be less than 
two thousand rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for any adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three months but which may 
extend to two years and with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees.  
21. Cognizance of offences .—(1) Save a s otherwise provided in section 173 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this Act 
except upon a complaint in writing made by — 
(a) a person authorised in this behalf under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 of the Prevention of 
Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (37 of 1954); or  
(b) an officer not below the rank of a Class I officer authorised in this behalf, by general or 
special order, by the Government; or  
(c) a representative of such volu ntary organisation engaged in the field of child welfare and 
development and child nutrition as the Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
authorise in this behalf.  
(2) Where a complaint has been made by a representative of the voluntary organisation authorised 
under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) and the court has issued a summons or, as the case may be, a warrant 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 204 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the Assistant 
Public Prosecutor for t hat court shall take charge of the case and conduct the prosecution.  
22. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this su b-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer  of the company , such director, manager, secretary or other officer  shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm of other association of               
individuals; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2003, s. 9, for “section 11”  (w.e.f. 1-11-2003).  8 
 (b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
23. Offences to be cognizable and bailable .—Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), an offence punishable under this Act shall be — 
(a) bailable;  
(b) cognizable.  
24. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any State Government or any officer of the Central Government 
1[or a representative of such voluntary organi sation which is notified under clause ( c) of sub-section (1) of 
section 21]  for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
25. Application of Act 37 of 1954 not barred .—The provisions of this Act , or the rules made 
thereunder shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 
1954, or the rule s made thereunder.  
26. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the conditions and restrictions subject to w hich educational equipment and other material may 
be donated or distributed under the proviso to clause ( b) of section 5;  
(b) the language in which the notice and other particulars shall be indicated under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 6;  
(c) the particulars which are to be indicated under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(d) the particulars which a container or label shall not bear under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 6;  
(e) the matters to be included in the information which reaches preg nant women or mothers of 
infants under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session , for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions afor esaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so , however, that any such modif ication or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2003, s. 10, for “or of any State Government”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2003).  
--------------------------The National Commission for Minorities Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITIES ACT, 1992  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  COMMISSION  FOR MINORITIES  
3. Constitution of the National  Commission for Minorities . 
4. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members . 
5. Officers and other employees of the Commission . 
6. Salaries and allowances to be paid out of grants . 
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Commiss ion. 
8. Procedure to be regulated by the Commission . 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
9. Functions of the Commission  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
10. Grants by the Central Government . 
11. Accounts and audit . 
12. Annual report . 
13. Annual report and audit report  to be laid before Parliament . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. Chairperson, Members and staff of the Commission to be public servants . 
15. Power to make rules . 
16. Power to remove difficulties . 
 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL COMMISSION FOR MINORITIES ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 19 OF 1992  
[17th May, 1992.]  
An Act to constitute a National Commission for Minorities and to provide for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by  Parliament in the Forty -third Y ear of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Commission 
for Minorities Act, 1992.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Gov ernment may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Commission” means the National Commission for Minorit ies constituted under section 3;  
(b) “Member” mea ns a Member of the Commission 2[and includes th e Vice -Chairperson];  
(c) “minority”, for the purposes of this Act, means a community notified as  such by the Central 
Government;  
(d) “prescribed” means prescribed by r ules made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  COMMISSIONFOR  MINORITIES  
3. Constitution of the Nati onal Commission for Minorities .—(1) The Central Government shall 
constitute a body to be known as the National Commission for Minorities to exercise the powers 
conferred on, and to perform the fun ctions assigned to, it under this Act.  
(2) The Commission s hall consist of a 3[Chairperson, a Vice -Chairperson and five Members ] to be 
nominated by the Central Government from amongst persons of e minence, ability and integrity:  
Provided that five Members including the Chairpe rson shall be from amongst the m inority 
communities.  
4. Term of office and conditions of se rvice of Chair person  and Members .—(1) The Chairperson 
and every Member shall hold office for a term of three years from the date he assumes office.  
(2) The Chairperson or a Member may, by writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government, resign from the office of Chairperson or, as the case may be, of the Member at any time.  
(3) The Central Government shall remove a person from the o ffice of Chairperson or a Member 
referred to in sub -section ( 2) if that person — 
(a) becomes an undischarged insolvent;  
(b) is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which , in the opinion of the 
Central Gove rnment , involves moral turpitude;  
(c) becomes of unsound mind and stands s o declared by a competent court;  
(d) refuses to act  or becomes incapable of acting;  
                                                           
1. 17th May, 1993, vide notification No . S.O. 317(E) , dated 17th May, 1993, see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3(ii). 
2.  Added by Act 41 of 1995, s.2 (w.e.f.  18-9-1995).  
3. Subs. by  s. 3, ibid., for “Chairperson and six Members” (w.e.f. 18-9-1995).  3 
 (e) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Commission, absent from three consecu tive 
meetings of the Commission; or  
(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abus ed the position of Chairperson or 
Member as to render that person’s continuance in office d etrimental to the interests of m inorities or 
the public interest:  
Provided that no person shall be removed under t his clause until that person has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(4) A vacancy caused under sub -section ( 2) or otherwise shall be filled by fresh nomination.  
(5) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and Members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
5. Officers and oth er employees of the Commission .—(1) The Central Government shall provide 
the Commission with a Secretary and such other officers and employees as may be necessary for the 
efficient performance of the functions of the Commission under this Act.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
officers and other employees appointed for the purpose of  the Commission shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
6. Salaries and allow ances to be paid out of grants .—The salaries and allowances payable to the 
Chairperson and Members and the administrative expenses, including salaries, allowances and pensions 
payable  to the officers and other employees referred to in section 5, shall be paid out of the grants referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) of section 10.  
7. Vacancies, etc. , not to invalidate  proceedings of the Commission .—No act or proceeding of the 
Commission shall be questioned or shall be invalid merely on the ground of the existence of any vacancy 
or defect in the constitution of the Commission.  
8. Procedure to be regulated by the Commission .—(1) The Commission shall meet as and when 
necessary at such time and place as the Chairperson may think fit.  
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure.  
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the Secretary or any other 
officer  of the Commission duly authoris ed by the Secretary on this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION  
9. Functions of the Commission .—(1)The Commission shall perform all or any of t he following 
functions, namely: — 
(a) evaluate the progress of the development of m inori ties under the Union and States;  
(b) monitor the working of the safeguards provided in the Constitution and in laws enacted by 
Parlia ment and the State Legislatures;  
(c) make recommendations for the effective implementation of safeguards for the protection of 
the interests of m inorities by the Central Gove rnment or the State Governments;  
(d) look into specific complaints regarding deprivation o f rights and safeguards of the m inorities 
and take up such matters w ith the appropriate authorities;  
(e) cause  studies to be undertaken into problems arising out  of any discrimination against 
minorities and recom mend measures for their removal;  
(f) conduct studies, research and analysis on the issues relating to socio -economic and educat ional 
development of m inori ties; 
(g) suggest appropri ate measures in respect of any m inority to be undertaken by the Central 
Gove rnment or the State Governments;  4 
 (h) make periodical or special reports to the Central Governme nt on any matter pertaining to 
minorities and in particular difficulties confronted by them; and  
(i) any other matter which may be referred to it by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause the recommendations referred to in clause ( c) of  
sub-section ( 1) to be laid  before each House of Parliament along with a memorandum explaining the 
action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating to the Union and the reasons for the 
non-acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendations.  
(3) Where any recommen dation referred to in clause (c) of sub -section ( 1) or any part thereof with 
which any State Government is concerned, the Commission shall forward a copy of such recommendation 
or part to such State Government who shall cause it to be laid before the Legislature of the State along 
with a memorandum explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendations relating 
to the State and the reasons for the non -acceptance, if any, of any of such recommendation or part.  
(4) The Commission shal l, while performing any of the functions mentioned in sub -clauses ( a), (b) 
and ( d) of sub -section ( 1), have all the powers of a  civil court trying a suit and in particular, in respect of  
the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the atten dance of any person from any part of India and examining 
him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery  and production of any document;  
(c) receiving  evidence on  affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy t hereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses and documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
10. Gr ants by the Central Government .—(1) The Central Government shall, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Commission by way of grants such 
sums of money as the Central Governmen t may think fit for being utilis ed for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Commission may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions under this Act, 
and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
11. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepar e an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General at s uch 
intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be 
payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in connec tion with the 
audit of the accounts of the Commission under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges and the 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has i n 
connection with the audit of G overnment a ccounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any of 
the offices of the Commission.  
12. Annual report .—The Commission shall prepare, in such form and at such time, for each 
financial year, as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the 
previous financial year and forward a copy thereof to the Central Government.  5 
 13. Annual r eport and audit repor t to be laid before Parliament .—The Cent ral Government shall 
cause the annual r eport together with a memorandum of action taken on the recommendations contained 
therein, in so far as they relate to the Central Government, a nd the reasons for the non -acceptance, if any, 
of any of such recommendations a nd the audit report to be laid as soon as may be after the reports are 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
14. Chairperson, Members and staff of  the Commission to be public servant s.—The Chairperson, 
Members and employees of the Commission shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of 
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
15. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson and Members under sub -section ( 5) of section 4 and of officers and other employees 
under sub -section ( 2) of section5;  
(b) any other matter under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 4) of section 9;  
(c) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be maintained under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 11;  
(d) the form in, and the time at, which the annual r eport sha ll be prepared unde r section 12;  
(e) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session , for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in makin g any  modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
16. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, ma ke such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament . 
 
--------------------------The National Waterway (Kollam-Kottapuram Stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogmadal Canals) Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (KOLLAM -KOTTAPURAM STRETCH OF WEST COAST  
CANAL AND CHAMPAKARA AND UDYOG MANDAL CANALS) ACT, 1992  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Declaration of Kollam -Kottapuram  Stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara and 
Udyogmandal Canals to be a national waterway . 
3. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union of Kollam -Kottapuram Stretch of West 
Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals for certain purposes.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (KOLLAM -KOTTAPURAM STRETCH OF WEST COAST  
CANAL AND CHAMPAKARA AND UDYOG MANDAL CANALS) ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 25 OF 1992  
[18th August , 1992 .] 
An Act to provide for the declaration of the Kollam -Kottapuram  Stretch of West Coast Canal 
and Champakaraand Udyogmandal Canals to be a national waterway and also to provide for 
the regulation and development of the said Stretch and the Canals for purposes of shipping 
and navigation on the said waterway and for matte rs connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of t he Republic of India as follows :— 
1. Short title and commencement .—This Act may be called the National Waterway (Kollam -
Kottapuram Stretch of West Coast C anal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals) Act, 1992.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration of Kollam -Kottapuram Stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara and 
Udyogmandal Canals to be a national waterway .—The Kollam -Kottapuram Stretch of West Coast 
Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals, the limits of which are speci fied in the Schedule, is 
hereby declared to be a national waterway.  
3. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union of Kollam -Kottapuram Stretch of West 
Coast Canal and Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals for certain purposes .—It is hereby 
declared t hat it is expedient in the public interest that the Union should take under its control the 
regulation and development of Kollam -Kottapuram Stretch of West Coast Canal and Champakara and 
Udyogmandal Canals for purposes of shipping and navigation on the nat ional waterway to the extent 
provided in the Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985.  
_______  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
LIMITS OF THE NATIONAL  WATERWAY  (KOLLAM -KOTTAPURAM STRETCH OF WEST COAST  CANAL AND  
CHAMPAKARA AND UDYOGMANDAL  CANALS ) 
The northern limit of the West Coast Canal shall be a line drawn across the river Periyar parallel to 
Kottapuram road bridge (NH -17) connecting Malinkara and ValiapanikanThuruthu at a distance of 1.0 
kilometer upstream, and the southern limit shall be a li ne drawn across the AshtamudiKayal at a distance 
of 100 meters south of Kollam jetty.  
The Champakara Canal starting from the confluence with the West Coast Canal and ending at the 
railway bridge (railway siding for Cochin Oil Refinery) near Fertilizers and  Chemicals Travancore 
Limited, boat basin.  
The Udyogmandal Canal starting from the confluence with West Coast Canal and ending at the 
Padalam road bridge (Eloor -Edayar).  
 
                                                           
1. 1st February, 1993 vide notification No. S.O. 806(E), dated 30th October, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
--------------------------The Rehabilitation Council of India Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE REHABILITATION COUNCIL OF INDIA ACT, 1992  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS   
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE REHABILITATION COUNCIL OF INDIA  
3. Constitution and incorporation of Rehabilitation Council of India.  
4. Term of office of Chairperson and members.  
5. Disqualifications.  
6. Vacation of office by members.  
7. Executive Committee and other committees.  
8. Member -Secretary and employees of Council.  
9. Vacancies in the Council not to invalidate ac ts, etc.  
10. Dissolution of Rehabilitation Council and transfer of rights, liabilities  and employees of 
Rehabilitation Council to Council.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  
11. Recognition of qualifications granted by University, etc., in India for rehabilitati on professionals.  
12. Recognition of qualifications granted by  institutions outside India.  
13. Rights of persons possessing qualifications included in the Schedule to be enrolled.  
14. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations.  
15. Inspectors as  examinations.  
16. Visitors a t examinations.  
17. Withdrawal of recognition.  
18. Minimum standards of education.  
19. Registration in Register.  
20. Privileges of persons who are registered on Register.  
21. Professional conduct and removal of names from Register.  
22. Appeal against order  of removal from Register.  
23. Register.  
24. Information to be furnished by Council and publication thereof.  
25. Cognizance of offences.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
27. Employees of Council to be public servants.  
28. Power to make rules.  
29. Power to make regulation s. 
30. Laying of rules and regulation s before Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  2 
 THE REHABILITA TION COUNCIL OF INDIA ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 34 OF 1992  
[1st September , 1992.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of the Rehabilitation Council of India for regulating 1[and 
monitoring the training of rehabilitation professionals and  personnel, promoting research in 
rehabilitation and special education ,] the maintenance of a Central Rehabilitation Register 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Rehabilitation Council of India 
Act, 1992.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification i n the 
Official Gazette, appoint . 
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Council appointed under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3;  
(b) “Council ” means the Rehabilitation Council of India constituted under section 3;  
3[(c) “handicapped ” means a person suffering from any disability referred to in clause ( i) of 
section 2 of the Persons With Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996); ] 
4*  *   *   *   * 
(f) “member ” means a member appointed under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 and includes the 
Chairperson;  
(g) “Member -Secretary ” means the Member -Secretary appointed under sub -section ( 1) of          
section 8;  
(h) “mental retardation ” means a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind of a 
person which is specially characterised by sub -normality of intelligence;  
(i) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by regulations;  
(k) “recognised rehabilitation qualifications ” means any of the qualifications included in the 
Schedule;  
(l) “Register ” means the Centra l Rehabilitation Register maintained under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23;  
(m) “regulations ” means regulations made under this Act;  
5[(ma) “rehabilitation ” refers to a process aimed at enabling persons with disabilities to reach and 
maintain their optimal physical, sensory, intellectual, psychiatric or social functional levels; ] 
(n) “rehabilitation professionals ” means — 
(i) audiologists and speech therapists ; 
(ii) clinical psychologists;  
(iii) hearing aid and ear mould technicians;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2000, s. 2, for “the training of rehabilitation professional s and” (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000).  
2. 31st July, 1993, vide notification No. S.O. 288(E), dated 28th April, 1993, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,                 
sec. 3( ii). 
3. Subs. by Act 38 of 2000, s. 3, for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000 ). 
4. Clauses ( d) and ( e) omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000).  
5. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000).  3 
 (iv) rehabilitation engineers and technicians;  
(v) special teachers for educating and training the handicap ped; 
(vi) vocational counsellors, employment officers and placement officers dealing with 
handicapped;  
(vii) multi -purpose rehabilitation therapists, technicians; or  
(viii) such other category of professionals as the Central Government may, in consultation 
with the Council, notify from time to time;  
1*   *   *  *   * 
2[(1A) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Persons With 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996) shall 
have the meanings resp ectively assigned to them in tha t Act .] 
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in relation to an area in 
which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law or the relevant provision of the corres ponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER II  
THE REHABILITATION COUNCIL OF INDIA  
3. Constitution and incorporation of Rehabilitation Council of India. —(1) With effect from such 
date as the Central Government may, by notification , appoint in this behalf, there shall be constituted for 
the purposes of this Act a Council to be called the Rehabilitation Council of India.  
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, wit h power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold  and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
3[(a) a Chairperson, from amongst the persons having experience in administration with 
professional qualification in the field of rehabilitation, disabilities, and special education, to be 
appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) such number of members not exceedi ng seven, as may be nominated by the Central 
Government, to represent the Ministries of the Central Government dealing with matters relating to 
persons with disabilities; ] 
(c) one member to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the University  Grants 
Commission;  
(d) one member to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Directorate General 
of Indian Council of Medical Research;  
(e) two members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Ministry or 
department of the States or the Union territories dealing with Social Welfare by rotation in 
alphabetical order;  
(f) such number of members not exceeding six as may be appointed by the Central Government 
from amongst the rehabilitation professionals working in voluntary  organisations;  
(g) such number of members not exceeding four as may be appointed by the Central Government 
from amongst the medical practitioners enrolled under the Indian Medical Council Act , 1956            
(102 of 1956)  and engaged in rehabilitation of  the handicapped;  
(h) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People and 
one by the Council of States;  
                                                           
1. Clause ( o) omitted by Act 38 of 2000, s. 3 (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for clauses ( a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000).  4 
 (i) such number of members not exceeding three as may be nominated by the Central 
Government from amongst the social  workers who are actively eng aged in assisting the disabled;  
(j) the Member -Secretary, ex officio . 
(4) The office of member of the Board shall not disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, 
a Member of either House of Parliament.  
4. Term of o ffice of Chairperson and members .—(1) The Chairperson or a member shall hold 
office for a term of two years from the date of his appointment or until his successor shall have been duly 
appointed, whichever is longer.  
(2) A casual vacancy in the Council sha ll be filled in accordance with the provisions of section 3 and 
the person so appointed shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the member in 
whose place he was appointed would have held that office.  
(3) The Council shall meet at least once in each year at such time and place as may be appointed by 
the Council and shall observe such rules of procedure in the transaction of business at a meeting as may 
be prescribed.  
(4) The Chairperson or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend the meeting of the Council, any 
member elected by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the 
meeting.  
(5) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Council shall be decided by a majority of 
votes of the mem bers present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in 
his absence, the person presiding shall have a second or cast ing vote.  
5. Disqualifications .—No person shall be a member if he — 
(a) is, or becomes, of unsound mind or  is so declared by a competent court; or  
(b) is, or has been, convicted of any offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or  
(c) is, or at any time has been , adjudicated as insolvent.  
6. Vacation of office by members .—If a member — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 5; or  
(b) is absent without excuse, sufficient in the opinion of the Council, from three consecutive 
meetings of the Council; or  
(c) ceases to be enrolled on the Indian  Medical Register in the case of a member referred to in 
clause ( g) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3,  
his seat shall thereupon become vacant.  
7. Executive Committee and other committees .—(1) The Council shall constitute from amongst its 
members an Executive  Committee and such other committees for general or special purposes as the 
Council deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Executive Committee shall consist of the Chairperson who shall be member ex officio  and not 
less then seven a nd not more than ten members who shall be nominated by the Council from amongst its 
members.  
(3) The Chairperson shall be the Chairperson of the Executive Committee.  
(4) In addition to the powers and duties conferred and imposed upon it by this Act, the Ex ecutive 
Committee or any other committee shall exercise and discharge such powers and duties as the Council 
may confer or impose upon it by any regulations which may be made in this behalf.  
8. Member -Secretary and employees of Council .—(1) The Central Gove rnment shall appoint the 
Member -Secretary of the Council to exercise such powers and perform such duties under the direction of 
the Council as may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson.  
(2) The Council shall, with the previous sanc tion of the Central Government, employ such officers 
and other employees as it deems necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.  5 
 (3) The Council shall, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, fix the allowances to be 
paid to the Chairperson and other members and determine the conditions of service of th e                    
Member -Secretary, officers and other employees of the Council.  
9. Vacancies in the Council not to invalidate acts, etc .—No act or proceeding of the Council or a ny 
committee thereof shall be called in question on the ground merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or 
any defect in the constitution of, the Council or a committee thereof, as the case may be.  
10. Dissolution of Rehabilitation Council and transfer o f rights , liabilities and employees of 
Rehabilitation Council to Council .—(1) On and from the date of the constitution of the Council, the 
Rehabilitation Council shall stand dissolved and on such dissolution, — 
(a) all properties and assets, movable and imm ovable, of, or belonging to, the Rehabilitation 
Council shall vest in the Council;  
(b) all the rights and liabilities of the Rehabilitation Council shall be transferred to, and be the 
rights and liabilities of, the Council;  
(c) without prejudice to the pro visions of clause ( b), all liabilities incurred, all contracts entered 
into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Rehabilitation Council 
immediately before that date, for or in connection with the purposes of the said Rehabilita tion 
Council shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into, or engaged to be done by, with or for, 
the Council;  
(d) all sums of money due to the Rehabilitation Council immediately before that date shall be 
deemed to be due to the Council;  
(e) all sui ts and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Rehabilitation Council immediately before that date may be continued or may be 
instituted by or against the Council; and  
(f) every employee holding any office under the Rehabilitation Council immediately before that 
date shall hold his office in the Council by the same tenure and upon the same terms and conditions of 
service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement and other terminal benefits as he 
would have held such office as if the Council had not been constituted and shall continue to do so as 
an employee of the Council or until the expiry of a period of six months from that date if such 
employee opts not to be the employee of the Council within such period.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or any other 
law for the time being in force, absorption of any employee by the Council in its regular service under this 
section shall not entitle  such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law and no such claim 
shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
Explanation .—In this section, “Rehabilitation Council ” means the Rehabilitation Council, a society 
formed and registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) and functioning as such 
immediately before the constitution of the Council.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  
11. Recognition of q ualifications granted by University, etc. , in India for rehabilitation 
professionals .—(1) The qualifications granted by any University or other institution in India which are 
included in the Schedule shall be recognised qualifications for rehabilitation pr ofessionals.  
(2) Any University or other institution which grants qualification for the rehabilitation professionals 
not included in the Schedule may apply to the Central Government to have any such qualification 
recognised, and the Central Government, aft er consulting the Council may, by notification, amend the 
Schedule so as to include such qualification therein and any such notification may also direct that an entry 
shall be made in the last column of the Schedule against such qualification only when gra nted after a 
specified date.  
12. Recognition of qualifications granted by institutions outside India .—The Council may enter 
into negotiations with the authority in any country outside India for settling of a scheme of reciprocity for 
the recognition of qualifications, and in pursuance of any such scheme, the Central Government may, by 
notification, amend t he Schedule so as to include therein any qualification which the Council has decided 6 
 should be recognised, and by such notification may also direct that an entry shall be made in the last 
column of the Schedule declaring that it shall be the recognised qua lification only when granted after a 
specified date.  
13. Rights of persons possessing qualifications included in the Schedule to be enrolled .—             
(1) Subject to the other provisions contained in this Act, any qualification included in the Schedule  shall 
be sufficient qualification for enrolment on the Register.  
(2) No person, other than the rehabilitation professional who possesses a recognised rehabilitation 
qualification and is enrolled on the Register, — 
(a) shall hold office as rehabilitation pr ofessional or any such office (by whatever designation 
called) in Government or in any institution maintained by a local or other authority;  
(b) shall practice as rehabilitation professional anywhere in India;  
(c) shall be entitled to sign or authenticate any certificate required by any law to be signed or 
authenticated by a rehabilitation professional;  
(d) shall be entitled to give any evidence in any court as an expert under section 45 of the Indian 
Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) on any matter relating to  the handicapped:  
Provided that if a person possesses the recognised  rehabilitation professional qualifications on the 
date of commencement of this Act, he shall be deemed to be an enrolled rehabilitation professional for a 
period of six months from such commencement, and if he has made an application for enrolment on the 
Register within said period of six months, till such application is disposed of.  
1[(2A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), any person being a doctor or a 
paramedic in the field of physical medicine and rehabilitation, orthopaedics, ear,  nose or throat (ENT), 
ophthalmology or psychiatry, employed or working in any h ospital or establishment owned or controlled 
by the Central Government or a State Government or any other body funded by the Central or a State 
Government and notified by the C entral Government, may discharge the functions referred to in                 
clauses ( a) to ( d) of that sub -section. ] 
(3) Any person who acts in contravention of any provision of sub -section ( 2) shall be punished with 
imprisonment for a term which may exte nd to one year, or with fine which may extend to one thousand 
rupees, or with both.  
14. Power to require information as to courses of study and examinations .—Every University or 
institution in India which grants a recognised qualification shall furnish suc h information as the Council 
may, from time to time, require as to the courses of study and examinations to be undergone in order to 
obtain such qualification, as to the ages at which such courses of study and examinations are required to 
be undergone and such qualification is conferred and generally as to the requisites fo r obtaining such 
qualification.  
15. Inspectors as examinations .—(1) The Council shall appoint such number of Inspectors as it may 
deem requisite to inspect any University or institution where education for practising as rehabilitation 
professionals is given or to attend any examination held by any University or instituti on for the purpose of 
recommending to the Central Government recognition of qualifications granted by that University or 
institution as recognised rehabilitation qualifications.  
(2) The Inspectors appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall not interfere with th e conduct of any training 
or examination but shall report to the Council on the adequacy of the standards of education including 
staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving such education or of 
the sufficiency of ev ery examination which they attend.  
(3) The Council shall forward a copy of the report of the Inspector under sub -section ( 2) to the 
University or institution concerned and shall also forward a copy, with the remarks of the University or 
the institution the reon, to the Central Government . 
16. Visitors at examinations .—(1) The Council may appoint such number of Visitors as it may deem 
requisite to inspect any University or institution wherein education for rehabilitation professionals is 
given or attend any e xamination for the purpose of granting recognised rehabilitation qualifications.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2000, s. 5 (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000).  7 
 (2) Any person, whether he is a member of the Council or not, may be appointed as a Visitor under 
sub-section ( 1) but a person who is appointed as an Inspector under sub -section (1) of section 15 for any 
inspection or examination shall not be appointed as a Visitor for the same inspection or examination.  
(3) The Visitor shall not interfere with the conduct of any training or examination but shall report to 
the Chairperson on th e adequacy of the standards of education including staff, equipment, 
accommodation, training and other facilities prescribed for giving education to the rehabilitation 
professionals or on sufficiency of every examination which they attend.  
(4) The report o f a Visitor shall be treated as confidential unless in any particular case the 
Chairperson otherwise, directs:  
Provided that if the Central Government requires a copy of the report of a Visitor, the Council shall 
furnish the same.  
17. Withdrawal of recogni tion.—(1) When upon report by the Inspector or the Visitor it appears to 
the Council — 
(a) that the courses of study and examination to be undergone in or the proficiency required from 
candidates at any examination held by an y University or institution, or  
(b) that the staff, equipment, accommodation , training and other facilities for instruction and 
training provided in such University or institution,  
do not conform to the standard prescribed by the Council, the Council shall make a representation to that 
effect to the Central Government.  
(2) After considering such representation, the Central Government may send it to the University or 
institution with an intimation of the period within which the University or institution may submit its 
explanation to that G overnment.  
(3) On the receipt of the explanation or where no explanation is submitted within the period fixed 
then, on the expiry of that period, the Central Government after making such further inquiry, if any, as it 
may think fit, may, by notification, direct that an  entry shall be made in the Schedule against the said 
recognised rehabilitation qualification declaring that it shall be the recognised rehabilitation qualification 
only when granted before a specified date or that the said recognised rehabilitation qualif ication if granted 
to students of a specified University or institution shall be recognised rehabilitation qualification only 
when granted before a specified date, or as the case may be, that the said recognised rehabilitation 
qualification shall be recogn ised rehabilitation qualification in relation to a specified University or 
institution only when granted after a specified date.  
18. Minimum standards of education .—The Council may prescribe the minimum standards of 
education required for granting recognised rehabilitation qualification by Universities or institutions in 
India. 
19. Registration in Register .—The Member -Secretary of the Council may, on receipt of an 
application made by any person in the prescribed manner enter his name in the Register  provided that the 
Member -Secretary is satisfied that such person possesses the recognised rehabilitation qualification : 
1[Provided that the Council shall register vocational instructors and other personnel working in the 
vocational rehabilitation centres under the Ministry of Labour on recommendation of that Ministry and 
recognise the vocational rehabilitation centres as m anpower development centres:  
Provided further that the Council shall register personnel working in national institutes and apex 
institut ions on disability under the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment on recommendation of 
that Ministry and recognise the national institutes a nd apex institutions on disability as manpower 
development centres. ] 
20. Privileges of persons who are registe red on Register .—Subject to the conditions and 
restrictions laid down in this Act regarding engagement in the area of rehabilitation of the handicapped by 
persons possessing the recognised  rehabilitation qualifications, every person whose name is for the time 
being borne on the Register shall be entitled to practise as a rehabilitation professional in any part of India 
and to recover in due course of law in respect of such practice any expe nses, charges in respect of 
medicaments or other appliances or any fees to which he may be entitled.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 38 of 2000, s. 6 (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000).  8 
 21. Professional conduct and removal of names from Register .—(1) The Council may prescribe 
standards of professional conduct and etiquette and a code of et hics for rehabilitation professionals.  
(2) Regulations made by the Council under sub -section ( 1) may specify which violations thereof shall 
constitute infamous conduct in any professional respect, that is to say, professional misconduct, and such 
provision  shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force.  
(3) The Council may order that the name of any person shall be removed from the Register where it is 
satisfied, after giving that person a reasonable opport unity of being heard, and after such further inquiry, 
if any, as it may deem fit to make, — 
(i) that his name has been entered in the Register by error or on account of misrepresentation or 
suppression of a material fact;  
(ii) that he has been convicted of any offence or has been guilty of any infamous conduct in any 
professional respect, or has violated the standards of professional conduct and etiquette or the code of 
ethics prescribed under sub -section ( 1) which, in the opinion of the Council, renders him  unfit to be 
kept in the Register.  
(4) An order under sub -section ( 3) may direct that any person whose name is ordered to be removed 
from the Register shall be ineligible for registration under this Act either permanently or for such period 
of years as may  be specified.  
22. Appeal against order of removal from Register .—(1) Where the name of any person has been 
removed from the Register on any ground other than that he is not possessed of the requisite rehabilitation 
qualifications, he may appeal, in the prescribed manner and subject to such conditions, including 
conditions as to the payment of a fee, as may be prescribed to the Central Government whose decision 
thereon shall be final.  
(2) No appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be admitted if it is preferre d after the expiry of a 1[period of 
sixty days ] from the date of the order under sub -section ( 3) of section 21:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the said 1[period of sixty days ] if the 
appellant satisfies the Central Government t hat he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
the said period.  
23. Register .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Member -Secretary to keep and maintain the Register in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and any order made by the Counc il and from time to time to 
revise the Register and publish it in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The Register shall be deemed to be a public document within the meaning of the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) and may be proved by a copy thereof.  
24. Information to be furnished by Council and publication thereof .—(1) The Council shall 
furnish such reports, copies of its minutes, abstracts of its accounts, and other information to the Central 
Government as that Government may require.  
(2) The Central Go vernment may publish in such manner as it may think fit, any report, copy, abstract 
or other information furnished to it by the Council under this section or under section 16.  
25. Cognizance of offences .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Cr iminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act 
except upon a complaint, in writing, made by any person authorised in this behalf by the Council.  
26. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No su it, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, Council, Chairperson, members, Member -Secretary or any officer or 
other employee of the Council for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act. 
27. Employees of Council to be public servants .—The Chairperson, members, Member -Secretary, 
officers and other employees of the Council shall, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule and regulation ma de thereunder, be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2000, s. 7 , for “ period of thirty days ” (w.e.f. 4 -9-2000).  9 
 28. Power to make rules .—The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry out 
the purposes of this Act.  
29. Power to make  regulations .—The Council may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, make, by notification, regulations generally to carry out the purposes of this Act, and 
without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may pr ovide for — 
(a) the management of the property of the Council;  
(b) the maintenance and audit of the accounts of the Council;  
(c) the resignation of members of the Council;  
(d) the powers and duties of the Chairperson;  
(e) the rules of procedure in the transaction of business under sub -section ( 3) of section 4;  
(f) the function of the Executive Committee and other committees, constituted under section 7;  
(g) the powers and duties of the Member -Secretary under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(h) the qualifications, appointment, powers and duties of, and procedure to be followed by, 
Inspectors and Visitors;  
(i) the courses and period of study or of training, to be undertaken, the subjects of examination 
and standards of proficiency therein to be obtained in any University or any institution for grant of 
recognised rehabilitation qualification;  
(j) the standards of staff, equipment, accommodation, training and other facilities for study or 
training of the rehabilitation professionals;  
(k) the conduct of examinations, qualifications of examiners, and the condition of the admission 
to such examinations;  
(l) the standards of professional conduct and etiquette and code of ethics to be observed by 
rehabilitation professionals under sub -section (1) of section 21;  
(m) the particulars to be stated, and proof of qualifications to be given, in application for 
registration under this Act;  
(n) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which an appeal may be preferred under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 22;  
(o) the fees to be paid on applications and appeals under this Act;  
(p) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
30. Laying of rules and regulations before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session im mediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
  10 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section  11) 
RECOGNISED REHABILITATION QUALIFICATION S GRANTED BY UNIVERSITIES OR INSTITUTIONS IN INDIA  
 
University/ Institution  Name of Course  Qualification  Remarks  
1 2 3 4 
I.—Rehabilitation engineers/technicians  
National Institute for the 
Orthopaedically  Handicapped, 
B.T. Road, Bonhooghly,       
Calcutta -700 090  Diploma in Prosthetic & 
Orthotic Engineering           
(2 Years)  Diploma   
Department of Rehabilitation, 
Safdarjang Hospital, New Delhi  Course in Prosthetics & 
Orthotics (3 years)  Diploma   
Govt. Institute of Rehabilitation of 
Medicine, K. K. Nagar,         
Madras -600 083  Diploma in Orthotics & 
Prosthetics  Diploma   
National Institute of Rehabilitation 
Training and Research, Olatpur, 
P.O. : Bairoi Distt. Cuttack 
(Orissa)  Diploma in Prosthetic & 
Orthotic Engineering         
(2 years)  Diploma   
All India Institute of Physical 
Medicine &  Rehabilitation, Haji 
Ali, Khadye Marg,  Mahalaxmi, 
Bombay -400 034  B. Sc. (P&O)  Degree   
School of Prosthetics & Orthotics, 
K. K. Nagar, Madras -600 083  Diploma in Prosthetic & 
Orthotics Engineering           
(2 Years duration)  Diploma   
Schieffelin Leprosy Research and 
Training Centre, Karigiri, SLR 
Sanatorium, P.O. North Arcot 
Distt. (S. India)  Prosthetic  Technician Course 
(18 months)  Diploma   
II.—Audiologists and speech therapists  
All India Institute of   Speech and 
Hearing, Manasa Gangothri, 
Mysore -576 006 B.Sc. (Speech & Hearing)          
(3 Years duration)  Degree   
Ali Yavar Jung National Institute 
for the Hearing Handicapped, 
Bandra (W .), Bombay -400 050  B.Sc. (A. & S. T.)                         
(3 Years duration)  Degree   
Post-Graduate Institute of Medical 
Education and Research, 
Chandigarh -160 012 B.Sc. (Speech & Hearing)        
(3 Years duration)  Degree   
Topiwala  National Medical College 
and BYL Nair Charitable 
Hospital, Dr. A.  L. Nair Road, 
Bombay -400 008  Diploma in Audiology & 
Speech Therapy (B.Sc.)  Diploma   
All India Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Ansari Nagar,              
New Delhi  B.Sc. (Hons.) in Speech & 
Hearing  Degree   11 
 1 2 3 4 
III.—Teachers of special schools and integrated schools for the disabled  
Shri K. L. Institute for the Deaf, 51, 
Vidyanagar, Bhavnagar -364 002 
(Gujarat)  Teachers Training for the 
Deaf                                       
(1 Year duration)  Diploma   
The Educational Audiology and 
Research Centre School for the 
Deaf “PONAM ”, 67, Napean Sea 
Road, Bombay -400 006 Certificate Course for 
Teachers of the Deaf          
(10 months duration)  Certificate   
V. R. Ruia Mook -Badhir Vidyalaya, 
Pune -30 Teachers Training Diploma 
Course for Deaf Students    
(1 Year duration)  Diploma   
Little Flower Convent Higher Se c. 
School for the Deaf, 127, G. N. 
Road, Cathedral P.O.,           
Madras -600 006  (i) Junior Diploma in 
Teaching the Deaf  Diploma   
(ii) Senior Diploma in 
Teaching the Deaf                   
(10 months duration)  Diploma  
The Blind Relief Association            
Lal Bahadur Shastri Marg,          
New Delhi -110003  One Year Diploma Course for 
Training of Teachers of the 
Blind  Diploma   
The Clarke School for the Deaf, 
“SADHANA ”, No. 3, Third 
Street, Dr. Radhakrishnan Road, 
Mylapore, Madras -600 004  (i) Teachers Training for the 
Deaf  Diploma   
(ii) Teachers Training for the 
Mentally Retarded  Diploma  
Ramakrishna Mission, Blind Boy ’s 
Academy, Harendrapur -743 508 , 
West Bengal  (i) In -Service Primary Level 
Teachers of the Visually 
Handicapped                             
(18 months duration)  Diploma   
(ii) Secondary Level Teachers 
of the Visually 
Handicapped                           
(10 months duration)  Diploma  
Govt. Higher Secondary School for 
the Blind, Poonamallee,        
Madras -600 056  (i) Diploma in Teaching the 
Blind                                   
(6 months at School + 12 
months by Correspondence)  Diploma   
(ii) Special Examination in 
Teaching the Blind                    
(10 months course)  Certificate  
Ali Yavar Jung National Institute 
for the Hearing Handicapped, 
Bandra (W .), Bombay -400 050  (i) B. Ed. (Deaf)  P.G. Diploma   
(ii) D. Ed. (Deaf) in Regional 
Languages  Diploma  
IV.—Multipurpose rehabilitation therapists technicians/assistant/worker  
Department of Rehabilitation, 
Safdarjang Hospital,                       
New Delhi - 110 029  One Year Certificate Course 
for Multi -Rehabilitation 
Worker  Certificate   
  12 
 1 2 3 4 
V.—Vocational counsel lors 
National Council of Education 
Research and Training,                 
Sri Aurobindo Marg,                           
New Delhi -110 016  Diploma Course in Education 
and Vocational Guidance      
(9 months duration)  Diploma   
All India Institute of Physical 
Medi cine & Rehabilitation, Haji 
Ali, Khadye Marg, Mahalaxmi, 
Bombay -400 034  PGDR (Vocational Guidance)  Diploma   
VI.—Diploma in communication disorders  
Ali Yavar Jung National Institute 
for the Hearing Handicapped, 
Bandra (W .), Bombay -400 050  Diploma in Communication 
Disorders  
(1 Year)  Diploma   
 
--------------------------The Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA ACT, 1992  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Board.  
4. Management of the Board.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairman and members of the Board.  
6. Removal of member from office.  
7. Meetings.  
7A. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases . 
8. Vaca ncies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board . 
9. Officers and employees of the Board . 
CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF THE  EXISTING SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE  BOARD TO THE 
BOARD  
10. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existing Securities and Exchange Board to the  Board . 
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD  
11. Functions of Board . 
11A. Board to regulate or prohibit issue of prospectus, offer document or advertisement  soliciting 
money  for issue of securities . 
11AA. Collective investment scheme . 
11B. Power to issue directions . 
11C. Investigation . 
11D. Cease and desist proceedings . 
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE  
12. Registration of stock -brokers, sub -brokers, share transfer agents, etc.  
CHAPTER VA  
PROHIBITION OF MANIPULATIVE AND DECEPTIVE  DEVICES, INSIDER TRADING AND SUBSTANTIAL  
ACQUISITION OF SECURITIES OR CONTROL  
12A. Prohibition of manipulative and deceptive devices, insider trading and substantial  acquisition of 
securities or control . 
  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
SECTIONS  
13. Grants by the Central Government . 
14. Fund . 
15. Accounts and audit . 
CHAPTER VIA  
PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION  
15A. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.  
15B. Penalty for failure by any person to enter into agreement with clients . 
15C. Penalty for failure to redress investors’ grievances . 
15D. Penalty for certain defaults in case of mutual funds . 
15E. Penalty for failure to observe rules and regulations by an asset management company . 
15F. Penalty for default in case of stock brokers . 
15G. Penalty for insider trading . 
15H. Penalty for non -disclosure of acquisition of shares and takeovers . 
15HA. Penalty for fraudulent and unfair trade practices . 
15HB. Penalty for contravention where no separate penalty has been provided . 
15-I. Power to adj udicate . 
15J. Factors t o be taken into account by the a djudicating officer . 
15JA. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India . 
15JB. Settlement of administrative and civil proceedings . 
CHAPTER VIB  
ESTABLISHMENT, JURISDICTION, AUTHORITY AND  PROCEDURE OF APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
15K. Establishment of Securities Appellate Tribunals . 
15L. Composition of Securities Appellate Tribunal . 
15M. Qualification for appointment as Presiding Officer or Member of Securities Appellate  Tribunal . 
15MA.  Amendment of Presiding Officer and Judicial Member.  
15MB. Search -cum-Selection Committee for appointment of Technical Members.  
15MC. Vacancy not to invalidate selection proceeding.  
15N. Tenure of office of Presiding Officer and other Members of Securities  Appellate  Tribunal . 
15-O. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officers . 
15P. Filling up of vacancies . 
15Q. Resignation and removal . 
15QA. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer and Mem ber. 
15R. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its  proceedings . 
15S. Staff of the Securities Appellate Tribunal . 
15T. Appeal to the Securities Appellate Tribunal . 
15U. Procedure and powers of the Securities Appellate Tribunal . 
15V. Right to legal representation . 
15W. Limitation . 3 
 SECTIONS  
15X. Presiding Officer, Members and staff of Securities Appellate Tribunals to be public  servants . 
15Y. Civil Court not to have jurisdiction . 
15Z. Appeal to Supreme Court . 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Power of Central Government to issue directions . 
17. Power of Central Government to supersede the Board . 
18. Returns and reports . 
19. Delegation . 
20. Appeals . 
20A. Bar of jurisdiction  
21. Savings . 
22. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servant s. 
23. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
24. Offences . 
24A. Composition of certain offences . 
24B. Power to grant immunity . 
25. Exemption from tax on wealth and income . 
26. Cognizance of offences by courts . 
26A. Establishment of Special Courts . 
26B. Offences triable by Special Courts . 
26C. Appeal and revision . 
26D. Application of Code to proceedings before Special Court . 
26E. Transitional p rovisions . 
27. Offences by companies . 
28. [Omitted .] 
28A. Recovery of amounts . 
29. Power to make rules . 
30. Power to make regulations . 
31. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament . 
32. Application of other laws not barred . 
33. [Repealed .] 
34. Power to remove difficulties . 
34A. Validation of certain acts . 
35. Repeal and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE . [Repealed .]  4 
 THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD  OF INDIA ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 15 OF 1992  
[4th April , 1992 .] 
An Act  to provide for the establishment of a Board to protect the interests of investors in  
securities and to promote the development of, and to regulate, the securities market  and for 
matters connected there with or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India  Act, 1992.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of January,  1992.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board ” means the Securities and Exchange Board of Ind ia established under section 3;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Board;  
1[(ba) “collective investment scheme” means any scheme or arrangement which satisfies the 
conditions specified in section 11AA ;] 
(c) “existing Securities and Exchange Board ” means the  Securities and Exchange Board of India 
constituted under the  Resolution of the Government of India in the Department of  Economic Affairs 
No. 1(44)SE/86, dated the 12th day of April,  1988;  
(d) “Fund ” means the Fund constituted under section 14;   
2[(da) “Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority” means the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority of India established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999  (45 of 1999) ; 
 (db) “Judicial Member” means a Member of the Securities Appellate Tribunal appointed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 15MA and in cludes the Presiding Officer;]  
(f) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official  Gazette;   
2[(fa) “Pension Fund Regu latory and Development Authority” means the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Pension 
Fund Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 2013  (23 of 2013) ;] 
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Board under  this Act;  
3[(ha) “Reserve Bank” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);]  
(i) “securities ” has the meaning assigned to it in section 2 of the  Securities Contracts (Regulation) 
Act, 1956 (42 of 1956).   
2[(j) “Technical Member” means a Technical Member appointed under sub -section ( 1) of             
section 15MB.]   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 199 9, s. 11 (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 146 (w.e.f. 26 -4-2017).  
3. Ins. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  5 
 1[(2) Words and  expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in  2[the Securities Contracts 
(Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) or the Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996)] shall  have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in that Act.]  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE BOARD OF INDIA  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by  notification, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of  this Act, a Board 
by the name of the Securities and Exchange Board  of India.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid , having  perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power subject to the  provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of  property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name,  sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Board shall be at Bombay.  
(4) The Board may establish offices at other places in India.  
4. Management of the Board .—(1) The Boar d shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairman;  
(b) two members from amongst the officials of the 3[Ministry]  of the  Central Government dealing 
with Finance 4[and administration of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ]; 
(c) one  member from amongst the officials of 5[the Reserve Bank] ; 
6[(d) five other members of whom at least three shall b e the whole -time members,]  
to be appointed by the Central  Government.  
(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs  of the Board shall vest in a 
Board of members, which may exercise all  powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or 
done by  the Board.  
(3) Save as otherwise determined by regulations, the Chairmen shall also  have powers of general 
superinten dence and direction of the affairs of  the Board and may also exercise all powers and do all acts 
and things  which may be exercised or done by that Board.  
(4) The Chairman and members referred to in clauses ( a) and ( d) of sub-section (1) shall be appointed 
by the Central Government and the  members referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of that sub -section shall be  
nominated by the Central Government and the 7[Reserve Bank ] respectively.  
(5) The Chairman and the other members referred to in clauses ( a) and ( d) of sub-section ( 1) shall be 
persons of ability, integrity and standing  who have shown capacity in dealing with problems relating to  
securities market or have special knowledge or experience of law,  finance, economics, accountancy, 
administration or in any ot her discipline which, in the opinion of the Central Government, shall be  useful 
to the Board.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of Chairman and members of  the Board .—(1) The 
term of office and other conditions of service of the Chairman and  the m embers referred to in clause ( d) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 4  shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central  Government shall have the 
right to terminate the services of the  Chairman or a membe r appointed under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 2, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 25-1-1995).  
2. Subs.   by Act  22  of  1996,   s. 30   and  the Schedule , for “the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956)”          
(w.e.f. 20 -9-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 3, for “Ministries” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “and Law” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “ the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934                
(2 of 1934) ” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002 ). 
6. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002 ). 
7. Subs. by s. 3, ibid.,  for “Reserve Bank of India” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002 ). 6 
 of section 4, at any time before the expiry of the period prescribed  under sub -section ( 1), by giving him 
notice of not less than three  months in writing or three months’  salary and allowances in lieu  thereof, and 
the Chairman or a member, as the case may be, shall  also have the right to relinquish his office, at any 
time before the  expiry of the period prescribed under sub -section ( 1), by giving to the  Central 
Government notice of not less than three m onths in writing.  
6. Removal of member from office .—1*** The Central Government shall remove a member from 
office if he— 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent;  
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central  Government, involves a 
moral turpitude;  
2*   *   *   *  * 
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position  as to render his 
continuation in office det rimental to the  public interest:  
Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless he has been  given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
7. Meetings .—(1) The Board shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe  such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its  meetings (including quorum at such meetings) as 
may be provided by  regulation.  
(2) The Chairman or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of  the Board, any other 
member chosen by the members present from  amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside at the 
meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be  decided by a majority 
votes of the members present and voting, and,  in the event of an equality of  votes, the Chairman, or in his 
absence,  the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.  
3[7A. Member not to participate in meetings in certain cases .—Any member, who is a director of 
a company and who as such director has any direct  or indirect  pecuniary interest in any matter coming up 
for consideration at a meeting  of the Board, shall, as soon as possible after relevant circumstances have 
come to  his knowledge, disclose the nature of his interest at such meeting and such  disclosure shall be 
recorded in the proceedings of the Board, and the member shall  not take any part in any deliberation or 
decision of the Board with respect to that  matter.]  
8. Vacancies , etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Board .—No act or proceeding of the Board 
shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the  Board; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits  of the case.  
9. Officers and employees of the Board .—(1) The Board may appoint such other officers and 
employees as it  considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions und er this Act.  
(2) The term and other conditions of service of officers and employees of  the Board appointed under 
sub-section ( 1) shall be such as may be  determined by regulations.  
  
                                                           
1. The brackets and figure “( 1)” omitted by Act 9 of 1995, s. 3 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Clause ( d) omitted by Act 9 of 1995 , s. 3 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  7 
 CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF ASSETS, L IABILITIES, ETC., OF  THE EXISTING SECURITIES AND  EXCHANGE BOARD TO THE 
BOARD  
10. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of existing Securities and Exchange  Board to the Board .—
(1) On and from the date of establishment of the Board, — 
(a) any  reference to the existing Securities and Exchange Board in  any law other than this Act or 
in any contract or other  instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Board;  
(b) all properties and assets, movable and immovable, of, or  belonging to, the exist ing Securities 
and Exchange Board,  shall vest in the Board;  
(c) all rights and liabilities of the existing Securities and Exchange  Board shall be transferred to , 
and be the rights and liabilities of , the Board;  
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of cl ause ( c), all debts,  obligations and liabilities incurred, 
all contracts entered into  and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for  the existing 
Securities and Exchange Board immediately  before that date, for or in connection with the purpo se of 
the said existing Board shall be deemed to have been incurred,  entered into or engaged to be done by, 
with or for, the Board;  
(e) all sums of money due to the existing Securities and  Exchange Board immediately before that 
date shall be deemed  to be due to the Board;  
(f) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could  have been instituted by or 
against the existing Securities and  Exchange Board immediately before that date may be  continued or 
may be instituted by or against the Board; and 
(g) every employee holding any office under the existing  Securities and Exchange Board 
immediately before that date  shall hold his office in the Board by the same tenure and upon  the same 
terms and conditions of service as respects  remuneration, leave,  provident fund, retirement and other  
terminal benefits as he would have held such office if the  Board had not been established and shall 
continue to do so as  an employee of the Board or until the expiry of the period of six  months from 
that date if such e mployee opts not to be the  employee of the Board within such period.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947 (14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force,  absorption of any employee by the Board in its r egular service under  
this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation  under that Act or other law and no such 
claim shall be entertained by  any court, tribunal or other authority.  
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE BOARD  
11. Functions of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the Board 
to protect the interests of investors in securities and to promote the  development of, and to regulate the 
securities market, by such  measures as it thinks fit.  
(2) With out prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the  measures refer red to therein 
may provide for — 
(a) regulating the business in stock exchanges and any other  securities markets;  
(b) registering and regulating the working of stock brokers, sub -brokers,  share transfer agents, 
bankers to an issue, trustees of  trust deeds, registrars to an issue, merchant bankers,  underwriters, 
portfolio managers, investment advisers and  such other intermediaries who may be associated with  
securities markets in an y manner;  
1[(ba) registering and regulating the working of the 2[depositories,  particip ants, custodians ] of 
securities, foreign institutional  investors, credit rating agencies and such other intermediaries  as the 
Board may, by notification, specify in this  behalf;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 5 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 22 of 1996, s. 30 and the Schedule, for “depositories, custodians” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1995).  8 
 (c) registering and regulating the working of 1[venture capital funds  and collective investment 
schemes], including mutual funds;  
(d) promoting and regulating self -regulatory organisations;  
(e) prohibiting fraudulent and unfair trade practices re lating to  securities markets;  
(f) promoting investors' education and training of intermediaries of  securities markets;  
(g) prohibiting insider trading in securities;  
(h) regulating substantial acquisition of shares and take -over of  companies;  
(i) calling f or information from, undertaking inspection, conducting  inquiries and audits of the 
2[stock exchanges, mutual funds,  other persons associated with the securities market]  intermediaries 
and self -regulatory organisations in the  securities market;  
3[(ia) calling for information and records from any person including any bank or any other 
authority or board or corporation established or cons tituted by or under any Central or  State Act 
which, in the opinion of the Board, shall be relevant to any investigation  or inquiry by the Board  in 
respect of any transaction in securities;]  
4[(ib) calling for information from, or furnishing information to, other authorities, whether in 
India or outside India, having functions similar to those of the Board, in the matters r elating to the 
prevention or detection of violations in respect of securities laws, subject to the provisions of other 
laws for the time being in force in this regard:  
Provided that the Board, for the purpose of furnishing any information to any authority outside 
India, may enter into an arrangement or agreement or understanding with such authority with the 
prior approval of the Central Government;]  
(j) performing such functions and exercising such powers under  the provisions of 5*** the 
Securities Contracts (Regulation)  Act, 1956 (42 of 1956), as may be delegated to it by the  Central 
Government;  
(k) levying fees or other charges for carrying out the purposes of  this section;  
(l) conducting research for the above purposes;  
6[(la) call ing from or furnishing to any such agencies, as may  be specified by the Board, such 
information as may be  considered necessary by it for the efficient discharge of  its functions;]  
(m) performing such other functions as may be prescribed.  
7[(2A) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2), the Board may take measures 
to undertake inspection of any book, or register, or other document or record of any listed public company 
or a public company (not being intermediaries referred to in se ction 12) which intends to get its securities 
listed on any recognised stock exchange where the Board has reasonable grounds to believe that such 
company has been indulging in insider trading or fraudulent and unfair trade practices relating to 
securities market.]  
8[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being  in force while exercising 
exercising the powers under 9[clause ( i) or clause ( ia) of sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 2A)], the Board 
shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court  under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 
1908) while trying a suit,  in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) the discovery and production of books of account and other  documents, at such place and such 
time as may be specified  by the Board;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 5, for “collective investment schemes ” (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for “stock exchanges and”  (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 2, for clause ( ia) (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 6 -3-1998 ). 
5. The words, brackets and figures “the Capital Issues (Control) Act, 1947 (29 of 1947) and” omitted by Act 9 of 1995, s. 5 
(w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
6. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
7. Ins. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 4 (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
8. Ins. by Act 9 of  1995, s. 5 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
9. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 4, for “clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2)” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  9 
 (ii) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and  examining them on oath;  
(iii) inspection of any books, registers and other documents of any  person referred to in            
sectio n 12, at any place; ] 
1[(iv) inspection  of any book, or register, or other document or record of the company referred to 
in sub -section ( 2A); 
(v) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.]  
1[(4) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -sections ( 1), (2), (2A) and ( 3) and         
section 11B, the Board may, by an order, for reasons to be recorded in writing, in the interests of investors 
or securities market, take any of the following measures, either pending investigation or inquiry or on 
completion of such i nvestigation or inquiry, namely: — 
(a) suspend the trading of any security in a recognised stock exchange;  
(b) restrain persons from accessing the securities market and prohibit any person associated with 
securities market to buy, sell or deal in securities ; 
(c) suspend any office -bearer of any stock exchange or self -regulatory organisation from holding 
such position;  
(d) impound and retain the proceeds or securities in respect of any transaction which is under 
investigation;  
(e) attach, after passing of an order on an application made for approval by the Judicial 
Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction, for a period not exceeding one month, one or more 
bank account or accounts of any intermediary or any person associated with the securities market in 
any manner involved in violation of any of the provisions of this Act, or the rules or the regulations 
made thereunder:  
Provided that only the bank account or accounts or any transaction entered therein, so far as it 
relates to the proceeds actually inv olved in violation of any of the provisions of this Act, or the rules 
or the regulations made thereunder shall be allowed to be attached;  
(f) direct any intermediary or any person associated with the securities market in any manner not 
to dispose of or ali enate an asset forming part of any transaction which is under investigation:  
Provided that the Board may, without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2) or 
sub-section ( 2A), take any of the measures specified in clause ( d) or clause ( e) or clause ( f), in respect 
of any listed public company or a public company (not being intermediaries referred to in section 12) 
which intends to get its securities listed on any recognised stock exchange where the Board has 
reasonable grounds to believe tha t such company has been indulging in insider trading or fraudulent 
and unfair trade practices relating to securities market:  
Provided further that the Board shall, either before or after passing such orders, give an 
opportunity of hearing to such intermediaries or persons concerned.]  
2[(5) The amount disgorged, pursuant to a direction issued, under section 11B of this Act or                
section 12A of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) or section 19 of the 
Depositories Act, 1996 (22 of 1996), as the case may be, shall be credited to the Investor Protection and 
Education Fund established by the Board and such amou nt shall be utilised by the Board in accordance 
with the regulations made under this Act.]  
 3[ 4[11A.  Board to regulate or prohibit issue of prospectus, offer document or advertisement 
soliciting money for issue of securities. —(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956), the Board may, for the protection of investors, — 
(a) specify, by regulations — 
(i) the matters relating to issue of capital, transfer of securities and other matters incidental 
thereto; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 4 (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 2 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
3. Ins. by Act 9 of 1995, s.  6 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 5, for section 11A (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  10 
 (ii) the manner in which such matters shall be disclosed by the companies;  
(b) by general or special orders — 
(i) prohibit any company from issuing prospectus, any offer document, or advertisement 
soliciting money from the public for the issue of securities;  
(ii) specify the conditions subject to which the prospectus, such offer document or 
advertisement, if not prohibited, may be issued.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 21 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act,  
1956 (42 of 1956), the Board may specify the requirements for listing and transfer of securities  and other 
matters incidental thereto .] 
1[11AA. Collective investment scheme. —(1) Any scheme or arrangement  which satisfies the 
conditions referred to in sub -section ( 2) 2[or sub -section ( 2A)] shall be a  collective investment scheme:  
2[Provided that any pooling of funds under any scheme or arrangement, which is not registered with 
the Board or is not covered under sub -section ( 3), involving a corpus amount of one hundred crore rupees 
or mor e shall be deemed to be a collective investment scheme.]  
(2) Any scheme or arrangement made or offered by any 3[person]  under  which, — 
(i) the contributions, or payments made by the investors, by whatever  name called, are pooled and 
utilized for the purposes of the scheme  or arrangement;  
(ii) the contributions or payments are made to such scheme or  arrangement by the investors 
with a view to receive profits, income,  produce or property, whether movable or immovable , from 
such scheme or arrangement;  
(iii) the property, contribution or investment forming part of scheme or  arrangement, whether 
identifiable or not, is managed on behalf of  the investors;  
(iv) the investors do not have day -to-day control over the management  and operation of the 
scheme or ar rangement.  
2[(2A) Any scheme or arrangement made or offered by any person satisfying the conditions as may be 
specified in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.]  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) 2[or sub -section ( 2A)], any scheme  or 
arrangement — 
(i) made or offered by a cooperative society registered under the  Co-operative Societies Act, 
1912 (2 of 1912) or a society being a society  registered or deemed to be registered under any law 
relating to  co-operative societies for the time being in force in any State;  
(ii) under which deposits are accepted by non -banking financial  companies as defined in          
clause ( f) of section 45 -I of the Reserve Bank  of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(iii) being  a contract of in surance to which the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of  1938),  applies;  
(iv) providing for any s cheme, pension scheme or the insurance scheme  framed under the 
Employees ’ Provident Fund s and Miscellaneous  Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952);  
(v) under  which deposits are accepted under section 58A of the  Companies Act, 1956                        
(1 of 1956);  
(vi) under  which deposits are accepted by a company declared as a  Nidhi  or a Mutual Benefit 
Society under section 620A of the  Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(vii) falling within the meaning of c hit business as defined in clause ( e) of section 2 of the Chit 
Fund s Act, 1982 (40 of 1982);  
(viii) under  which contributions made are in the nature of subscription to  a mutual fund;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 31 of 1999, s. 11 (w.e.f. 22 -2-2000).  
2. Ins. by  Act 27 of 2014, s. 3 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “company” (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013) . 11 
 1[(ix) such  other scheme or arrangement which the Central Government may, in consultation with 
the Board, notify,]  
shall not be a collective investment scheme. ] 
11B. Power to issue directions .—Save as otherwise provided in section 11, if after making or 
causing to be  made an  enquiry, the Board is satisfied that it is necessary — 
(i) in the interest of investors, or orderly development of securities market;  or 
(ii) to prevent the affairs of any intermediary or other persons referred to  in section 12 being 
conducted in a  manner detrimental to the interests  of investors or securities market; or  
(iii) to secure the proper management of any such intermediary or person,  
it may issue such directions, — 
(a) to any person or class of persons referred to in section 12, or  associat ed with the securities 
market; or  
(b) to any company in respect of matters specified in section 11A,  
as may be appropriate in the interests of investors in securities  and the securities market.]  
2[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declar ed that the power to issue directions 
under this section shall include and always be deemed to have been included the power to direct any 
person, who made profit or averted loss by indulging in any transaction or activity in contravention of the 
provisions  of this Act or regulations made thereunder, to disgorge an amount equivalent to the wrongful 
gain made or loss averted by such contravention.]  
3[11C. Investigation. —(1) Where the Board has reasonable ground to believe that — 
(a) the transactions in securities are being dealt with in a manner detrimental to the investors or 
the securities market; or  
(b) any intermediary or any person associated with the securities market has violated any of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules or t he regulations made or directions issued by the Board 
thereunder,  
it may, at any time by order in writing, direct any person (hereafter in this section referred to as the 
Investigating Authority) specified in the order to investigate the affairs of such in termediary or persons 
associated with the securities market and to report thereon to the Board.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sections 235 to 241 of the Companies Act, 1956                    
(1 of 1956), it shall be the duty of every manager,  managing director, officer and other employee of the 
company and every intermediary referred to in section 12 or every person associated with the securities 
market to preserve and to produce to the Investigating Authority or any person authorised by it in  this 
behalf, all the books, registers, other documents and record of, or relating to, the company or, as the case 
may be, of or relating to, the intermediary or such person, which are in their custody or power.  
(3) The Investigating Authority may require any intermediary or any person associated with securities 
market in any manner to furnish such information to, or produce such books, or registers, or other 
documents, or record before i t or any person authorised by it in this behalf as it may consider nec essary if 
the furnishing of such information or the production of such books, or registers, or other documents, or 
record is relevant or necessary for the purposes of its investigation.  
(4) The Investigating Authority may keep in its custody any books, reg isters, other documents and 
record produced under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) for six months and thereafter shall return the 
same to any intermediary or any person associated with securities market by whom or on whose behalf 
the books, registers, ot her documents and record are produced:  
Provided that the Investigating Authority may call for any book, register, other document and record 
if they are needed again:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 3 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
3. Ins. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 6 (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  12 
 Provided further that if the person on whose behalf the books, registers, other documents and record 
are produced requires certified copies of the books, registers, other documents and record produced before 
the Investigating Authority, it shall give certified copies of such books, registers, other documents and 
record to such person or on whos e behalf the books, registers, other documents and record were produced.  
(5) Any person, directed to make an investigation under sub -section ( 1), may examine on oath, any 
manager, managing director, officer and other employee of any intermediary or any per son associated 
with securities market in any manner, in relation to the affairs of his business and may administer an oath 
accordingly and for that purpose may require any of those persons to appear before it personally.  
(6) If any person fails without rea sonable cause or refuses — 
(a) to produce to the Investigating Authority or any person authorised by it in this behalf any 
book, register, other document and record which is his duty under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) to 
produce; or  
(b) to furnish any  information which is his duty under sub -section ( 3) to furnish; or  
(c) to appear before the Investigating Authority personally when required to do so under                     
sub-section ( 5) or to answer any question which is put to him by the Investigat ing Authority in 
pursuance of that sub -section; or  
(d) to sign the notes of any examination referred to in sub -section ( 7), 
 he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year, or with fine, which 
may extend to one crore rupee s, or with both, and also with a further fine which may extend to five lakh 
rupees for every day after the first during which the failure or refusal continues.  
(7) Notes of any examination under sub -section ( 5) shall be taken down in writing and shall be  read 
over to, or by, and signed by, the person examined, and may thereafter be used in evidence  against him.  
(8) Where in the course of investigation, the Investigating Authority has reasonable ground to  believe 
that the books, registers, other documents an d record of, or relating to, any intermediary  or any person 
associated with securities market in any manner, may be destroyed, mutilated,  altered, falsified or 
secreted, the Investigating Authority may make an application to 1[the Magistrate or Judge of such 
designated court in Mumbai, as may be notified by the Central  Government] for an order for the seizure 
of such books, registers, other documents and record.  
2[(8A) The  authorised officer may requisition the services of any police officer or any officer of  the 
Central Government, or of both, to assist him for all or any of the purposes specified in sub -section  (8) 
and it shall be the duty of every such officer to comply with such requisition.]  
(9) After considering the application and hearing the Investigating Authority, if necessary, 3[the 
Magistrate or Judge of the Designated Court] may, by order, authorise the Investigating  Authority — 
(a) to enter, with such assistance , as may be required, the place or places where such books,  
registers, other documents and record are kept;  
(b) to search that place or those places in the manner specified in the order; and  
(c) to seize books, registers, other documents and record, it con siders necessary for the  purposes 
of the investigation:  
Provided that 3[the Magistrate or Judge of the Designated Court] shall not authorise seizure of  
books, registers, other documents and record, of any listed public company or a public company  (not 
being the intermediaries specified under section 12) which intends to get its securities listed  on any 
recognised stock exchange unless such company indulges in insider trading or market  manipulation.  
(10) The Investigating Authority shall keep in its custody the books, registers, other documents  and 
record seized under this section for such period not later than the conclusion of the  investigation as it 
considers necessary and thereafter shall return the same to the company or the  other body corporate, or, as 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 5, for “the Judicial Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction”  (w.e.f. 18-7-2013 ). 
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 28-3-2014 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “the Magistrate”  (w.e.f. 18-7-2013 ). 13 
 the case may be, to the managing director or the manager or any  other person, from whose custody or 
power they were seized and inform 1[the Magistrate or  Judge of the Designated Court] of such return:  
Provided that the Investigating Authority may, before r eturning such books, registers, other  
documents and record as aforesaid, place identification marks on them or any part thereof.  
(11) Save as otherwise provided in this section, every search or seizure made under this section  shall 
be carried out in accord ance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) 
relating to searches or seizures made under that Code.  
11D. Cease and desist proceedings. —If the Board finds, after causing an inquiry to be made, that 
any person has violated, or  is likely to violate, any provisions of this Act, or any rules or regulations made 
thereunder, it may  pass an order requiring such person to cease and desist from committing or causing 
such violation:  
Provided that the Board shall not pass such order in r espect of any listed public company or a  public 
company (other than the intermediaries specified under section 12) which intends to get  its securities 
listed on any recognised stock exchange unless the Board has reasonable grounds  to believe that such 
comp any has indulged in insider trading or market manipulation.]  
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION CERTIFICATE  
12. Registration of stock -brokers, sub -brokers, share transfer agents, etc .—(1) No stock -broker, 
sub-broker, share transfer agent, banker to an issue,  trustee of trust deed, registrar to an issue, merchant 
banker,  underwriter, portfolio manager, investment adviser and such other  intermediary who may be 
associated with securities market shall buy,  sell or deal in securities except under, and in accordance with, 
the conditions of a certificate of registration obtained from the Board in  accordance with the 
2[regulations] made under this Act:  
Provided that a person buying or selling securities or otherwise  dealing with the securities market as a 
stock -broker, sub -broker, share  transfer agent, banker to an issue, trustee of trust deed, registrar to an  
issue, merchant banker, underwriter, portfolio manager, investment  adviser and such other intermediary 
who may be associated with  securities market immediately before the  establishment of the Board  for 
which no registration certificate was necessary prior to such  establishment, may continue to do so for a 
period of three months  from such establishment or, if he has made an application for such  registration 
within the said period of three months, till the disposal of  such application:  
3[Provided further that any certificate of registration, obtained  immediately before the commencement 
of the Securities Laws  (Amendment) Act, 1995  (9 of 1995) , shall be deemed to have been obtained from  
the Board in accordance with the regulations providing for such  registration.]  
3[(1A) No 4[depository, participant, custodian ] of securities, foreign  institutional investor, credit rating 
agency or any other  intermediary associated with the securities market as the  Board may by notification in 
this behalf specify, shall buy or  sell or deal in securities except under and in accordance with  the 
conditions of a certificate of registration obtained from the  Board in a ccordance with the regulations made 
under this Act:  
Provided that a person buying or selling securities or otherwise  dealing with the securities market as a 
4[depository,  participant, custodian ] of securities, foreign institutional  investor or credit rating agency 
immediately before the  commencement of the Securities Laws (Amendment) Act,  1995 (9 of 1995), for 
which no certificate of registration was  required prior to such commencement, may continue to buy or  sell 
securities or otherwise deal with the securities market until  such time regulations are made under clause 
(d) of sub-section  (2) of section 30.  
(1B) No person shall sponsor or cause to be sponsored or carry on  or cause to be carried on any 
venture capital funds or  collective investment scheme including mutual funds, unless  he obtains a 
certificate of registration from the Board in  accordance with the regulations:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 5, for “ the Judicial Magistrate of the first class having jurisdiction”  (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 7, for “rules”  (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 1996, s. 30 and the Schedule, for “depository, custodian” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1995).  14 
 Provided that any person sponsoring or causing to be  sponsored, carrying or causing to be carried on 
any venture  capital funds or col lective investment scheme operating in the  securities market immediately 
before the commencement of  the Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, 1995 (9 of 1995) for which no  
certificate of registration was required prior to such  commencement, may continue to oper ate till such 
time regulations are made under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 30.]  
 (2) Every application for registration shall be in such manner and on  payment of such fees as may be 
determined by regulations.  
(3) The Board may, by order, suspen d or cancel a certificate of  registration in such manner as may be 
determined by regulations:  
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made unless  the person concerned has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of  being heard.  
1[CHAPTER VA  
PROHIBITION OF MANIPULATIVE AND DECEPTIVE DEVICES, INSIDER TRADING AND SUBSTANTIAL 
ACQUISITION OF SECURITIES OR CONTROL  
12A. Prohibition of manipulative and deceptive devices, insider trading and substantial 
acquisition of securities or control. —No person s hall directly or indirectly — 
(a) use or employ, in connection with the issue, purchase or sale of any securities listed or 
proposed to be listed on a recognis ed stock exchange, any manipulative or deceptive device or 
contrivance in contravention of the pro visions of this Act or the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder;  
(b) employ any device, scheme or artifice to defraud in connection with issue or dealing in 
securities which are listed or proposed to be listed on a recognised stock exchange;  
(c) engage  in any act, practice, course of business which operates or would operate as fraud or 
deceit upon any person, in connection with the issue, dealing in securities which are listed or 
proposed to be listed on a recognised stock exchange, in contravention of the provisions of this Act or 
the rules or the regulations made thereunder;  
(d) engage in insider trading;  
(e) deal in securities while in possession of material or non -public information or communicate 
such material or non -public information to any other person, in a manner which is in contravention of 
the provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations made thereunder;  
(f) acquire control of any company or securities more than the percentage of equity share capital 
of a company whose securities are  listed or proposed to be listed on a recognised stock exchange in 
contravention of the regulations made under this Act.]  
CHAPTER VI  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND  AUDIT  
13. Grants by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in  this behalf, make to the Board grants of such sums of money as that 
Government  may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
14. Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Securities and  Exchange B oard of 
India General Fund and there shall be credited  thereto — 
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Board under this  Act; 2*** 
3*   *   *   *  * 
(b) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as  may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 7 (w.e.f. 29-10-2002).  
2. The word  “and” omitted by Act 9 of 1995, s. 8 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
3. Clause ( aa) omitted by Act 59 of 2002, s. 8 (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  15 
 (2) The Fun d shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the  members, officers and other employees 
of the Board;  
(b) the expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions  under section 11;  
(c) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this  Act. 
15. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records  
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be  prescribed by the Central 
Gover nment in consultation with the  Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him  and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be  payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person  appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the  Board shall have the s ame rights and privileges and 
authority in  connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General  generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts  and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of  books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and  papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Board.  
(4) The accounts of the Board as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf  toget her with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to  the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to  be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
1[CHAPTER VIA  
PENALTIES AND ADJUDIC ATION  
15A. Penalty for failure to furnish information , return , etc.—If any person, who is required under 
this Act or any rules or regulations made  thereunder, — 
(a) to furnish any document, return or report to the Board, fails to furnish  the same, he shall be 
liable to 2[a penalty 3[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees  but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees for each day during which such failure continues  subject to a maximum of one crore rupees ]]; 
(b) to file any return or furnish any information, books or other documents  within the time 
specified therefor in the regulations, fails to file return  or furnish the same within the time specified 
therefor in the regulations,  he shall be liable to 4[a penalty 3[which shall not be less than one lakh 
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues 
subject to a maximum of  one crore rupees] ]; 
(c) to maintain books of account or records, fails to maintain the same, he  shall be liable to 5[a 
penalty  3[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for 
each day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of  one crore rupees ]]. 
15B. Penalty for failure by any person to ente r into agreement with clients .—If any person, who 
is registered as an intermediary and is required under this Act or  any rules or regulations made thereunder 
to enter into an agreement with his client,  fails to enter into such agreement, he shall be liable to 6[a 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 9 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 9, for “a penalty not exceeding one lakh and fifty thousand rupees for each such failure”                    
(w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 6, for certain words (w.e.f.  8-9-2014 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 9, for “a penalty not exceeding five thousand r upees for every day during which such failure 
continues”  (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “a penalty not exceeding ten thousand rupees for every day during which such failure continues”   
(w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
6. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for “a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees for every such failure”  (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 16 
 penalty 1[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for each 
day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of one crore rupees]].  
2[15C.  Penalty for failure to redress investors ’ grievances .—If any listed company or any person 
who is registered as an intermediary, after having been called upon by the Board in writing, to redress the 
grievances of investors, fails to redress such grievances  within the time specified by the Board, such 
company or intermediary shall be liable to a penalty 3[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but 
which may extend to one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues subject to a 
maximum of one crore rupees ].] 
15D. Penalty for certain defaults in case of mutual funds .—If any person, who is — 
(a) required under this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder to  obtain a certificate of 
registration from the Board for sponsoring or  carrying on any collective investment scheme, including 
mutual funds,  sponsors or carries on any collective investment scheme, including  mutual funds, 
without obtaining such certificate of registration, he shall  be liable to 4[a penalty  
5[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for each day 
during which he sponsors or carries on any such collective investment scheme including mutual funds  
subject to a maximum of  one crore rupees ]]; 
(b) registered with the Board as a collective investment scheme, including  mutual funds, for 
sponsoring or carrying on any investment scheme,  fails to comply with the terms and conditions of 
certificate of  registration, he shall be liable to 6[a penalty 7[which shall not be less than o ne lakh rupees 
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues 
subject to a maximum of one crore rupees ]; 
(c) registered with the Board as a collective investment scheme including  mutual funds, fails to 
make an appl ication for listing of its schemes as  provided for in the regulations governing such listing, 
he shall be liable  to 8[a penalty 7[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to 
one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure co ntinues subject to a maximum of one crore 
rupees ]]; 
(d) registered as a collective investment scheme, including mutual funds,  fails to despatch unit 
certificates of any scheme in the manner  provided in the regulation governing such despatch, he shall 
be liable  to 9[a penalty 7[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh 
lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of one crore 
rupees] ]; 
(e) registered as collective investment scheme, includ ing mutual funds,  fails to refund the 
application monies paid by the investors within the  period specified in the regulations, he shall be 
liable to 10[a penalty  7[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh 
rupees for each  day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of one crore rupees] ]; 
(f) registered as a collective investment scheme, including mutual funds,  fails to invest money 
collected by such collective investment schemes  in the manner or within the  period specified in the 
regulations, he shall  be liable to 11[a penalty 7[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which 
may extend to one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues subject to a 
maximum of one crore rupees] ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 7, for certain words (w.e.f. 8-9-2014 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 11, for section 15C  (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 8, for certain words (w.e.f.  8-9-2014 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 12, for “a penalty not exceeding ten thousand rupees for each day during which he carries on any 
such collective investment scheme including mutual funds, or ten lakh rupees, whiche ver is higher” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
5.  Subs. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
6. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 12, for “a penalty not exceeding ten thousand rupees for each day during which such failure 
continues or ten lakh rupees, whichever is higher” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
7. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 9, for certain words (w.e.f. 8-9-2014 ). 
8. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 12, for “a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees for each day during which such failure 
continues or five lakh rupees, whichever is higher” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
9. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 12, for “a penalty not exceeding five thousand rup ees for each day during which such failure 
continues” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
10. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “a penalty not exceeding one thousand rupees for each day during which such failure continue”    
(w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
11. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees for each such failure” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 17 
 15E.  Penalty for failure to observe rules and regulations by an asset  management company .—
Where any asset management company of a mutual fund registered under this Act  fails to comply with 
any of the regulations providing for restrictions on the activities of  the asset management companies, such 
asset management company shall be liable  to 1[a penalty 2[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees 
but which may extend to one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues subject to a 
maximum of one  crore rupees] ]. 
15F. Penalty for default in case of stock brokers .—If any person, who is registered as a stock 
broker under this Act, — 
(a) fails to issue contract notes in the form and manner specified by the  stock exchange of which 
such broker is a member, he shall be liable  to 3[a penalty which shall not be less than one lakh rupees 
but which may extend to] for which the  contract note was required to be issued by that broke r; 
(b) fails to deliver any security or fails to make payment of the amount  due to the investor in the 
manner within the period specified in the  regulations, he shall be liable to 4[a penalty  
5[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for each 
day during which he sponsors or carries on a ny such collective investment scheme including mutual 
funds subject to a maximum of one crore rupees] ]; 
(c) charges an amount of brokerage which is in excess of the brokerage  specified in the 
regulations, he shall be liable to 6[a penalty 7[[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which 
may extend to five times the amount of  brokerage ]] charged in excess of the specified brokerage, 
whichever is  higher.  
15G. Penalty for insider trading .—If any insider who, — 
(i) either on his own behal f or on behalf of any other person, deals in  securities of a body 
corporate listed on any stock exchange on the  basis of any unpublished price sensitive information; or  
(ii) communicates any unpublished price sensitive information to any  person, with or without his 
request for such information except as  required in the ordinary course of business or under any law; 
or 
(iii) counsels, or procures for any other person to deal in any securities of  any body corporate on 
the basis of unpublished price sensitive  information,  
shall be liable to a penalty 8[which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but which may extend to   
twenty -five crore rupees or three times the amount of profits made out of insider trading, whichever is 
higher] . 
15H. Penalty for non -disclo sure of acquisition of shares and takeovers .—If any person, who is 
required under this Act or any rules or regulations made  thereunder, fails to — 
(i) disclose the aggregate of his share holding in the body corporate  before he acquires any shares 
of that bo dy corporate; or  
(ii) make a public announcement to ac quire shares at a minimum price;  
9[(iii) make a public offer by sending letter of offer to the shareholders of the concerned 
company; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 59 of 2002, s. 13, for “a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees for each such failure” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 10, for certain words (w.e.f. 8-9-2014 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “a penalty not exceeding five times the amount” (w.e.f. 8-9-2014 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 14, for “a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees for each day during which such fail ure 
continues” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
5. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 11, for certain words (w.e.f. 8-9-2014 ). 
6. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 14, for “a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
7. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 11, for “of one lakh rupees or five times the amount of brokerage” (w.e.f. 8-9-2014 ). 
8. Subs. by s.  12, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f.8 -2-2014).  
9. Ins. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 16 (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  18 
 (iv) make  payment of consideration to the shareholders who sold their shares pursuant to letter of 
offer,]  
he shall be liable to a penalty 1[which shall not be less than ten lakh rupees but which may extend to   
twenty -five crore rupees or three times the amount of  profits made out of such failure, whichever is 
higher].  
2[15HA. Penalty for fraudulent and unfair trade practices. —If any person indulges in fraudulent 
and unfair trade practices relating to securities, he  shall be liable to a penalty 3[which shall not be  less 
than five lakh rupees but which may extend to  twenty -five crore rupees or three times the amount of 
profits made out of such practices,  whichever is higher ]. 
15HB. Penalty for contravention where no separate penalty has been provided. —Whoever fails 
to comply with any provision of this Act, the rules or the regulations  made or directions issued by the 
Board thereunder for which no separate penalty has been  provided, shall be 4[liable to a penalty which 
shall not be less one lakh rupees but which may extend to one crore rupees ].] 
15-I. Power to adjudicate .—(1) For the purpose of adjudging under sections 15A, 15B, 15C, 15D, 
15E, 15F, 15G , 5[15H, 15HA and 15HB]  the Board shall appoint any officer not below the  rank of a 
Division Chief to be an adjudicating officer for holding an  inquiry in the prescribed manner after giving 
any person concerned a  reasonable opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing any  penalty.  
(2) While holding an inquiry the adjudicating officer shall have power t o summon and enforce the 
attendance of any person acquainted with  the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to  
produce any document which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer,  may be useful for or relevant to 
the subject matter of t he inquiry and if,  on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person has failed to comply  
with the provisions of any of the sections specified in sub -section ( 1), he may impose such penalty as he 
thinks fit in accordance with the  provisions of any of those sections.  
6[(3) The Board may call for and examine the record of any proceedings under this section and if it 
considers that the order passed by the adjudicating officer is erroneous to the extent it is not in the 
interests of the securities market, it may , after making or causing to be made such inquiry as it deems 
necessary, pass an order enhancing the quantum of penalty, if the circumstances of the case so justify:  
Provided that no such order shall be passed unless the person concerned has been given an opportunity 
of being heard in the matter:  
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub -section shall be applicable after an expiry of a 
period of three months from the date of the order passed by the adjudicating officer or disposal of the 
appeal un der section 15T, whichever is earlier.]  
15J. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer .—While adjudging the quant um 
of penalty under section 15 -I, the adjudicating officer  shall have due regard to the following factors, 
namely: —  
 (a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever  quantifiable, made as a 
result of the default;  
(b) the amount of loss caused to an investor or group of investors as a  result of the default;  
(c) the repetitive nature of the default.  
7[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that the power of an adjudicating officer to 
adjudge the quantum of penalty under sections 15A to 15E, clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 15F, 15G, 15H 
and 15HA shall be and shall always be deemed to have  been exercised under the provisions of this 
section.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014, s.13, for certain words (w. e.f.8-2-2014).  
2. Ins. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 17 (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 14, for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -2-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 15,  ibid., for “liable to a penalty which may extend to one crore rupees” (w.e.f. 8 -2-2014).  
5. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 18, for “and 15H” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
6. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 16 (w.e.f. 28 -3-2014).  
7. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s.147 (w.e.f. 1 -3-2017)  19 
  
1[15JA. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India. —All sums 
realised by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.]  
2[15JB. Settlement of administrative and civil proceedings. —(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time being in force, any person, against whom any proceedings have 
been initiated or may be initiated under section 11, section 11B, section  11D, sub -section ( 3) of section 12 
or section 15 -I, may file an application in writing to the Board proposing for settlement of the proceedings 
initiated or to be initiated for the alleged defaults.  
(2) The Board may, after taking into consideration the n ature, gravity and impact of defaults, agree to 
the proposal for settlement, on payment of such sum by the defaulter or on such other terms as may be 
determined by the Board in accordance with the regulations made under this Act.  
(3) The settlement proceed ings under this section shall be conducted in accordance with the 
procedure specified in the regulations made under this Act.  
(4) No appeal shall lie under section 15T against any order passed by the Board or adjudicating 
officer, as the case may be, under  this section.]  
CHAPTER VIB  
ESTABLISHMENT, JURISD ICTION, AUTHORITY AN D PROCEDURE OF  3[SECURITIES APPELLATE TRIBUNAL]  
 4[15K. Establishment of Securities Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification, establish a Tribunal to be known  as the Securities Appellate Tribunal to exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act or any other law for the time being 
in force.  
(2) The Central Government shall also specify in the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1), the 
matters and places in relation to which the Securities Appellate Tribu nal may exercise jurisdiction.]   
5[15L. Composition of Securities Appellate .—(1) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall consist of 
a Presiding Officer and such number of Judicial Members and Technical Members as the Central 
Government may determine, by notification, to exercise the powers and discharge the functions conferred 
on the  Securities Appellate Tribunal under this Act or any other law for the time being in force.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, —  
(a) the jurisdiction of the Securities Appellate Tribunal may be exercised by Benches thereof;  
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Presiding Officer of the Securities Appellate Tribunal with 
two or more Judicial or Technical Members as he may deem fit:  
Provided that every Bench constituted shall include at least one Judicial Member and one Technical 
Member;  
(c) the Benches of the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at Mumbai and may also sit 
at such other places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Presiding Officer, notify.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in s ub-section ( 2), the Presiding Officer may transfer a 
Judicial Member or a Technical Member of the Securities Appellate Tribunal from  one Bench to another 
Bench. ] 
6[15M.  Qualification for appointment as Presiding Officer , Judicial  Member and Technical 
Member .—A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Presiding Officer or a Judicial Member 
or a Technical Member of the Securities Appellate Tribunal, unless he —  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 19 (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 17  (w.e.f. 20 -4-2007).  
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 148, for “ APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL ” (w.e.f. 1 -3-2017).  
4. Subs. by s. 148, ibid., for section 15 K (w.e.f. 1 -3-2017).  
5. Subs. by s.148, ibid., for section 15L (w.e.f.1 -3-2017)  
6. Subs. by s. 148,  ibid.,  for section 15M (w.e.f. 1 -3-2017).  
 20 
 (a) is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or a Chief Justice of a High Cou rt or a Judge of 
High Court for at least seven years, in the case of the Presiding Officer; and  
(b) is, or has been, a Judge of High Court for at least five years, in the case of a Judicial Member; 
or 
(c) in the case of a Technical Member ––  
(i) is, or has been, a Secretary or an Additional Secretary in the Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government or any equivalent post in the Central Government or a State Government; or  
(ii) is a person of proven ability, integrity and standing having special knowledge and 
professional experience, of not less than fifteen years, in financial sector including securities 
market or pension funds or commodity derivatives or insurance.  
15MA.  Appointment  of Presiding Officer and Judicial Member. —The Presidin g Officer and 
Judicial Members of the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India or his nominee.  
 15MB. Search -cum-Selection Committee for appointment of Technical Members .—(1) The 
Technical Members of the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the Central Government on 
the recommendation of a Search -cum-Selection Committee consisting of the following, namely: ––  
(a) Presiding Officer, Securities Appellate Tribunal —Chairperson;  
(b) Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs —Member;  
(c) Secretary, Department of Financial Services —Member; and  
(d) Secretary, Legislative Department or Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs —Member.  
(2) The Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs shall be the Convener of the Search -cum-
Selection Committee.  
(3) The Search -cum-Selection Committee shall determine its procedure for recommending the names 
of persons to be appointed under sub -section ( 1).  
15MC. Vacancy not to invalidate selection proceeding. —(1) No appointment of the Presiding 
Officer, a Judicial Member or a Technical Member of the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be invalid 
merely by reason of any vacancy or any defect in the constitut ion of the Search -cum-Selection 
Committee.  
(2) A member or part time member of the Board or the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority or the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority, or any person at senior 
management level equivalent to the Executive Director in the Board or in suc h Authorities, shall not be 
appointed as Presiding Officer or Member of the Securities Appellate Tribunal, during his service or 
tenure as such with the Board or with such Authorities, as the case may be, or within two years from the 
date on which he cease s to hold office as such in the Board or in such Authorities.  
(3) The Presiding Officer or such other member of the Securities Appellate Tribunal, holding office 
on the date of commencement of Part VIII of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017) shall 
continue to hold office for such term as he was appointed and the other provisions of this Act shall apply 
to such Presiding Officer or such other member, as if Part VIII of Chapter VI of the Finance Act , 2017 
had not been enacted.]  
1[15N. Tenure of o ffice of P residing Office,  Judicial or Technical Members of Securities 
Appellate Tribunal. —The Presiding Officer or every Judicial or Technical Member of the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office, and shall be eligible for reappointment for another term of maximu m five years:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.148, for section 15N (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 21 
 Provided that no Presiding Officer or the Judicial or Technical Member shall hold office after he has 
attained the age of seventy years .] 
15-O. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of  Presiding Officers .—
The salary  and allowances payable to , and the other terms and conditions of service  (including pension, 
gratuity and other retirement benefits ) of, the 1[Presiding Officer and other Members of a Securities 
Appellate Tribunal ] shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Prov ided that neither the salary and allowances no r the other terms and conditions of  services of the 
2[Presiding Officer and other Members of a Securities Appellate Tribunal] shall be varied to their 
disadvantage after  appointment.  
15P. Filling up of vacancies .—If, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in 
3[the office of the  Presiding Officer or any other Member ,] of a Securities Appellate Tribunal , then the 
Central Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the pr ovisions of this Act to fill the 
vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Securities Appellate Tribunal from the stage at 
which the  vacancy is filled.   
4[15PA.  Member to act as Presiding Officer in certain circumstances. —In the event of occurrence 
of any vacancy in the office of the Presiding Officer of the Securities Appellate Tribunal by reason of his 
death, resignation or otherwise, the senior -most Judicial Member of the Securities Appellate Tribunal 
shall act as the Presiding Officer until the date on which a new Presiding Officer is appointed in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act.]  
15Q. Resignation and removal .—(1) 5[The Presiding Officer or any other Member of a Securities 
Appellate Tribunal ] may, by notice  in writing under h is hand addressed to the Central Government, resign  
his office:  
Provided that 6[the Presiding Officer or any other Member] shall , unless he is permitted by  the 
Central Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to  hold office until the expiry of three 
months from the date of receipt of  such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor inters  
upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the  earliest.  
7[(2) The Central Government may, after an inquiry made by t he Judge of the Supreme Court, remove 
the Presiding Officer or Judicial Member or Technical Member of the Securities Appellate Tribunal, if 
he—  
(a) is, or at any time has been adjudged as an insolvent;  
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of a cting as the Presiding Officer, Judicial or 
Technical Member;  
(c) has been convicted of any offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude;  
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to  render his 
continuation in office detrime ntal to the public interest; or  
(e) has acquired such financial interest or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his 
functions as the Presiding Officer or Judicial or Technical Member:  
Provided that  he shall not be removed from office under clauses ( d) and ( e), unless he has been given 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 22,  for “Presiding Officer of a Securities Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
2. Subs. by s. 22, ibid.,  for “said Presiding Officer s” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
3. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for “office of the Presiding Officer” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
4. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 148 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) .  
5. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 24, for “Presiding Officer of a Securities Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
6. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for “the said Presiding Officer” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
7. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.148,  for sub -section ( 2)  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  22 
 (3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the  investigation of 
misbehaviour or incap acity of the 1[the Presiding  Officer  or any other Member] .  
2[15QA .Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Presiding Officer and                 
Member. — Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of 
office, salaries and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Presiding Officer and other Members of the Appellate Tribun al appointed after the commencement of 
Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of 
that Act:  
Provided that the Presiding Officer and Member appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of 
Chapter  VI of the Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had not come into 
force.]  
15R. Orders constitutin g Appellate Tribunal to be  final and not to invalidate  its proceedings .—
No order of the Central Government appointing any person as the 3[Presiding Officer  or a Member] of a 
Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be called in question in any manner, and no  act or proceeding before a 
Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be called in question in  any manner on the ground merely of any 
defect in the constitution of a Securities  Appellate Tribunal.  
15S. Staff of the Securities Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall provide the  
Securities Appellate  Tribunal with such officers and employees as that Government may  think fit.  
(2) The officers and employees of the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall  discharge their functions 
under general superintendence of the  Presiding Officer.  
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the  officers and employees of the 
Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be  such as may be prescribed.  
15T. Appeal to the Securities Appellate Tribunal .—4[(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), 
any person aggrieved, — 
(a) by an order of the Board made, on and after the com mencement of the Securities Laws 
(Second Amendment)  Act, 1999  (32 of 1999) , under this Act, or the rules or regulations 
made  thereunder; or  
(b) by an order made by an adjudicating officer  5[under this Act; or]   
6[(c) by an order of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority or the Pension Fund 
Regulatory and Development Authority,]  
may prefer an appeal to a Securities Appellate Tribunal having  jurisdiction in the matter. ]  
7*    *    *   * 
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the  date 
on which 8[a copy of the order made by the  Board or the  adjudicating officer  9[or the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority or the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority ] as 
the case may be, ] is received by him and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee as may  
be prescribed : 
Provided that the Securities Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the  said 
period of forty -five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it  within that period.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 24,  for “aforesaid Presiding Officer” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.178   (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
3. Subs. by  Act 59 of 2002 , s. 25, for “Presiding Officer” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
4. Subs. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 9, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  
5. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017 , s. 148, “under this Act,”   (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
6. Ins. by s.148 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
7. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 27 of 2014, s. 18 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
8. Subs. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 9, for “a copy of the order made , by the adjudicating officer” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  
9. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.148  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 23 
 (4) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Securities Appellate Tribunal may, after  giving 
the parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it  thinks fit, 
confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.  
(5) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of ev ery order made by it to the  1[Board, 2[or 
2[or the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority or the Pension Fund Regulatory and 
Development Authority, as the case may be]  the parties  to the appeal and to the concerned adjudicating 
officer.  
(6) The appeal f iled before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt  with 
by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the  appeal finally within 
six months from the date of receipt of the appeal.  
15U. Procedure and powers of the Securities Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Securities Appellate 
Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure  laid down by the code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , 
but shall be guided by  the principles of natural justice and, s ubject to the other provisions of  this Act and 
of any rules, the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall have  powers to regulate their own procedure 
including the places at which  they shall have their sittings.  
(2) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall have,  for the purposes of  discharging their functions under 
this Act, the same powers as are  vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908                    
(5 of 1908) , while  trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and  examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or  documents;  
(e) reviewin g its decisions;  
(f) dismissing an application for default or deciding it ex-parte ; 
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for  default or any order passed by it      
ex-parte ; 
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceeding before the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to  be a judicial 
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the  purposes of section 196, of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Securities Appellate  Tribunal sha ll be deemed to be a civil court for all 
the purposes of section 195 and  Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).   
2[(4) Where Benches are constituted, the Presiding Officer of the Securities Appellate Tribunal may, 
from time to ti me make provisions as to the distribution of the business of the Securities Appellate 
Tribunal amongst the Benches and also provide for the matters which may be dealt with, by each Bench.  
(5) On the application of any of the parties and after notice to th e parties, and after hearing such of 
them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion without such notice, the Presiding Officer of the 
Securities Appellate Tribunal may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to any other 
Bench.  
(6) If a Bench of the Securities Appellate Tribunal consisting of two members differ in opinion on 
any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the Presiding 
Officer of the Securities Appellate Tribunal who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the 
case for hearing only on such point or points by one or more of the other members of the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majo rity of 
the members of the Securities Appellate Tribunal who have heard the case, including those who first 
heard it.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 9,  for “parties” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017 , s.148  (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  24 
 1[15V. Right to legal representation .—The appellant may either appear in  person or authorise one 
or more chartered accountants or company  secretaries or cost accountants or legal practitioners or 
any of its  officers to present his or its case before the Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant as defined in  clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants  Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice  under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) “company  secretary” means a company secretary as defined in  clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of 1980) and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice  under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) “cost accountant” means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of             
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act,  1959 (23 of 1959) and who has obtained a certificate 
of practice  under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) “legal  practitioner” means an advocate, va kil or an attorney of any High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice. ] 
15W. Limitation .—The provisions of the Limited Act, 1963  (36 of 1963) , shall, as far as may be, 
apply to an appeal  made to a Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
2[15X. Presiding Officer , Members  and staff of Securities Appellate tribunal to be public  
servants .—The Presiding Officer , Members  and other officers and employees of a Securities Appellate  
Tribunal shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the  Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) .] 
15Y. Civil C ourt not to have jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
suit or proceeding in respect of  any matter which an adjudication officer appointed under this Act or a 
Securities  Appellate Tri bunal constituted under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to  determine 
and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in  respect of any action taken or to be 
taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or  under this Act.  
3[15Z. Appeal to Supreme  Court .—Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal  may file an appeal to the Supreme  Court within sixty days from the date of 
communication  of the decision or order of the Securities Appellate T ribunal to him on any question of   
law arising out of such order:  
Provided that the Supreme  Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by  sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within  a furt her period not 
exceeding sixty days.] ] 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
16. Power to Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Board  shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions  under 
4[this Act  or the Depositories Act, 1996  (22 of 1996) ], be bound by  such directions on questions of policy 
as the Central Government may  give in writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given  an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under  this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of  policy or not shall be final.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 32 of 199 9, s. 10, for section 15V  (w.e.f. 16-12-1999). 
2. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 26, for section 15X (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002,  s. 27, for section 15Z (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
4. Subs. by Act 22 of 1996, s. 30 and the Schedule, for “this Act” (w.e.f. 20 -9-1995).  25 
 17. Power of Central Government to supersede the Board .—(1) If at any time the Central 
Government is of opinion — 
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to  discharge the functions and duties 
imposed on it by or under  the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Board has persistently made default  in complying with  any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act  or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it  by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such  default the financial position of the Board or 
the administration  of the Board has deteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public  interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification,  supersede the Board for such period, not exceeding six  
months, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Board, — 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession,  vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties whic h may, by or under the  provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on  behalf of the Board, shall until the Board is reconstituted under       
sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person  or persons as the Central Government 
may direct; and  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the  Board is reconstituted under     
sub-section ( 3), vest in the  Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the  notification issued under              
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government  may reconstitute the Board by a fresh appointment and in such 
case any person or persons who vacated their offices under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 2), shall not be 
deemed disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the  expiration of the period of 
supersession, take action under this sub-section . 
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub-section  (1) and a full report of 
any actio n taken under this section and  the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House  of Parliament at the earliest.  
18. Returns and reports .—(1) The Board shall furnish to the Central Government at such time and 
in such form and manner as m ay be prescribed or as the Central  Government may direct, such returns and 
statements and such  particulars in regard to any proposed or existing programme for the  promotion and 
development of the securities market, as the Central  Government may, from time to time, require.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Board shall,  withi n 1[ninety days] after 
the end of each financial year, submit to the  Central Government a report in such form, as may be 
prescribed,  giving a true and full account of its activities, policy and programmes  during the previous 
financial year.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as  soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
19. Delegation .—The Board m ay, by general or special order in writing delegate to any member,  
officer of the Board or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be  specified in the 
order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the  powers under secti on 29) as it may 
deem necessary.  
20. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by 2[an order of the Board made , before the commencement 
of the Securities Laws (Second Amendment) Act, 1999  (32 of 1999) ,] under this Act,  or the rules or 
regulations made thereunder may prefer an appeal to  the Central Government within such time as may be 
prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 10, for “sixty days”  (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Subs. by  Act 32 of 1999,  s. 11, for “an order of the Board made”  (w.e.f. 16-12-1999). 26 
 (2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the  period prescribed therefor:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the per iod prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfies the Central Government  that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
the prescribed period.  
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and  shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the order appealed against and by  such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be  prescribed:  
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be  given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
1[20A. Bar of jurisdiction .—No order passed by the 2[Board or the adjudicating officer] under this 
Act shall be appealable except as provided  in 3[section 15T or section 20 ] and no civil court shall have 
jurisdiction in respect of any matter which  the 4[Board or the adjudicating officer] is empowered by, or 
under, this Act to pass any order and no injunction  shall be granted by any court or other authority in 
respect of any a ction taken or to be  taken in pursuance of any order passed by the 4[Board or the 
adjudicating officer] by, or under, this Act.]  
21. Savings .—Nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or other proceedings which  
might, apart from this Act, b e brought against him.  
22. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants .—All members, officers 
and other employees of the Board shall be deemed, when  acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any 
of the provisions of this Act, to be  public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of  1860).  
23. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central  Government 4[or Board] or any officer of the Central Government or any member,  
officer or other employee of the Board for anything which is in good faith done or  intended to be done 
under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
5[24. Offences .—(1) Without prejudice to any award of p enalty by the adjudicating officer  under this 
Act, if any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or  abets the contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or of any rules or  regulations made thereunder, he shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to 6[ten years, or with fine,  which may extend to twenty -five crore rupees or with 
both]. 
(2) If any person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the adjudicating  officer or fails to comply with 
any of his directions or orders, he  shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than one month but which may extend to 7[ten years, or with fine, which may extend to twenty -five 
crore rupees or with both .] 
8[24A.  Composition of certain offences. —Notwithstanding anythin g contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under this Act, not being an offence 
punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine, may either before or after 
the institution of any proce eding, be compounded by a Securities Appellate Tribunal or a court before 
which such proceedings are pending.  
24B. Power to grant immunity. —(1) The Central Government may, on recommendation by the 
Board, if the Central Government is satisfied, that any per son, who is alleged to have violated any of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations made thereunder, has made a full and true disclosure 
in respect of the alleged violation, grant to such person, subject to such conditions as it may thin k fit to 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 1995,  s. 11 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 199 9, s. 12, for “Board”  (w.e.f. 16-12-1999). 
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “section 20” (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999). 
4. Ins. by Act 9 of 1995, s. 12 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
5. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for section 24  (w.e.f. 25-1-1995).  
6. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002, s. 28, for “one year, or with fine, or with both” (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
7. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  
8. Ins. by s. 29,  ibid. (w.e.f. 29 -10-2002).  27 
 impose, immunity from prosecution for any offence under this Act, or the rules or the regulations made 
thereunder or also from the imposition of any penalty under this Act with respect to the alleged violation:  
Provided that no such immunity shall  be granted by the Central Government in cases where the 
proceedings for the prosecution for any such offence have been instituted before the date of receipt of 
application for grant of such immunity:  
Provided further that recommendation of the Board under  this sub -section shall not be binding upon 
the Central Government.  
(2) An immunity granted to a person under sub -section ( 1) may, at any time, be withdrawn by the 
Central Government, if it is satisfied that such person had, in the course of the proceeding s, not complied 
with the condition on which the immunity was granted or had given false  evidence, and thereupon such 
person may be tried for the offence with respect to which the immunity was granted or for any other 
offence of which he appears to have be en guilty in connection with the contravention and shall also 
become liable to the imposition of any penalty under this Act to which such person would have been 
liable, had not such immunity been granted.]  
25. Exemptio n from tax on wealth and income. —Notwi thstanding anything contained in the 
Wealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957), the  Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) or any other enactment for the 
time being in force  relating to tax on we alth, income, profits or gains — 
(a) the Board;  
(b) the  existing Securities and Exchange Board from the date of its  constitution to the date  of 
establishment of the Board,  
shall not be  liable to pay wealth -tax, income -tax or any other tax in respect of their  wealth, income, 
profits or gains derived.  
26. Cogniz ance of offences by courts .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
punishable under this  Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint  made by the 
Board 1***. 
2*   *   *   *   * 
3[26A. Establishment of Special Courts. —(1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of 
providing speedy trial of offences under this Act, by notification, establish or designate as many Special 
Courts as may be necessary.  
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a single judge who shall be appointed  by the Central Government 
with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court within whose jurisdiction the judge to be 
appointed is working.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of a Special Court unless he is, 
immediate ly before such appointment, holding the office of a Sessions Judge or an Additional Sessions 
Judge, as the case may be.  
26B. Offences triable by Special Courts. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , all off ences under this Act committed prior to the date of 
commencement of the Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2014  (27 of 2014)  or on or after the date of 
such commencement, shall be taken cognizance of and tried by the Special Court established for the area 
in which the offence is committed or where there are more Special Courts than one for such area, by such 
one of them as may be specified in this behalf by the High Court concerned.  
26C. Appeal and revision. —The High Court may exercise, so far as may be appli cable, all the 
powers conferred by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  on a 
High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court 
of Session trying cases within th e local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.  
                                                           
1. The words “with the previous san ction of the Central Government” omitted by Act 9 of 1995, s. 14 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 27 of 2014, s. 19 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 20 , ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  28 
 26D. Application of Code to proceedings before Special Court. —(1) Save as otherwise provided 
in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall apply to the 
proceeding s before a Special Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Court of Session and the person conducting prosecution before a Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of cl ause ( u) of section 2 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
(2) The person conducting prosecution referred to in sub -section ( 1) should have been in practice as 
an advocate for not less than seven years or should have held a post, for a peri od of not less than seven 
years, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law.  
26E. Transitional provisions. —Any offence committed under this Act, which is triable by a Special 
Court shall, until a Special Court is established, be taken c ognizance of and tried by a Court of Session 
exercising jurisdiction over the area, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) : 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the powers of the High Court under    
section 407 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) to transfer any case or class of cases 
taken cognizance by a Court of Session under this section.]  
27. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company,  every person who at the time the offence was committed was in  charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the  business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and sha ll be liable to be proceeded against  and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any  such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves  that the offence was committed without his knowledge  or 
that he had  exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an  offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is  proved that the offence has been com mitted with the consent or  
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any  director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such  director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to  be guilty 
of the offenc e and shall be liable to be proceeded against  and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other  association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
28. [Power to exempt .] Omitted by the Securities Laws (Amendment ) Act, 1995 ( 9 of 1995 ), s. 15 
(w.e.f. 25-1-1995).  
1[28A. Recovery of amounts. —(1) If a person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the adjudicating 
officer or fails to comply with any direction of the Board for refund of monies or fails to comply with a 
direction of disgorgement order issued under section 11B or fails to pay any fees due to the Board, the 
Recovery Officer may draw up under his signature a sta tement in the specified form specifying the 
amount due from the person (such statement being hereafter in this Chapter referred to as certificate) and 
shall proceed to recover from such person the amount specified in the certificate by one or more of the 
following modes, namely: — 
(a) attachment and sale of the person’s movable property;  
(b) attachment of the person’s bank accounts;  
(c) attachment and sale of the person’s immovable property;  
(d) arrest of the person and his detention in prison;  
(e) appointing a receiver for the management of the person's movable and immovable properties,  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 21 (w.e.f.  18-7-2013 ). 29 
 and for this purpose, the provisions of sections 220 to 227, 228A, 229, 232, the Second and Third 
Schedules to the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 
1962, as in force from time to time, in so far as may be, apply with necessary modifications as if the said 
provisions and the rules made thereunder were the provisions of this Act and referred to the amount due 
under th is Act instead of to income -tax under the Income -tax Act, 1961.  
Explanation  1.— For the purposes of this sub -section, the person's movable or immovable property or 
monies held in bank accounts shall include any property or monies held in bank accounts whic h has been 
transferred directly or indirectly on or after the date when the amount specified in certificate had become 
due, by the person to his spouse or minor child or son's wife or son's minor child, otherwise than for 
adequate consideration, and which is held by, or stands in the name of, any of the persons aforesaid; and 
so far as the movable or immovable property or monies held in bank accounts so transferred to his minor 
child or his son's minor child is concerned, it shall, even after the date of at tainment of majority by such 
minor child or son's minor child, as the case may be, continue to be included in the person's movable or 
immovable property or monies held in bank accounts for recovering any amount due from the person 
under this Act.  
Explanati on 2.—Any reference under the provisions of the Second and Third Schedules to the 
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961)  and the Income -tax (Certificate Proceedings) Rules, 1962 to the 
assessee shall be construed as a reference to the person specified in the ce rtificate.  
Explanation  3.—Any reference to appeal in Chapter XVIID and the Second Schedule to the       
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , shall be construed as a reference to appeal before the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal under section 15T of this Act.  
(2) The Recovery Officer shall be empowered to seek the assistance of the local district 
administration while exercising the powers under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the recovery of 
amounts by a Recovery Officer under sub -section ( 1), pursuant to non -compliance with any direction 
issued by the Board under section 11B, shall have precedence over any other claim against such person.  
(4) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), the expression ‘‘Recovery Officer’’ means any 
officer of the Board who may be authorised, by general or special order in writing, to exercise the powers 
of a Recovery Officer.]  
29. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying  out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely: — 
(a) the term of office and other conditions of serv ice of the  Chairman and the members under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) the additional functions that may be performed by the Board  under section 11;  
1*   *   *   *  *; 
(d) the manner in which the accounts of the Board shall be  maintained under section  15; 
2[(da) the manner of inquiry under sub -section ( 1) of section 15 -I; 
(db) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of  service of the 3[Presiding 
Officers , Members]  and other officers and  employees of the Securities Appellate Tribunal under 
section  15-O and sub -section ( 3) of section 15S;  
(dc) the procedure for the investigation of misbehaviou r or incapacity of the 4[Presiding Officers , 
or other Members]  of the Securities Appellate  Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) of section 15Q;  
                                                           
1. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 9 of 1995,  s. 16 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
3. Subs. by Act 59 of 2002 , s. 31, for “Presiding Officers” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid.,  for “Presiding Officers” (w.e.f.  29-10-2002 ). 30 
 (dd) the  form in which an appeal may be filed before the Securities  Appellate Tribunal under 
section 15T and the fees payable in  respect of such appeal;]  
(e) the form and the manner in which returns and report to be  made to the Central Government 
under section 18;  
(f) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in  respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by rules.  
30. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, 1*** by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act  and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the times and places of meeti ngs of the Board and the  procedure to be followed at such 
meetings under sub -section  (1) of section 7 including quorum necessary for the transaction  of 
business;  
(b) the term and other conditions of service of officers and  employees of the Board under           
sub-section ( 2) of section 9;  
2[(c) the matters relating to issue of capital, transfer of securities  and other matters incidental 
thereto and the manner in which  such matters shall be disclosed by the companies under  section 11A;  
3[(ca) the utilisati on of the amount credited under sub -section ( 5) of section 11;  
(cb) the fulfilment of other conditions relating to collective investment scheme under                        
sub-section ( 2A) of section 11AA;]  
(d) the conditions subject to which certificate of registration is to  be issued, the amount of fee to 
be paid for certificate of  registration and the manner of suspension or cancellation of  certificate o f 
registration under section 12; ] 
3[(da) the terms determined by the Board for settlement of proceedi ngs under sub -section ( 2) and 
the procedure for conducting of settlement proceedings under sub -section ( 3) of section 15JB;  
(db) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be made by  regulations.]  
31. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total  period of thi rty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following  the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree  in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree  that the rule or  regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only  in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any  such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
32. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the  provisions of any other law fo r the time being in force.  
[33. Amendment of certain enactments .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001                        
(30 of 2001), s. 2 and the First Schedule (w.e.f.  3-9-2001) . 
34. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the  Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette,  make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act  as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the  expiry of five years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
                                                           
1. The words  “with the previous approval of the Central Government” omitted by Act 9 of 1995, s. 17 (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 25 -1-1995).  
3. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 22 (w.e.f.  18-7-2013 ). 31 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
1[34A. Va lidation of certain acts. —Any act or thing done or purporting to have been done under the 
principal Act, in respect of calling for information from, or furnishing information to, other authorities, 
whether in India or outside India, having functions similar to those of the Board and in respect of 
settlement of administrative and civil proceedings, shall, for all purposes, be deemed to be valid and 
effective as if the amendments made to the principal Act had been in force at all material times.]  
35. Re peal and saving .—(1) The Securities and Exchange Board of India Ordinance, 1992                    
(Ord . 5 of 1992), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under  the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have bee n done or taken  under the  corresponding  provisions of this Act.  
[THE SCHEDULE .] Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001 (30 of 2001), s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014 , s. 23 (w.e.f.  18-7-2013 ). 
--------------------------The Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in Securities) Act, 1992--------------------------
1 
 THE SPECIAL COURT (TRIAL OF OFFENCES RELATING TO  
TRANSACTIONS IN SECURITIES) ACT, 1992  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Appointment and functions of Custodian.  
4. Contracts entered into fraudulently may be cancelled . 
5. Establishment of Special Court.  
 5A. Distribution of cases amongst Judges of Special Court . 
6. Cognizance of cases by Special Court . 
7. Jurisdiction of Special Court . 
8. Jurisdiction of Special Court as to joint trials.  
9. Procedure and powers of Special Court . 
 9A. Jurisdiction, powers, authority and procedure of  Special Court in civil matters . 
 9B. Powers of the Special Court in arbitration matters . 
10. Appeal . 
11. Discharge of liabilities . 
      11A. Power to punish for contempt.  
12. Protection of  action taken in good faith . 
13. Act to have overriding effect . 
14. Power to make rules.  
15. Repeal and savings.  
 
 
 
  2 
 THE SPECIAL COURT (TRIAL OF OFFENCES RELATING TO  
TRANSACTIONS IN SECURITIES) ACT, 1992  
ACT NO. 27 OF 1992  
[18th August , 1992 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a Special Court for the trial of  offences relating to 
transactions in securities and for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -third Year of the Republic of India as  follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called  the Special Court (Trial of Offences 
Relating to Transactions in Securities)  Act, 1992.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 6th day of June, 1992.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unles s the context otherwise  requires, — 
(a) “Code” means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of1974);  
(b) “Custodian” means the Custodian appointed under sub -section( 1) of section 3;  
(c) “securities”  includes — 
(i) shares , scrips, stocks, bonds, debentures, debenture stock , units of the Unit Trust of India 
or any other mutual  fund or other marketable securities of a like nature in or of  any incorporated 
company or other body corporate;  
(ii) Government securities; and  
(iii) rights or interests in securities;  
(d) “Special Court” means the Special Court established under  sub-section ( 1) of section 5.  
3. Appointment and functions of Custodian. —(1) The Central  Government may appoint one or 
more Custodians as it may deem fit for the  purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Custodian may, on being satisfied on information received that  any person has been involved 
in any offence relating to transactions insecurities after the 1st day of April, 1991 and on and before  the 
6th June, 1992,  notify the name of such person in the Of ficial Gazette.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code and any other law  for the time being in force, on 
and from the date of notification under sub -section  (2), any property, movable or immovable, or both, 
belonging to any  person notified unde r that sub -section shall stand attached simultaneously with  the issue 
of the notification.  
(4) The property attached under sub -section ( 3) shall be dealt with by  the Custodian in such manner 
as the Special Court may direct.  
(5) The Custodian may take assistance of any person while exercising  his powers or for discharging 
his duties under this section and section 4.  
4. Contracts entered into fraudulently may be cancelled. —(1) If the Custodian is satisfied, after 
such inquiry as he may think fit, that an y contract or agreement entered into at any time after the 1st day 
of April, 1991  and on and before the 6th June, 1992 in relation to any property of the person  notified 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 has been entered into fraudulently or  to defeat the  provisions of this 
Act, he may cancel such contract or agreement  and on such cancellation such property shall stand 
attached under this Act:  
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled except after  giving to the parties to the 
contract or ag reement a reasonable opportunity of  being heard.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by a notification issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 or any 
cancellation made under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 or any  other order made by the Custodian in exercise 
of the po wers conferred on him  under section 3 or 4 may file a petition objecting to the same within thirty 
days of the assent to the Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in  Securities) Bill, 
1992 by the President before the Special Court where  such notification, cancellation or order has been 3 
 issued before the date of assent to  the Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in 
Securities)Bill, 1992 by the President and where such notification, cancellation or order  has been issued 
on or after that date, within thirty days of the issuance of such  notification, cancellation or order, as the 
case may be; and the Special Court  after hearing the parties, may make such order as it deems fit.  
5. Establishment of Special Court .—(1) The Central Government  shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, establish a Court to be called the  Special Court.  
(2) The Special Court shall consist of 1[one or more sitting Judges] of  the High Court nominated by 
the Chief Justice of the High Court within the  local limits of whose jurisdiction the Special Court is 
situated, with the  concurrence of the Chief Justice of India.  
2[(3) When the office of 3[a Judge of the Special Court] is vacant by  reason of absence or leave, the 
duties of the office shall be performed by such  Judge of the High Court within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the  Special Court is situated as the Chief Justice of that High Court may, with the  concurrence 
of the Chief Justice of India, nominate for the purpose and the  Judge so appointed shall have all the 
jurisdiction and powers of 3[a Judge of  the Special Court] including t he powers to pass final orders. ] 
4[5A.Distribution of cases amongst Judges of Special Court. —Where the Special Court consists of 
two or more Judges , the Chief Justice of the High Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the 
Special Court is situated may, from time to time, by general or special order, make provisions as to the 
distribution of cases amongst the Judges and specify the matter s which may be dealt with by each of such 
Judge.]  
6. Cognizance of cases by Special Court. —The Special Court  shall take cognizance of or try such 
cases as are instituted before it or  transferred to it as hereinafter provided.  
7. Jurisdiction of Special Court. —Notwithstanding anything  contained in any other law, any 
prosecution in respect of any offence referred  to in sub -section ( 2) of section 3 shall be instituted only in 
the Special Court  and any prosecution in respect of such offence pending in any co urt shall stand  
transferred to the Special Court.  
8. Jurisdiction of Special Court as to joint trials. —The Special  Court shall have jurisdiction to try 
any person concerned in the offence  referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 3 either as a principal , 
conspirator or abettor  and all other offences and accused persons as can be jointly tried  therewith at one 
trial in accordance with the Code.  
9. Procedure and powers of Special Court. —(1) The Special  Court shall, in the trial of such cases, 
follow the proce dure prescribed by the  Code for the trial of warrant cases before a magistrate.  
(2) Save as expressly provided in this Act, the provisions of the  Code shall, in so far as they are not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,  apply to the proceedings before the Special Court and for the 
purposes of the  said provisions of the Code, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of  Session 
and shall have all the powers of a Court of Session, and the person  conducting a prosecution before the 
Special Cou rt shall be deemed to be a  Public Prosecutor.  
(3) The Special Court may pass upon any person convicted by it  any sentence authorised  by law for 
the punishment of the offence of which  such person is convicted.  
(4) While dealing with any other matter brought  before it, the  Special Court may adopt such 
procedure as it may deem fit consistent with the  principles of natural justice.  
5[9A. Jurisdiction, powers, authority and procedure of  Special Court in civil matters. —(1) On 
and from the commencement of the  Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions in 
Securities)  Amendment Act, 1994 (24 of 1994) the Special Court shall exercise all such  jurisdiction, 
powers and authority as were exercisable, immediately before  such commencement, by any civil c ourt in 
relation to any matter or  claim — 
(a) relating to any property standing attached under sub -section( 3) of section  3; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 1997, s. 2 for “a sitting Judge” (w. e. f. 16 -1-1997 ).  
2. Ins. by Act 24 of 1994, s. 2(w. e. f. 25-1-1994).  
3. Subs. by  Act 6 of 1997, s. 2, for “the Judge of the Special Court ” (w. e. f. 16 -1-1997).  
4. Ins. by s. 3, ibid. (w. e. f. 16 -1-1997).  
5. Ins. by Act 24 of 1994, s. 3 (w. e. f. 25 -1-1994).  4 
 (b)arising out of transactions in securities entered into after the1st day of April, 1991, and on or 
before the 6th day of June, 1992, in  which a person notified under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 is 
involved as  a party, broker, intermediary or in  any other manner.  
(2) Every suit, claim or other legal proceeding (other than an  appeal) pending before any court 
immediately before the commencement of  the Special Court (Trial of Offences Relating to Transactions 
in Securities) Amendment Act, 1994 (24 of 1994) , being a suit, claim or proceeding, the cause of action 
whereon  it is based is such that it would have been, if it had arisen after  such commencement, within the 
jurisdiction of the Special Court under sub -section  (1), shall stand transferred on such commencement to 
the Special Court and the  Special Court may, on receipt of the records of such suit, claim or other legal  
proceeding, pr oceed to deal with it, so far as may be, in the same manner as a  suit, claim or legal 
proceeding from the stage which was reached before such  transfer or from any earlier stage or de novo as 
the Special Court may deem fit.  
(3) On and from the commencement of the Special Court (Trial of  Offences Relating to Transactions 
in Securities) Amendment Act, 1994 (24 of 1994) , no court other than the Special Court shall have, or be 
entitled to exercise, any  jurisdiction, power or authority in relation to any matter o r claim referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) While dealing with cases relating to any matter or claim under  this section, the Special Court shall 
not be bound by the procedure laid down  by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be 
guided b y the  principles of natural justice, and subject to the other provisions of this Act and  of any rules, 
the Special Court shall have power to regulate its own procedure.  
(5) Without prejudice to the other powers conferred under this Act,  the Special Court s hall have, for 
the purposes of discharging its functions under  this section, the same powers as are vested in a civil court 
under the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the  following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and  examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the  Indian Evidence Act, 1872                      
(1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record  or document or copy of such record or document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or  documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing a case for default  or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any case for default  or any order passed by it ex parte ; 
and 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central  Government under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 14 . 
9B. Powers of the Special Court in arbitration matters. —(1) The Special Court shall have the 
jurisdiction and powers of a Court  conferred under the Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940) to decide any 
question  forming subject matter of a reference relating to any matter or claim mentioned  in sub -section 
(1) of section 9 A. 
(2) Every suit or other proceeding (other than an appeal) in relation  to any matter or claim referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 9 A pending  before any Court and gov erned by the Arbitration Act, 1940          
(10 of 1940),  immediately before the date of commencement of the Special Court (Trial of  Offences 
Relating to Transactions in Securities) Amendment Act, 1994  (24 of 1994)  shall  stand transferred on that 
date to t he Special Court.  
 5 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expressions “Court”  and “reference” shall have 
respectively the same meanings as defined under  clauses (c)and (e)of section 2 of the Arbitration Act, 
1940 (10 of 1940 ).] 
10. Appeal. —(1) Notwit hstanding anything in the Code 1[or the  Code of Civil Procedure,1908             
(5 of 1908) or the Arbitration Act, 1940 (19  of1940)], an appeal shall lie from any judgment 1[,decree]  
sentence or order, not  being interlocutory order, of the Special Court to the Supreme Court both on  facts 
and on law.  
(2) Except as aforesaid, no appeal or revision shall lie to any Court  from any judgment 1[,decree]  
sentence or order of the Special Court.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a  period of thirty days from the date of 
any judgment, sentence or order of the  Special Court:  
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain an appeal after the  expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if it is satisfied that the appellant had  sufficient cau se for not preferring the appeal within the period 
of thirty days.  
11. Discharge of liabilities. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained  in the Code and any other law 
for the time being in force, the Special  Court may make such order as it may deem fit directing the 
Custodian for the  disposal of the property under attachment.  
(2) The following liabilities shall be paid or discharged in full, as  far as may be, in the order as               
under: — 
(a) all revenues, taxes, cesses and rates due from the per sons notified by the Custodian under          
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 to the  Central Government or any State Government or any local 
authority;  
(b) all amounts due from the person so notified by the  Custodian to any bank or financial 
institution or mu tual fund;  
(c) any other liability as may be specified by the Special Court  from time to time.  
2[11A. Power to punish for contempt. —The Special Court  shall have , and exercise, the same 
jurisdiction, powers and authority in respect  of contempt of itself as a High Court has and may exercise 
and, for this  purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of Courts Act, 1971 (70 of 1971),  shall have effect 
subject to the modifications that — 
(a) the references therein to a High Court shall be construed as  including a reference to such 
Special Court;  
(b) the references to the Advocate -General in section 15 of the  said Act, shall be construed, in 
relation to the Special Court, as a  reference to the Attorney -General or the Solicitor -General or the  
Additional Solicitor -General.] 
12. Protection of action taken in good faith. —(1) No suit,  prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against the Central Government  or the Custodian for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be  done under this Act.  
(2) No suit or  other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central  Government or any of its officers or 
other employees for any damage caused or  likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be  done under this Act.  
13. Act to have overridin g effect. —The provisions of this Act  shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in  any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by  virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court,  tribunal or 
other authority.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 1994, s. 4 (w. e. f. 25 -1-1994).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w. e. f. 25 -1-1994).  6 
 14. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by  notification in the O fficial Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions  of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under  this Act  shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of  Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be  comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before  the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive  sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or  both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter  have effect only in such modifi ed form or be of no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without  prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
15. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Special Court (Trial of  Offences Relating to Transactions in 
Securities) Ordinance, 1992 (Ord. 10  of 1992) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken  under the said Ordinance , shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under  the corresponding pr ovisions of this Act.  
