--------------------------The Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings and Repeal) Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
 THE AIR CORPORATIONS (TRANSFER OF UNDER TAKINGS AND REPEAL) ACT, 1994  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Undertakings of corporations to vest in companies . 
4. General effect of vesting of undertakings in the companies . 
5. Licences, etc., to be deemed to have been granted to companies . 
6. Tax exemption or benefit to continue to have effect . 
7. Guarantee to be operative . 
8. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of corporations . 
9. Power of C entral Government to give directions . 
10. Power to remove difficulties . 
11. Repeal of Act 27 of 1953 and cesser of corporations . 
12. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE AIR CORPORATIONS (TRANSFER OF UNDER TAKINGS AND REPEAL) ACT, 1994  
ACT NO. 13 OF 1994  
 [21st March , 1994.]  
An Act to provide for the transfer and vesting of the undertakings of Indian Airlines and Air 
India respectively to and in the companies formed and registered as Indian Airlines Limited 
and Air India Limited and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto and also to 
repeal the Air Corporations Act, 1953.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Air Corporations (Transfer of 
Unde rtakings and Repeal) Act, 1994.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into fo rce on the 29th day of January ,1994.  
2. Definitions .— In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day” means such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint under section 3;  
(b) “company”  means “Indian Airlines Limited” or “ Air India Limited”  formed and registered 
under the C ompanies Act, 1956  ( 1 of 1956 ); 
(c) “corporations” means "I ndian Airlines" and “Air India” established under  section 3 of the Air 
Corporations Act, 1953  (27 of 1953 ), and “corporation”  means either of the corporations.  
3. Undertakings of co rporations to vest in companies .—On such date as the  Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be transferred to, and ves t in,— 
(a) Indian Airlines Limited, the unde rtaking of Indian Airlines; and  
(b) Air India Limited, the undertaking of Air India.  
4. General effect of vesting o f undertaking s in the companies .—(1) The undertaking of a 
corporation which is transferred to, and which vests in, a company under section 3 shall be deemed to 
include all assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all proper ties, movable and immovable, 
real or personal, corporeal or incorporeal, in possession or reservation, present or contingent, of whatever 
nature and wheresoeve r situate, includin g lands, work s, workshops, aircraft s, cash balances, capital 
reserves, reserve funds, investments, tenancies, leases and book debts and all other rights and interests 
arising out of such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession or 
power of that corpora tion in relation to its undertaking, whether within or outside India, all books of 
account and documents relating thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and 
obligations of whatever kind then subsisting of that corporation in relation to its undertaking.  
(2) All contracts and working arrangements subsisting immediately before the appointed day and 
affecting a corporation shall, in so far as they relate to the u ndertaking of that corporation , cease to have 
effect or to be enfo rceable against that corpo ration and shall be of as full force and effect against or in 
favour of the company in which the undertaking has vested by virtue of this Act and enforceable as fully 
and effectually as if, instead of the corporation, the company had been named ther ein or had been a party 
thereto.  
 (3) Any proceeding or cause of action pendi ng or existing imme diately before the appointed day by 
or against a corporation in relation to its undertaking may, as from that day, be continued and enforced by 
or against the company in which it has vested by virtue of this Act, as it might have been enforced by or 
against that corporation if this Act had not been passed, and shall cease to be enforceable by or against 
that corporation.  
5. Licences, etc., to b e deemed to have been grant ed to companies .—With effect from the 
appointed day, all licences, permits, quotas and exemptions granted to a corporation in connection with 3 
 the affairs and business of that corporation under any law for the time being in force, shall be deemed to 
have been granted to the company in which the undertaking of that corporation has vested.  
6. Tax exemption or bene fit to continue to have effect .—(1) Where any exemption from, or any 
assessment with respect to, any tax has been granted or made or any benefit by way of set off or carry 
forward, as the case may be, of any una bsorbed depreciation or invest ment allowance or other allowance 
or loss has been  extended or is available to a corporation under the Income -tax Act, 19 61 (43 of 1961 ), 
such exemption, assessment or benefit shall continue to have effect in relation to the company in which 
the under taking of that corporation has vested.  
(2) Where any payment made by a corporation is exempt from deduction of the tax at source under 
any provisio n of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961 ), the exemption from tax will continue to be 
available as if the provisions of the said Act made applicable to the corpo ration were operative in relation 
to the company in which the undertaking of th at corporation has been vested.  
(3) The transfer and vesting of the undertaking or any pa rt thereof in terms of section 3 shall not be 
construed as a transfer within the meaning  of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) for the pu rposes of 
capital gains.  
7. Guarantee to be operative .—Any guarantee given for or in favour of a corporation with respect to 
any loan or lease finance shall continue to be operative in relation to the company in which the 
undertaking of that corporation has vested by virtue of this Act.  
8. Provisions in respect of officers and o ther employees of corporations .—(1) Every officer o r 
other employee of a corporation (except a Director of the Board, Chairman, Managing Director or any 
other person entitled to manage the whole or a substantial part of the business and af fairs of the 
corporation) serving in its employment immediately before the appointed day shall, in so far as such 
officer or other employee is employed in connection with the undertaking which has vested in a company 
by virtue of this Act , become, as from the appointed day , an officer or other employee, as the case may 
be, of the company in which the undertaking has vested and shall hold his office or service therein by the 
same tenure, at the same remuneration, upon the same terms and conditions, with the same obligations 
and with the same rights and privileges as to leave, passage, insurance, superannuation scheme, provident 
fund, other funds, retirement, pension, gratuity and other benefits as he would have held under that 
corporation if its undertaking h ad not vested in the company and shall continue to do so as an officer or 
other employee, as the case may be, of the company or until the expiry of a period of six months from the 
appointed day if such officer or other employee opts not to be the officer o r other employee of t he 
company, within such period.  
(2) Where an officer or other employee of a corporation opts under sub -section ( 1) not to be in the 
employment or service of the company in which the undertaking of that corporation has vested, such 
officer or other employee sh all be deemed to have resigned.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial  Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other emplo yee of a 
corporation to a com pany shall not entitle such officer or other employee to any compensation under this 
Act or under any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any cour t, 
tribunal or other authority.  
(4) The officers and other employees who have retired before the appointed day from the service of a 
corporation and are entitled to any benefits, rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same 
benefits, rights or privileges from the company in whic h the undertaking of that corporation has vested.  
(5) The trusts of the Provident Fund or Pilots Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme of the 
corporation and any other bodies created for the welfare of officers or employees would continue to 
discharge their functions in the company as was being done hitherto in the corporation. Tax exemption 
granted to Provident Fund or Pilots Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme would continu e to be 
applied to the company.   4 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained i n this Act or in the Companies Act, 1956  (1of 1956) or in 
any other law for the time bein g in force or in the regulations of a corporation, no Director of the Board, 
Chairman, Managing Director or any other person entitled to manage the whole or a substantial part of the 
business and affairs of that corporation shall be entitled to any compensation against that corp oration or 
against the company , as the case may be, for the loss of office or for the premature termination of any 
contract of managemen t entered into by him with that corporation.  
9. Power of Central  Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give toa 
company  directions as to the exercise and performance by that company of its functions, and that 
company shall be bound to give effect to any such directions.  
10. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provision of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, not inconsistent with the 
provisions o f this Act, remo ve the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the  coming 
into force of this Ac t. 
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
11. Repeal of Act 27 of 1953 and cesser of corporation s.—(1) On the appointed day, the Air 
Corporations  Act, 1953 shall stand repealed.  
(2) The corporations shall, with the repeal of the Air Corporations Act, 1953, cease to exist.  
12. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings and Repeal) 
Ordinance, 1994  (Ord. 4 of 1994) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal of the Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertaki ngs and Repeal) 
Ordinance, 1994 (Ord. 4 of 1994),  anythin g done or any action taken under the said Ordinance  shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
--------------------------The Airports Authority of India Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
 THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1994  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE AIRPORTS  AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Authority.  
4. Disqualification for office of member.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of members.  
6. Vacation of office of member.  
7. Eligibility of member for re -appointment.  
8. Meeting s. 
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Authority.  
10. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Authority.  
11. Authority to act on business principles.  
 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
12. Functions of the Authority.  
12A.  Lease by the Authority . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT  
13. Undertakings of the Internation al Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority to vest 
in the Authority.  
14. General effect of vesting of undertaking in the Authority.  
15. Licences, etc., to be deemed to have been granted to the Authority.  
16. Tax exemption or benefit to contin ue to have effect.  
17. Guarantee to be operative.  
18. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of the International Airports Authority and 
the National Airports Authority.  
19. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Authority.  
20. Contracts by the Authority.  
21. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority.  
 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
22. Power of the Authority to charge s, fees, rent, etc.  
22A. Power of Authority to levy development fees at airports . 2 
 SECTIONS  
23. Additional capital and grant to the Authority by the Central Government.  
24. Fund of the Authority and its investment.  
25. Allocation of surplus funds.  
26. Submission of programme of activities and financial estimates.  
27. Borrowing powers of the Authority . 
28. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER VA  
EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS, ETC., OF AIRPORT PREMISES  
 
28A. Definitions.  
28B. Appointment of eviction officers.  
28C. Issue of notice to show cause against order of eviction.  
28D.  Eviction of unauthoris ed occupants . 
28E. Disposal of property  left on airport  premises by un authorised  occupants.  
28F. Power to remove un authorised  constructions, etc.  
28G. Power to require payment of rent or damages in respect of airport premises.  
28H. Powers of eviction officers.  
28-I. Establishment of Tribunal.  
28J. Resignation and removal.  
28JA. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson.  
28K. Appeal s to Tribunal.  
28L. Procedure and powers of Tribunal.  
28M. Finality of  orders.  
28N. Offences under this Chapter.  
28-O. Offences by companies.  
28P. Congizance  of offences.  
28Q. Power to obtain information.  
28R. Officers, etc., to aid and assist.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Submission of annual report.  
30. Delegation.  
31. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority.  
32. Officers and employees of the Authori ty to be public servants.  
33. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
34. Custody and disposal of lost property.  
35. Provisions relating to income -tax. 
36. Power of the Authority to undertake certain works.  
37. Power to issue directions.  
38. Power of the Central Government  to temporarily divest the Authority of the management of any 
airport.  
39. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Authority.  
40. Power of the Central Government to issue directions.  
41. Power to make rules.  
42. Power to make regulations.  
43. Rules and regulations to  be laid before Parliament.  
44. Power to remove difficulties.  
45. [Repealed .] 
46. Repeal and saving.  
 3 
  
 
THE AIRPOR TS AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1994  
  ACT NO. 55 OF 1994  
[12th September , 1994.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of the Airports Authority of India and  for the transfer and 
vesting of the undertakings of the International Airports Authority of India and the National 
Airports Authority to and in the Airports Authority of India so constituted for the better 
administration and cohesive management of airport s and civil enclaves whereat air transport 
services are operated or are intended to be operated and of all aeronau tical communication 
stations 1[for the purposes of establishing or assisting in  the establishment of airports]  and for 
matters connected t herewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the Airport s Authority 
of India Act, 1994.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
(3) It applies to — 
(a) all airports whereat air transport services are operated or are intended to be operated, other 
than airports and airfields belonging to, or subject to the control of, any armed force of the Union;  
3[(aa) all private airports inso far as it relates t o providing air traffic service , to issue directions 
under s ection 37 to them and f or the purposes of Chapter VA;]  
(b) all civil enclaves;  
(c) all aeronauti cal communication stations; and  
(d) all training stations, establishments and workshops rela ting to air transport services.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “aeronautical communication station” means a station in the aeronautical communication 
service whi ch includes aeronautical practis ing service, aeronautical fixed service, aeronautical mobile 
service and aeronautic al radio communication service;  
(b) “airport” means a lan ding and taking off area for aircrafts, usually with runways and aircraft 
maintenance and passenger facilities and includes aerodrome as defined in clause ( 2) of section 2 of 
the Aircraft Act,  1934  (22 of 1934) ; 
(c) “airstrip” means an area used or intende d to be used for the landing and take -off of aircrafts 
with short take -off and landing characteristics and includes all buildings and structures t hereon or 
appertaining thereto;  
(d) “air traffic service” includes flight information service, alerting servic e, air traffic advisory 
service, air traffic control service, area control service, approach control servi ce and airport control 
service;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  2 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004) . 
2.1st April , 1995 , vide notification No. S.O. 285(E), dated  30th March, 1995, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,               
sec. 3(ii). 
3. Ins. by Act 43 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  4 
 (e) “air transport service” means any service, for any kind of remuneration, whatsoever, for the 
transport by air of persons, mail or any other thing, animate or inanimate, whether such service relates 
to a sing le flight or series of flights;  
(f) “appointed  day” means such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint  for the purposes of section 3;  
(g) “Authority” means the Airports Authority of Ind ia constituted under section 3;  
(h) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under clause ( a) of                   
sub-section ( 3) of section 3;  
(i) “civil enclave” means the area, if any, allotted at an airport belonging to any armed force of 
the Union, for use by persons availing of any air transport se rvices from such airport or for the 
handling of baggage or cargo by such service, and includes land comprising of any build ing and 
structure on such area;  
(j) “heliport” means an area, either at ground level or elevated on a structure, used or intended to 
be used for the landing and take -off helicopters and includes any area for parking helicopters and all 
buildings and structures t hereon or appertaining thereto;  
(k) “International Airports Authority” means the International Airports Authority of India 
constituted under section 3 of the Internationa l Airports Authority Act, 1971  (43 of 1971) ; 
(l) “member” means a member of the Authority and includes the Chairperson, but does not 
include, for the purposes of sections 4,  5, 6 and 7, an ex officio  member referred to in clause ( b) of        
sub-section ( 3) of secti on 3;  
(m) “National Airports Authority” means the National Airports Authority constituted under 
section 3 of the National Airports Authority Act, 1985  (64 of 1985) ; 
(n) “prescribed” means prescribed b y rules made under this Act;  
 1[(nn) ‘private airport’ means an airport o wned, developed or managed by — 
(i) any person or agency other than the Author ity or any State Government, or  
(ii) any  person or agency jointly with the Authority or any State Government or both 
where the share of such person or agency , as the case may be , in the assets of the private 
airpo rt is more than fifty per  cent; ] 
(o) “regulations” means regulations made under thi s Act.  
CHAPTER II  
THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Authority. —(1) With effect from the appointed day, the 
Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, constitute an Authority to be called t he 
Airports Authority of India.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property 
both movable and immov able, and to contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The  Authority shall consist of —  
(a) a Chairperson to be appoin ted by the Central Government;  
(b) the Director General of Civil Aviation, or an officer not below  the rank of the Deputy Director 
General of Civil Aviation, to be appointed by the Central Government, ex officio;  
(c) not less than eight and not more than fourteen members to be appoi nted by the Central 
Government.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  4 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  5 
 (4) The Chairperson shall be a whole -time member and other members referred to in clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 3) may be appointed as whole -time or part -time members as the Central Government may 
think fit. 
(5) The Chairperson and the members referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 3) shall be chosen from 
among persons who have special knowledge and experience in air transport of any other transport 
services, industry, commercial or financial matters or administration and from among persons who are  
capable of representing organis ations of worker s and consumers.  
4. Disqualification for office of member. —A person shall be disqualified for bei ng appointed as a 
member if he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence, which, in the opinion of the 
Central Governmen t, involves  moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so de clared by a competent court; or  
(d) has been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a body corporate 
owned or co ntrolled by the Government;  or 
(e) has in the opinion of the Central Government such financial or other interest in the Authority 
as is likely to affect prejudicially the discharge by him of his functions as a member.  
5. Term of office and conditions of service of member s.—(1) Subj ect to  the provisions of              
section 6, — 
(i) every whole -time member (other than the ex officio  member) shall hold office for a period of 
five years from the date on which he assumes office or till he attains the age of sixty y ears, whichever 
is earlier, and  
(ii) every part -time member (other than the ex officio  member) shall hold office for a period of 
three years from the d ate on which he assumes office:  
Provided t hat the Central Government may — 
(a) terminate the appointment of any whole -time member, who is not a servant of the 
Government, after giving him notice for a period of not less than three months or, in lieu thereof, on 
payment of an amount equal to his salary and allowances, if any , for a period of three months;  
(b) terminate the appo intment of any part -time member who is not a servant of the Government 
after giving him notice for such p eriod as may be prescribed; and  
(c) terminate at any time the appointment of any member who is a servant of the Government.  
(2) The other conditions of  service of the members shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any member may resign his office by giving notice in writing for such period as may be 
prescribed , to the Central Government and, on such resignation being notified in the Official Gazette by 
the Government, such member shall be deem ed to have vacated his office.  
 6. Vacation of office of member. —The Central Government  shall remove a member if he — 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifi cations mentioned in section 4:  
Provided that no memb er shall be removed on the ground that he has become subject to th e 
disqualification mentioned in  clause ( e) of that section, unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunity o f being heard in the matter; or  
(b) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or  
(c) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Authority, absent from three consecutive 
meetings of the Authority; or  
(d) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office detr iment al to the public interest:  6 
 Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless he has been given a reasonable 
opportunit y of being heard in the matter.  
7. Eligibility of member for re -appointment .—Any pers on ceasing to be a member shall , unless 
disqualified under section 4, be eligible for re -appointment.  
8. Meeting s.—(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of the business at its meetings  (including the quorum at such 
meetings) as may be provided by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting of the Authority, any 
other member chosen by the members present at the meetin g shall preside at the meeting . 
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of the votes of the members present and voting, and, in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, 
or in his absence, the person presiding, s hall have and exercise a second or casting vote.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to  invalidate  proceedings of the Authority. —No act or proceeding of the 
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any  vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; o r 
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting a s a member of the Authority ; or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not af fecting the merits of the case.  
10. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Authority .—(1) For the purpose of 
enabling it efficiently to discharge its functions under this Act, the Authority shall, subject to the 
provisions of section 18 and to such rules as may be made in this be half, appoint (whether on deputation 
or otherwise) such number of officers and other employees as it may consider necessary:  
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers, as may be specified after consultation 
with the Chairperson in such ru les, shall be subject to the appr oval of the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 18, every officer or other employee appointed by the 
Authority shall be subject to such conditions of service and shall be entitled to such remunerati on as ma y 
be determined by regulations.  
11. Authority to act on business principles. —In the discharge of its functions under this Act, the 
Authority shall act, so far as may b e, on business principles.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
12. Functions o f the Authority .—(1) Subject to the rules, if any, made by the Central Government in 
this behalf, it shall be the function of the Authority to manage the airports, the civil enclaves and the 
aeronautical comm unication stations efficiently.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Authority to provide air traffic service and air transport service at any 
airport and civil enclaves.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -sections (1) and ( 2), the 
Authority may — 
(a) plan , develop, construct and maintain runways, taxiways, aprons and terminals and ancillary 
buildings at th e airports and civil enclaves;  
1[(aa) establish airports, or assist in the establishment of private airports , by rendering such 
technical, financial or other assistance which the Central Government may consid er necessary for 
such purpose;]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  5 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  7 
 (b) plan, procure, insta l and maintain navigational aids, communication equipment, beacons and 
ground aids at the airports and at such locations as may be considered necessary for safe navigat ion 
and operation of aircrafts;  
(c) provide  air safety services and search and rescue, facilities in co -ordination with other 
agencies;  
(d) establish s chools or institutions or centre s for the training of its officers and employees in 
regard to any matter connected  with the purposes of this Act;  
(e) construct residential buildings for its employees;  
(f) establish and maintain hotels, restaurants and res trooms at or near the airports;  
(g) establish warehouses and cargo complexes at the airports for the storage or processing of 
goods;  
(h) arrange for postal, money exchange, insurance and telephone facilities for the use of 
passengers and other persons at the airports and civil enclaves;  
(i) make appropriate arrangements for watch and ward at t he airports and civil enclaves;  
(j) regulate and control the  plying of vehicles, and the entry and exit of passengers and visitors, in 
the airports and civil enclaves with due regard to the security and protocol functi ons of the 
Government of India;  
(k) develop and provide consultancy, construction or management se rvices, and undertake 
operations in India and abroad in relation to airports, air -navigation services, ground aids and safety 
services or any facilities thereat;  
(l) establish and manage heliports and airstrips;  
(m) provide such transport facility as are, in the opinion of the Authority, necessary to the 
passengers travel ling by air;  
(n) form one or more companies under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  or under any other 
law relating to companies to further the efficient discharge of the funct ions impose d on it by this Act;  
(o) take all such steps as may be necessary or convenient for, or may be incidental to, the  exerci se 
of any power or the discharge  of any function conferred  or imposed on it  by this Act;  
(p) perform any other function considered necess ary or desirable by the Central Government for 
ensuring the safe and efficient operation of aircraft to, from and  across the air space of India;  
(q) establish tra ining institutes and workshops;  
(r) any other activity at the airports and the civil enclaves in the best commercial interests of the 
Authority including cargo handling, setting up of joint ventures for the discharge of any func tion 
assigned to the Authority.  
(4) In the discharge of its functions under this section, the Authority shall have due reg ard to the 
development of air transport service and to the efficiency, econ omy and safety of such service . 
(5) Nothing contained in this  section shall be construed as — 
(a) authorising  the disregard by the Authority of any law for the time being in force; or 
(b) authorising  any person to institute any proceeding in respect of duty or liability to which the 
Authority or its officers or other employees would not otherwise be subject.  
1[12A. Lease by the Authority .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in th is Act, the Authority 
may, in the public interest or in the interest of better management of airports, make a lease of the premises 
of an airport (including buildings and structures thereon and appertaining thereto) to carry out some of its 
functions under  section 12  as the Authority may deem fit:  
Provided that such lease shall  not affect the functions of the Authorit y under section 12 which relate s 
to air traffic service or watch and ward at airports and civil enclaves.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  6 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  8 
 (2) No lease under sub -section ( 1) shall be made without the previous approval of the Central 
Government.  
(3) Any money , payable by the lessee in ter ms of the lease made under sub -section ( 1), shall form 
part of the fund of the Authority and shall be credited thereto as if such money is the  receipt of the 
Authority for all purposes of section 24.  
(4) The lessee , who has been assigned any function of the Authority under sub -section ( 1), shall have 
all the powers of the Authority  necessary for the performance of such f unction in terms of the l ease.]  
CHAPTER IV  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACT  
13. Under takings of the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority 
to vest in the Authority .—(1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be transferred to, and vest in, 
the Authority constituted under section 3, the undertakings of the International Airports Authority and t he 
National Airports Authority.  
(2) The undertaking of the International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority which 
is transferred to, and which ves ts in, the Authority under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, powers, authorities and privileges and all property movable and immovable, real or 
personal, corporeal or incorporeal, present or contingent, of whatever nature and w heresoever situate, 
including lands, buildings, machinery, equipments, works, workshops, cash balances, capital, reserves, 
reserve funds, investments, tenancies, leases and book debts and all other rights and interests arising out 
of such property as were immediately before the appointed day in the ownership, possession or power of 
the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, in relation to 
its undertaking, whether within or outside India, all books of accoun t and documents relating thereto and 
shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities and obligations of whatever kind then subsisting 
of the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority in relation 
to its undertaking.  
14. General effect of vesting of undertaking in the Authority .—(1) All contracts, agreements and 
working arrangements subsisting immediately before the appointed day and affecting the International 
Airports Authority, or as the case may b e, the National Airports Authority shall, in so far as they relate to 
the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, cease to have 
effect or be enforceable against the International Airports Authority, or as t he case may be, the National 
Airports Authority and shall be of as full force and effect against or in favo ur of the Authority in which 
the undertakings have vested by virtue of this Act and enforceable as fully and effectually as if, instead of 
the Intern ational Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, the Authority 
had been named there in or had been a party thereto.  
(2) Any proceeding, suit or cause of action pending or existing immediately before the appointed day 
by or  against the International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority in relation to its 
undertakings may, as from that day, be continued and enforced by or against the Authority in which it has 
vested by virtue of this Act, as it might have bee n enforced by or against the International Airports 
Authority or the National Airports Authority  if this Act had not been passed, and shall cease to be 
enforceable by or against the International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National 
Airports Authority.  
15. Licences, etc., to be deemed to have been granted to the Authority .—With effect fr om the 
appointed day, all licenc es, permits, quotas and exemptions, granted to the International Airports 
Authority or the National Airports Authority in  connection with the affairs and business of the 
International Airports Authority, or as the case may be, the National Airports Authority, under any law 
for the time being in force, shall be deemed to have been granted to the Authority in which the 
underta kings of the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority have vested by 
virtue of this Act.  
16. Tax exemption or benef it to continue  to have effect .—(1) Where any exemption from, or any 
assessment with respect to, any tax has been granted or made or any benefit by way of set off or carry 
forward, as the case may be, of any unabsorbed depreciation or investment allowance or other  allowance   9 
 or loss has been extended or is available to the International Airports Authority or the Nat ional Airports 
Authority,  under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) , such exemption, assessment or benefit shall 
continue to have effect in relation to the Authority in which the undertakings of the International Airports 
Authority and the National Airpo rts Authority hav e vested by virtue of this Act.  
(2) Where any payment made by the International Airports Authority or the National Airports 
Authority is exempt from deduction of the tax at source under any provis ion of the Income -tax Act, 1961 
(43 of 1961 ), the exempt ion from tax will continue to be available as if the provisions of the said Act 
made applicable to the International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority were operative 
in relation to the Authority in which the undertakings of  the International Airports Authority and the 
National Airports Authority hav e vested by virtue of this Act.  
(3) The transfer and vesting of the undertakings or any part thereof in terms of section 13 shall not be  
construed as a transfer within the meanin g of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961)  for th e purposes of 
capital gains.  
17. Guarantee to be operative. —Any guarantee given for or in favour  of the International Airports 
Authority or the National Airports Authority with respect to any loan or lease finance shall continue to be 
operative in relation to the Authority in which the undertakings of the International Airports Authority 
and the Nati onal Airports Authority have vested by virtue of  this Act.  
18. Provisions in respect of officers and other employee s of the In terna tional Airports  Authority  
and the National Airports Authority .—(1) (a) Every officer or other employee of the International 
Airports Authority serving in its employment immediately before the appointed day shall, in so far as 
such officer or other employee is employed in connection with the undertaking which has vested in the 
Authority by virtue of this Act, becomes, as from the  appointed day, an officer or, as the case may be, 
other employee of the International Airports Division of the Au thority.  
(b) Every officer or other employee of the National Airports Authority serving in its employment 
immediately before the appointed day  shall, in so far as such officer or other employee is employed in 
connection with the undertaking which has vested in the Authority by virtue of this Act, becomes, as from 
the appointed day, an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of the Nationa l Airp orts Division of 
the Authority.  
(2) Every officer or other employee of the International Airports Authority or the National Airports 
Authority who becomes an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of the Authority, as referred to 
in sub -section (1), shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same remuneration, 
upon the same terms and conditions, with the same obligations and with the same rights and privileges as 
to leave, passage, insurance, superannuation scheme, pro vident fund, other funds, retirement, pension, 
gratuity and other benefits as he would have held under the International Airports Authority or, as the 
case may be, the National Airports Authority if its undertaking had not vested in the Authority and shall  
continue to do so as an officer or other employee, as the case may be, of the Authority or until the expiry 
of a period of one year from the appointed day if such officer or other employee opts not to be the officer 
or other employee of th e Authority with in such period:  
Provided that if the Authority thinks it expedient to extend the period so fixed, it may extend the same 
up to a maximum period of one year.  
(3) Where an officer or other employee of the International Airports Authority or the National 
Airports Authority opts under sub -section ( 2) not to be in the employment or service of the Authority in 
which the undertakings of the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority have 
vested, such officer or other employee shall be deemed to have resi gned from the respective cadre.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 19 47) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee of th e 
International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority to the Authority shall not entitle such 
officer or other employee to any compensation under this Act or under any other law for the time being in 
force and no such claim shall be enterta ined by any cour t, tribunal or other authority.  
(5) The officers and other employees who have retired before the appointed day from the service of 
the International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority and are entitled to any benefits, 10 
 rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the same benef its, rights or privileges from  the Authority in 
which the undertaking s of the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority have 
vested.  
(6) The trusts of the Provident Fun d and Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme of the 
International Airports Authority or the National Airports Authority and any other bodies created for the 
welfare of officers or employees would continue to discharge their functions in the Authority as  was 
being done hitherto in the International Airports Authority or the National Airports  Authority  and tax 
exemption granted to Provident Fund or Group Insurance and Superannuation Scheme would continue to 
be applied to the Authority.  
(7) After the expiry  of the period of one year, or the extended period, as referred to in                                   
sub-section ( 2), all the officers and other employees transferred and appointed to the Authority, other than 
those opting not to be the officers or empl oyees of the Authority within such period, shall be governed by 
the rules and regulations made by the Authority in respect of the service conditions of the officers and 
other e mployees of the said Authority.  
19. Compulsory acquisition of land for the Autho rity.—Any land required by the Authority for the 
discharge of its functions under this Act shall be deemed to be needed for a public purpose and such land 
may be acquired for the Authority under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894  (1 of 1894)  or 
of any other corresponding law for the time being in force.  
20. Contracts by the Authority. —Subject to the provisions of section 21, the Authority shall be 
competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the discharge of its functions u nder this 
Act.  
21. Mode of executing contracts on behalf of the Authority .—(1) Every contract shall, on behalf of 
the Authority, be made by the Chairperson or such other member or such officer of the Authority as may 
be generally or specially empowered in  this behalf by the Authority and such contracts or class of 
contracts as may be specified in the regulations shall be sealed with th e common seal of the Authority:  
Provided that no contract exceeding such value or amount as the Central Government may, fro m time 
to time, by order, fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has been previously approved by the Authority:  
Provided further that no contract for the acquisition or sale of immovable property or for the lease of 
any such property for a term exceedi ng thirty years and no other contract exceeding such value or amount 
as the Central Government may, from time to time, by order, fix in this behalf shall be made unless it has 
been previously appr oved by the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provision s of sub -section ( 1), the form and manner in which any contract shall be 
made under this Act shall be such as m ay be specified by regulations . 
(3) No contract which is not in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the regulations shall be 
binding o n the Authority.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE,  ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
22. Power of the Authority to charges fees, rent, etc. —The Authority may, — 
(i) with the previous approval of the Central Go vernment, charge fees  or rent —  
(a) for the landing, housing or parking of aircraft or for any other service or facility offered in 
connection with aircraft operations at any airport, helip ort or airstrip.  
Explanation. —In this sub -clause “aircraft” does not include an aircraft belonging to any 
armed force of the Union and “aircraft operations” does not include operations of any aircra ft 
belonging to the said force;  
(b) for providing air traffic services, ground safety services, aeronautical communications and 
navigational aids and meteoro logical  services at any airport  and at any aero nautical 
communication station;  11 
 (c) for the amenities given to the passengers and visitors at any airport, civil  enclave, heliport 
or airstrip;  
(d) for the use and employment by persons of facilities and other servic es provided by the 
Authority at any airport, civi l enclave , heliport or airstrip;  
(ii) with due regard to the instructions that the Central Government may give to the Authority, 
from time to time, charge fees or rent from persons who are given by the Authority any facility for 
carrying on any trade or business at any airport, heliport or airstrip.  
1[22A.  Power of Authority to levy development fees at airports .—2[The Authority may ,— 
 (i) after the previous approval of the Central Government in this behalf, levy on, and collect 
from, the embarking passengers at an airport  other than the major airports referred to in clause ( h) of 
section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008  (27 of 2008)  the 
development fees at the rate as may be prescribed;  
(ii) levy, on, and collect from, the embarking passengers at major airport referred to in clause ( h) 
of section 2 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008  (27 of 2008)  the 
development fees at the rate as may be determine d under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of            
section 13 of the Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008 ,  
and such fees shall be credited to the Authority and shall be regulated and utilised  in the prescrib ed 
manner, for the purposes of —] 
(a) funding or financing the costs of upgradation, expansion or development of the airport at  
which the fee is collected; or  
(b) establishment or development of a new airport in lieu of the airport referred to in                  
clause ( a); or  
(c) investment in the equity in respect of shares to be subscribed by the Authority in companies 
engaged in establishing, owning, developing, operating or maintaining a private airport in lieu of the 
airport referred to in clause ( a) or advancement of loans to such companies or other persons engaged 
in such activities.]  
23. Additional capital and grant to the Authority by the Central Government. —The Central 
Government may, after due appropriation made by Pa rliament , by law in this behalf, — 
(a) provide any capital that may be required by the Authority for the discharge of its functions 
under this Act or for any purpose connected therewith on such terms and conditions as  that 
Government may determine;  
(b) pay to the Authority, on such terms and co nditions as the Central Government may determine, 
by way of loans or grants such sums of money as that Government may consider necessary for the 
efficient discharge by the Authority o f its functions under this Act.  
24. Fund of the Authority and its investm ent.—(1) The Authority shall have its own fund and all 
receipts of the Authority shall be credited thereto and all payments of the Authority shall be made               
therefrom.  
(2) The Authority shall have power, subject to the provisions of this Act, t o spend such sums as it 
thinks fit to cover all administrative expenses of the Authority and on objects or for purposes authorised  
by this Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure out of the fund of the Authority.  
(3) All moneys standing at the c redit of the Authority which cannot immediately be applied as 
provided in sub -section ( 2), shall be — 
(a) deposited in the State Bank of India or any such Scheduled bank or banks or other public 
financial institutions subject to such conditions as may, from  time to time, be specified by  the Central 
Government; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.7 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
2. Sub s. by Act of 27 of 2008, s.  54 and the Schedule, for certain words  (w.e.f. 30 -11-2008).  12 
 (b) invested in the securities of the Central  Government  or in such manner as may be prescribed.  
Explanation —In this sub -section , “Scheduled bank”  has the same meaning as in clause ( e) of             
section  of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934  (2 of 1934) . 
25. Allocation of surplus funds. —(1) The Authority may, from time to time, set apart such amounts 
as it thinks fit as a reserve fund or funds for the purpose of expanding existing facilities o r services or 
creating new facilities or services at any airport, civil enclave, heliport or airstrip or for the purpose of 
providing against any temporary decrease of revenue or increase of expenditure from transient causes or 
for purposes of replacement or for meeting expenditure arising from loss or damage from fire, cyclone, 
air-crash or other accident or for meeting any liability arising out of any act or commission in the 
discharge o f its functions under this Act:  
Provided that without prejudice to the right of the Authority to establish specific reserves for one or 
more specific purposes, the Authority shall also have the power to establish a general reserve:  
Provided further that the sums set apart annually in re spect of each or any of the specific and general 
reserves and the aggregate at any time of such sums shall not exceed such limits as may, from time to 
time, be fixed in that be half by the Central Government.  
(2) After making provision for such reserve fund  or funds and for bad and doubtful debts, 
depreciation in assets and all other matters which are usually provided for by companies registered and 
incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  the Authority shall pay the balance of its annual 
net p rofits to the Central Government.  
26. Submission of program me of activities and financial estimat es.—(1) The Authority shall, 
before the commencement of each financial yea r, prepare a statement of the  programme of its activities 
during the forthcoming fina ncial year as well as financi al estimate in respect thereof.  
(2) The statement prepared under sub -section ( 1) shall, not less than three months before the 
commencement of each financial year, be submitted for approval to the Ce ntral Government.  
(3) The sta tement and the financial estimates of the Authority may, with the approval of the Central 
Governmen t, be revised by the Authority.  
27. Borrowing powers of the Autho rity.—(1) The Authority may, with the consent of the Central 
Government or in accordance with the terms of any general or special authority given to it by the Central 
Government, borrow money from any source by the issue of bonds, debentures or such other instruments 
as it may deem fit for discharging all or any o f its functions under this Act . 
(2) The Central Government may guarantee in such manner as it thinks fit, the repayment of the 
principal and the payment of interest thereon with respect to the loans borrowed by the Authority under 
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) Subject to such limits as the Cent ral Government may, from time to time, lay down, the Authority 
may borrow temporarily by way of overdraft or otherwise such amounts as it may require for dischargin g 
its functions under this Act.  
28. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Authority shall maintain pro per accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the profit and loss account and the    
balance -sheet in such form as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
Comptroll er and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited annually by the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the 
Authority to the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and authority in 
connection with such audit as the C omptroller and Auditor -General has in connection with the audit of 
Government accounts and, in particular , shall have the right to demand the production of books, accounts, 
connected vouchers, documents and papers and inspect any of the offices of the Auth ority.  13 
 (4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that  Government shall cause the same to be laid bef ore both 
Houses of Parliament.  
1[CHAPTER VA  
EVICTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPANTS, ETC., OF AIRPORT PREMISES  
28A. Definitions. —In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “airpor t premises” means any premises — 
(i) belonging to airport;  
(ii) taken on lea se for the purposes of airport;  
  (iii) acquired for the Authority under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act,  1894            
(1 of 1894)  or any other corresponding law for the time being i n force.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that for the purposes of this clause, 
“airport” includes private airport;  
(b) “eviction  officer” means an officer of the Authority appointed a s such by it under section 28B;  
(c) “premises” means any land or building or pa rt of a building, and includes — 
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to such buil ding or part of a 
building; and  
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building for more beneficial enjoyment 
there of; 
(d) “rent”, in relation to any airport premises, means the consideration payable periodically for 
the authorised occupation  of the premise s, and includes —  
(i) any charge for electricity, water or any other service in connection with the occupation of 
the premises; and  
(ii) any tax, by whatever name called, paya ble in respect of the premises;  
(e) “Tribunal” means the Airport Appellate Tribun al established under sub -section ( 1) of                 
section 28 -I; 
(f) “un authorised  occupation”, in relation to any airport premises, means the occupation by any 
person of the airport premises without authority for such occupation and includes the cont inuance in 
occupation by any person of the airport premises after the authority (whether by way of grant or any 
other mode of transfer) under which he was allowed to occupy the premises has expired or has been 
determ ined for any reason whatsoever.  
28B. Appointment of eviction officers. —The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, 
appoint such number of its officers, as it thinks fit, to be eviction officers for the purposes of this Chapter, 
and define the local limits within which, or the c ategories of airport premises in respect of which, the 
eviction officers shall exercise the powers conferred and perform the duties imposed, on eviction officers 
by or under this Chapter.  
 28C. Issue of notice to show cause against order of eviction. —(1) If the eviction officer is of the 
opinion that any persons are in unauthorised occupation of any airport premises and that they should be 
evicted, the eviction officer shall, in the manner hereinafter provided, issue a notice in writing calling 
upon all per sons concerned to show cause why an order of eviction should not be made.  
(2) The notice shall — 
(a) specify the grounds on which the order of evict ion is proposed to be made; and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  8 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004). 14 
 (b) require all persons concerned, that is to say, all persons who are or may  be, in occupation of, 
or claim int erest in, the airport premises —  
(i) to show cause, if any, against the proposed order on or before such date as is specified in 
the notice, being a date not earlier than seven days from th e date of issue thereof, and  
(ii) to appear before the eviction officer on the date specified in the notice along with the 
evidence which they intend to produce in support of the cause shown and also for personal 
heari ng, if such hearing is desired.  
(3) The eviction officer shall cause t he notice to be served by having it affixed on the outer door or 
some other conspicuous part of the airport premises and in such other manner as may be prescribed, 
whereupon  the notice shall be deemed to have been duly gi ven to the persons concerned.  
(4) Where the eviction officer knows or has reasons to believe that any person is in occupation of the 
airport premises, then, without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), he shall cause a copy of the 
notice to be served on every such person by post  or by delivering or tendering it to that person or in such 
other manner as may be prescribed.  
28D.  Eviction of un authorised  occupants. —(1) If, after considering the cause, if any, shown by any 
person in pursuance of a notice under section 28C and any evid ence produced by him in support of the 
same and after personal hearing, if any, given under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b) of                                           
sub-section ( 2) of section 28C, the eviction officer is satisfied that the airport premis es are in unauthorised 
occupation, the eviction officer may make an order of eviction, for reasons to be recorded therein, 
directing that the airport premises shall be vacated, on such date as may be specified in the order, by the 
persons who may be in occ upation thereof, and cause a copy of the order to be affixed on the outer door 
or some other conspicuou s part of the airport premises.  
(2) If any person refuses or fails to comply with the order of eviction on or before the date specified 
in the order or w ithin fifteen days of the date of publication under sub -section ( 1), whichever is earlier, 
the eviction officer or any other officer duly authorised by the eviction officer in this behalf may, after the 
date so specified or after the expiry of the period a foresaid, whichever is earlier, evict that person from, 
and take possession of, the airport premises and may, for that purpose, use such force as may be 
necessary.  
28E. Disposal of property left on airport premises by un authorised  occupants. —(1) Where any 
persons have been evicted from any airport premises under section 28D, the eviction officer may, after 
giving ten days’ notice to the persons from whom possession of the airport premises has been taken and 
after publishing the notice in at least one newspa per having circulation in the locality, remove or cause to 
be removed or  dispose of by public auction any property  remaining on such premises.  
(2) Where any property is sold under sub -section ( 1), the sale proceeds thereof shall, after deducting 
the expen ses of the sale and the amount, if any, due to the Central Government or the corporate authority 
on account of arrears of rent or damages or costs, be paid to such person or persons as may appear to the 
eviction offi cer to be entitled to the same:  
Provided  that where the eviction officer is unable to decide as to the person or persons to whom the 
balance of the amount is payable or as to the apportionment of the same, he may refer such dispute to the 
Tribunal and the decision of the T ribunal thereon shall b e final.  
28F. Power to remove unauthorised constructions, etc. —(1) No person shall — 
(a) erect or place or raise any building or any movable or immovable structure o r fixture;  
(b) display or spread any goods;  
(c) bring or keep any cattle or other animal,  
on or against or in front of any airport premises except in accordance with the authority (whether by way 
of grant or any other mode of transfer) under which he was allowed t o occupy such airport premises.  
(2) Where any building or other immovable structur e or fixture has been erected, placed or raised in 
any airport premises in contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the eviction officer may serve 
on the person erecting such building or other structure or fixture, a notice requiring him either to remove 15 
 or show cause why he shall not remove such building or other structure or fixture to or from the airport 
premises within such period, not being less than seven days but not exceeding thirty days as may be 
specified in the notice, and on the omiss ion or refusal of such person to show cause, or to remove such 
building or other structure or fixture from the airport  premises, or where the cause shown is not, in the 
opinion of the eviction officer, sufficient, the eviction officer may, by order, remov e or cause to be 
removed the building or other structure or fixture from the airport premises and the cost of such removal 
shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of land revenue.  
(3) Where any movable structure or fixture has been erected, plac ed or raised, or any goods have been 
displayed or spread or any cattle or other animal has been brought or kept on any airport premises in 
contravention of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) by any person, the eviction officer may, by order, 
remove or cause  to be removed without notice, such structure, fixture, goods, cattle or other animal, as the 
case may be, from the airport premises and the cost of such removal shall be recoverable from such 
perso n as an arrear of land revenue.  
28G. Power to require paym ent of rent or damages in respect of airport premises. —(1) Where 
any person is in arrears of rent payable in respect of airport premises, the eviction officer may, by order, 
require that person to pay the same within s uch time and in such instal ments as  may be specified in the 
order.  
(2) Where any person is, or has at any time been, in unauthorised  occupation of any airport premises, 
the eviction officer may, having regard to such principles of assessment of damages as may be prescribed, 
assess the damages on account of the use and occupation of such premises and may, by order, require that 
person t o pay the damages with in such time and in such instal ments as  may be specified in the order.  
(3) While making an order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the eviction officer may direct 
that the arrears of rent or, as the case may be, damages shall be payable together with simple interest at 
such rate as may be prescribed.  
(4) No order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be made against any person until after the 
issue of a notice in writing to the person calling upon him to show cause wit hin such period not being less 
than seven days but not exceeding thirty days as may be specified in the notice as to why such order 
should not be made, and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of the 
same have been cons idered by the eviction officer.  
28H. Power s of eviction officers. —An eviction officer shall, for the purpose of holding any inquiry 
into this Chapter, have the same powers, as are vested in a civil court under th e Code of Civil             
Procedure, 1908 ( 5 of 1908) , while trying a suit in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) any other matter which may be pre scribed.  
28-I. Establishment of Tribunal. —(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish a Tribunal, to be known as the Airport Appellate Tribunal, to exercise the jurisdiction, 
powers and authority confer red on it by or under this Act  1[and the Control of National Highways (Land 
and Traffic) Act, 2002  (13 of 200 3)]. 
(2) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson (hereinafter referred to in this Act, as th e Chairperson 
of the Tribunal).  
(3) The head office of the Tribu nal shall be at New Delhi:  
Provided that the Tribunal may hold its sittings at other places as the Chairperson of the Tribunal may 
decide, from time to time, having taken into consideration the convenience to decide t he appeals before 
the Tribunal.  
(4) The  Chairperson of the Tribunal shall be appointed by the Central Government after consultation 
with the Chief Justice of India.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 166 (w.e.f.  26-5-2017) . 16 
 (5) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as Chairperson of the Tribunal unless he is, or has 
been, or is qualified  to be, a Judge of a High Court.  
(6) The Chairperson of the Tribunal shall hold office as such for a term of three years from the date 
on which he enters upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty -two years, whichever is earlier.  
(7) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson of the Tribunal shal l be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairpers on of the Tribunal shall be varied to his disadvantage afte r his appointment.  
28J. Resignation and removal .—(1) The Chairperson of the Tribunal may, by notice in writing 
under his hand addressed to the Central  Government, resign his office:  
Provided that t he Chairperson of the Tribunal shall, unless he is permitted by the Central Government 
to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his  successor enters upon his office or until the 
expiry of his term of off ice, whichever is the earliest.  
(2) The Chairperson of the Tribunal shall not be removed from his office except by an order made by 
the Central Government on the ground of proved misbe havio ur or incapacity after an inquiry made by a 
Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairperson had been informed of the charges against him and 
given reasonable opportunity of being hea rd in respect of those charges.  
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of t he Chairperson of the Tribunal.  
1[28JA. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson. —Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries and allowances, 
resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson of the Tribunal 
appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall 
be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:  
Provided that the Chairperson appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the 
Finance Act, 2017, shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this Act an d the rules made 
thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had not come into force.]  
28K.  Appeals to Tribunal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the eviction officer under this 
Chapter may, within fifteen days from the d ate of such order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal in such 
form as m ay be prescribed:  
Provided that the Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period of fifteen days, 
but not af ter the period of thirty days from the date aforesaid , if it is satisfied that the appellant was 
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal shall, after giving the appellant and the 
eviction officer an opportunity of being hea rd, pa ss such order as it thinks fit.  
(3) The Tribunal shall dispose of the appeal within thirty days from the date of filing the appeal:   
Provided that the Tribunal may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, dispose of the appeal within a 
further period  of fifteen days.  
(4) An order of the Tribunal passed under sub -section ( 2) shall be executable as a decree of a              
civil court and for executing the same the Tribunal shall send a copy thereof to the civil court having 
jurisdiction which shall execute the same, as expeditiously as may be possible, as if such order is a decree 
passed by that court.  
(5) On and from the date  from  which any jurisdiction, powers and authority becomes exercisable 
under this Chapter by the Tribunal in relation to any m atter, no court (except the Supreme Court under 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 166 (w.e.f.  26-5-2017) . 17 
 article 136 and the High Court under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) shall have, or be entitled to 
exercise any jurisdiction, powers or author ity in relation to such matter.  
28L. Procedure and power s of Tribunal. —(1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure 
laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of  1908) but shall be guided by the principles of 
natural justice, and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made  by the Central 
Government, the Tribunal shall have power to lay down and regulate its own procedure including the 
fixing of places and times of its inquiry and deciding whether to sit in public or in private.  
(2) The Tribunal shall have, for the purpose o f discharging its functions under this Chapter, the same 
powers as are ve sted in a civil court under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of  1908) , while trying a 
suit in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendanc e of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the Indian                            
Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  and the Tribunal shall be dee med to be a civil court for all the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Co de of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
28M. Finality of orders. —Subject to the provisions of this Act, every order made by an eviction 
officer or the Tribunal under this Chapter shall be final and shall not be called in question in any suit, 
application, execution or other proceeding and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or intended to be taken in pursuance o f any power conf erred by or 
under this Chapter.  
28N.  Offences under this C hapter. —(1) Whoever, unlawfully occupies any airport premises, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may ext end to six years and with fine.  
(2) Whoever fails to comp ly with any order of the eviction officer or the Tribunal under this Chapter 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may exten d to seven years and with fine.  
(3) If any person who has been evicted from any airport premises under this Chapter  again occupies 
the premises without authority for such occupation, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may ext end to ten years and with fine.  
(4) The court may, while convicting a person under sub -section ( 3), make an order for evict ing that 
person summarily and he shall be liable to such eviction without prejudice to any other action that may be 
taken under this Chapter.  
28-O. Offences by companies .—(1) Where any offence under this Chapter has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the c ompany, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Chapter, i f he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge 
or he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), where an offence under this Chapter has 
been commit ted by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation  —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 18 
 (b) “director”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
28P. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Chapter 
except on a complaint made by the Authority, eviction officer or any other officer authorised by it and no 
court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall try any 
offence pu nishable under this Chapter.  
28Q.  Power to obtain information. —If the eviction officer has re ason to believe that any persons 
are in an unauthorised occupation of any airport premises, he or any other officer authorised by him in 
this behalf may require those persons or any other person to furnish information in relation to the names 
and other par ticulars of the persons in occupation of the airport premises and every person so required 
shall be bound to furnish the information in his possession.  
28R. Officers, etc., to aid and assist. —It shall be the duty of all the officers of the Government 
including police officers and any local authority to aid and assist the eviction officer or other officers of 
the Authority in the discharge of thei r functions under this Chapter.]  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Submission of annual report. —(1) The Authority  shall, as soon as may be after the end of each 
financial year, prepare and submit to the Central Government in such form as may be prescribed a report 
giving an account of its activities during that financial year and the report shall also give an account  of the 
activities which are likely to be undertaken by the Authority dur ing the next financial year.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause such report to be laid before both Houses of Parliament as 
soon as may be after it is submitted.  
30. Delegation. —The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the 
Chairperson or any other member or to any officer of the Authority, subject to such conditions and 
limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and funct ions under this               
Act, (except the powers under section  42) as it may deem necessary.  
31. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Authority .—All orders and decisions 
of the Authority shall be authenticated by the signature of the C hairperson or any other member 
authorised  by the Authority in this behalf and all other instruments executed by the Authority shall be 
authenticated by the signature of an officer of the Authority authorised  by it in this behalf.  
32. Officers and employees of the Authority to be public servants. —All officers and employees of 
the Authority shall, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of the provisions of this Act or of an y 
rule or regulation made there under, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of secti on 21 of 
the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
33. Protection of action taken in good faith. — No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Authority or any member or any officer or  other  employee of the Auth ority 1[or the 
Chairperson of the Tribunal] for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or of an y rule or regulation made there under or for any damage sustained by any aircraft or 
vehicle in consequence of any d efect in any of the airports, civil enclaves, heliports, airstrips, aeronautical 
communication stations or other things belonging to or under the control of the Authority.  
34. Custody and disposal  of lost property .—Subject to such regulations as the Authority may make 
in this behalf, the authority shall provide for securing the safe custody and restoration of any property 
which, while not in proper custody, is found on any premises belonging to the Authority or under its 
overall control or in any  aircraft on any such premises.  
35. Provisions relating to income -tax.—For the purposes of the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961)  
or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to income -tax or any other tax on income , 
profits or gains, the Authorit y shall be deemed to be a company within the meaning of the Income -tax 
Act, 1961 and shall be liable to tax accordingly on i ts income, profits and gains.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.  9 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  19 
 36. Power of the Authority to under take certain works. —The Authority may undertake to carry 
out on beh alf of any person any works or services or any class of works or services on such terms and 
conditions as may be agreed upon between the Authority and the person concerned.  
37. Power to issue directions. —(1) The Authority or any officer specially authoris ed by it in this 
behalf may, from time to time, by order, issue directions, consistent with the provi sions of the Aircraft 
Act, 1934 (22 of 1934)  and the rules made there under, with respect to any of the matters specified in 
clauses ( f), (h), (i), (j), (k), (m), (p), (qq) and ( r) of  sub-section ( 2) of section 5 of that Act, to any person 
or persons engaged in aircraft operations or using any airport s, heliport, airstrip or civil enclave, in any 
case where the Authority or the officer is satisfied that in the interests of the security of India or for 
securing the security of the air craft it is necessary to do so.  
(2) Every direction issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be complied with by the person or persons to  
whom such direction is issued.  
(3) If any person wil fully fails to comply with any direction issued under this section, he shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend 
to five  thousand rupees, or with both.  
38. Power of the Central Government to temporarily d ivest the Authority of the mana gement of 
any airport .—(1) If, at any time, the Central Government is of opinion that in the public interest it is 
necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order, direct the Authority to entrust the administration, 
management or similar other functions of any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave, aeronautical 
communication station, or any other agency or department of any airport, heliport, airstrip civil enclave or 
aeronautical comm unication station with effect from such date and to such person as may be specified in 
the order and the Authority shall be bound to comply with such direction:  
Provided that before an order is made under this sub -section the Authority shall be given a rea sonable 
opportunity of bei ng heard in the matter.  
(2) Where the management of any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical 
communication station or any other agency or department thereof is entrusted to any person specified 
under sub -section ( 1) (hereafter referred to in this section as the authorised  person), the Authority shall 
cease to exercise and discharge all its powers and functions under this Act in relation to such airport, 
heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communi cation station or any other  agency or department 
thereof and such powers and functions shall be exercised and discharged by the authorised  person in 
accordance with the instructions, if any, which the Central Government may give to the authorised  person 
from time to time:  
Provided that no such power or function as may be specified by the Central Government by a general 
or special order shall be exercised or discharged by the authorised  person except with the previous 
sanction of the Central Government.  
(3) An order made under sub -section ( 1) shall, unless rescinded, be in operation for a period of six 
months from the date on which the management of the airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or 
aeronautical communication station or any other agency or de partment thereof is entrusted to the 
authorised  person:  
Provided that the Central Government may extend such period for a further period or periods  not 
exceeding eighteen months.  
(4) During the operation of an order made under sub -section ( 1), it shall be competent for the Central 
Government to issue, from time to time, such directions to the Authority as are necessary to enable the 
authorised  person to exercise the powers and discharge the functions of the Authority under this Act in 
relation to the airpor t, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication station, or any other 
agency or department thereof the management of which has been entrusted to him and in particular to 
transfer any sum of money from the fund of the Authority to the authorised  person for the management of 
the airport, heliport, airstrip , civil enclave or aeronautical communication station or any other agency or 
department thereof and every such direction shall be complied with by the Authority.  20 
 (5) On the cesser  of operation of any order made under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any airport, 
heliport , airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication station, or any other agency or  department 
thereof the authorised  person shall cease to exercise and perform the powers and functions of the 
authority under this Act in relation to such airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical 
communication station or any other agency or department thereof and the Authority shall continue to 
exercise and perform  such powers and functions in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act.  
(6) On the cesser o f operation of any order made under sub -section ( 1) in relation to any airport, 
heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication station, or any oth er agency or department 
thereof the authorised  person shall hand over to the Authority any property (including any sum of money 
or other asset) remaining with him in connection with the management of such airport, heliport, airstrip, 
civil enclave or aero nautical communication station.  
(7) Anything done or any action taken lawfully by the authorised  person in relation to any airport, 
heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical communication station or any other agency or department 
thereof during the period of operation of an order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to have 
been done or taken by the Authority and shall be binding on the Authority.  
39. Power of the Central Government to supersede the Authority .—(1) If, at any time, the Ce ntral 
Government is of opinion —  
(a) that on account of a grave emergency, the Authority is unable to discharge the functions and 
duties imposed on it by or under  the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has persistently made default in complying wi th any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of which default the financial position of the  
Authority or the administr ation of any airport, heliport, airstrip, civil enclave or aeronautical 
communication station has deteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification in the O fficial Gazette, supersede the Authority for such 
period, not exceeding six months, as may be s pecified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section for the reasons mentioned in               
clause ( b), the Central Government shall give a reasonable opportunity to the Authority to show cause 
why it should not be superseded and shall consider the explanations and object ions, if any, of the 
Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Authority, — 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority, shall until the Authority is re -constituted 
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or persons as the  Central 
Government may direct;  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until th e Authority is re -constituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under              
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may — 
(a) extend the per iod of supersession for such further term not exceeding six months, a s it may 
consider necessary; or  
(b) re-constitute the Authority by fresh appointment and in such case the members who vacated 
their offices under clause ( a) of   sub-section ( 2) shall not  be deemed disqualified for appointment:  
 Provided that the Central Government may, at any time before the expiration of the period of 
supersession, whether as originally specified under sub -section ( 1) or as extended under this                    
sub-section, take action under  clause ( b) of this sub -section.  21 
 (4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under  sub-section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be la id before both 
Houses of Parliament at the earliest opportunity.  
40. Power of the Central Government to issue directions. —(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties unde r this Act, be 
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in w riting to it from 
time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given opportunity to express its views 
before any direction i s given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one o f policy or not shall be final.  
(3) The Central Government may, from time to time, issue directions to the Authority regarding the 
discharge of any functi ons to it under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of section 12 and the Authority shall be 
bound to comply with such directions.  
 41. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out  the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the period of notice as may be given by the Central Government to terminate the appointment 
of any part -time memb er of the Authority under clause ( b) of proviso to                                                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) the conditions of service of the members of the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(c) the period of notice as may be given by any member to resign his office under sub -section ( 3) 
of section 5;  
(d) the provisions subject to which officers and other employees may be appointed by the 
Authority and the category of officers to be appointed after approval of the Central Government under 
the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 10;  
(e) the provisions subject to which the Authority may manage the airports, civil enclaves and 
aeronautical communication stations under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
1[(ee) 2[the rate of development fees  in respect of airports other than major airports and]  the 
manner of regulating and utili sing the fees under section 22A ;]  
(f) the manner in which the Authority may invest its funds under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 24;  
(g) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared by the Authority under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 28:  
1[(gi) the other manner of serving notice under sub -section ( 3) of section 28C;  
(gii) the other manner of serving  notice  under sub -section ( 4) of section 28C;  
(giii) the principles o f assessment of damages under sub -section ( 2) of section 28G;  
(giv) the rate of simple interest under sub -section ( 3) of section 28G;  
(gv) any other matter under clause ( c) of section 28H;  
(gvi) the salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson of the Tribunal under sub -section ( 7) of section 28 -I; 
(gvii) the pro cedure for the investigation of misbehavio ur or incapacity of the Chairper son of the 
Tribunal under sub -section ( 3) of section 28J;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 43 of 2003, s.10 (w.e.f. 1 -7-2004).  
2. Subs. by Act 27 of 2008, s. 54 and the Schedule, for “the rate of development fees and” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2009).  22 
 (gviii) the form of appeal under sub -section ( 1) of section 28k;  
(gix) any other matter under clause ( c) of sub -section (2) of section 28L ;] 
 (h) the form in which a report giving an account of its activities shall be prepared and submitted 
by the Authority to the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 29; and  
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
42. Power to make  regulations .—(1) The Authority may make regulations not inconsistent with this 
Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision is necessary or expedient 
for the purpose of giving effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, such regulations may provide         
for— 
(a) the time and places of the meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed for the 
transaction of business including the quorum at such meetings under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(b) the conditions of service and the remuneration of officers and other employees to be 
appointed by the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(c) the construction of residential accommodation for the officers and other employees appointed 
by the  Authority under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
(d) the storage or processing of goods in any warehouse established by the Authority under            
clause ( g) of sub -section ( 3) of section 12 and the charging of fees for such storage or processing;  
(e) the contracts or class of contracts which are to be sealed with the common seal of the 
Authority and the form and manner in which a contract may be made by the Authority under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 21;  
(f) the custody and restoration of lost property and the terms and conditions under which lost 
property may be restored to the persons ent itled thereto under section 34;  
(g) the disposal of any lost property in cases  where  such property is not restored;  
 (h) securing the safety of aircraft, vehicles and persons using the airport or civil enclave and 
preventing danger to the public arising from the use and operation of aircraft i n the airport or civil 
enclave;  
(i) prev enting obstruction within the airport or civil encl ave for its normal functioning;  
(j) prohibiting the parking or waiting of any vehicle of carriage within the airport or civil enclave 
except at pla ces specified by the Authority;  
(k) prohibiting or restric ting access to any part o f the airport or civil enclave;  
(l) preserving order within the airport or civil enclave and prevent ing damage to property therein;  
(m) regulating or restricting advertising withi n the airport or civil enclave;  
(n) requiring any pe rson, if so directed by an officer appointed by the Authority in this behalf, to 
leave the airport or civil enclave or any particular part of th e airport or civil enclave; and  
(o) generally for the efficient and proper management of the airport or civil en clave.   
(3) Any regulation made under any of the clauses ( h) to ( o) (both inclusive) of sub -section ( 2) may 
provide that a contravention thereof shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees and in the case of a continuing contravention with an additional fine which may extend to twenty 
rupees for every day during which such contravention continues after conviction fo r the first such 
contravention.  
(4) No regulation made by the Authority under this section shall have effect until it has been approved 
by the Central Government and pub lished in the Official Gazette.  23 
 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the first regulations under this Act shall be 
made by the Central Government and shall have effect on being published in t he Official Gazette.  
(6) The first regulations framed under sub -section ( 5) shall remain in force until such time the 
Authority has made regulations and they are pub lished in the Official Gazette.  
43. Rules and regulations to be laid  before  Parliament. —Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, as 
the case may be, or both Houses agree that  the rule or regulation, as the case may be, should not be made, 
the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without pr ejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rul e or regulation.  
44. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, make 
such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or 
expedient for  the removal of the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of one y ear fro m the commencement of 
this Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one se ssion or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the order or both Houses agree that the order shou ld not be made, the order shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that  order.  
 45. [Amendment of Act 22 of 1934 .].—Rep. by Repealing and Amending Act , 2001  (30 of 2001 ),        
s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 3-11-2001) . 
46. Repeal and saving. —(1) On and from the appointed date, — 
(i) the  International Airports Authority Act, 1971  (43 of 1971)  and the National Airports 
Authority Act , 1985  (64 of 1985)  shall stand repealed;  
(ii) the International Airports Authority and the National Airports Authority constituted under 
the aforesaid Acts sh all cease to exist.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done 
or taken under the aforesaid Acts so repealed shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act, be deemed to hav e been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
 THE BABASAHEB BHIMRAO AMBEDKAR UNIVERSITY ACT, 1994  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definition s. 
3. The University.  
4. Objects of the University.  
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
8. Residence of students.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. Officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor.  
13. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor s. 
14. Deans of Schools.  
15. The Registrar.  
16. The Finance Officer.  
17. Other officers.  
18. Authorities of the University.  
19. The Board of Management.  
20. The Academic Council.  
21. The Planning Board.  
22. The Boards of Schools.  
23. The Finance Committee.  
24. Other authorities of the University.  
25. Power to make Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made.  
27. Power to make Ordinances.  
28. Regulations.  
29. Annual report.  
30. Annual accounts.  
31. Conditions of service of employees.  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
33. Right to appeal.  
34. Provident and pension funds.  
35. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities  and bodies.  
36. Constitution of Committees.  
37. Filling of casual vacancies.  
38. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
39. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
40. Mode of proof of University record.  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  2 
 SECTIONS  
42. Transitional provisions.  
43. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE BABASAHEB BHIMRAO AMBEDKAR UNIVERSITY  
ACT, 1994  
ACT NO. 58 OF 1994  
[30th September , 1994.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and residential University in the State of Uttar 
Pradesh and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Babasaheb B himrao Ambedkar 
University Act, 1994 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless t he context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic st aff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Management”  means the Board of Management of the University;  
(d) “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of the University;  
(e) “Chancellor”, “Vice -Chancellor” and “Pro-Vice -Chancellor” mean, respectively , the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice-Chancellor of the University;  
(f) “College”  means a College maintained by the University;  
(g) “Department”  means a Department of Studies; and includes a Centre of Studies;  
(h) “distance education system” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telec asting, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more such mean s; 
(i) “employee”  means any person appointed by the University; and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(j) “Finance Committee” means the Finance Committee of the University;  
(k) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of a 
College or of an Institution, maintained by the University;  
(l) “Institution ” means an academic institution, not being a College, maintained by the University;  
(m) “Planning Board” means the Planning Board of the  University;  
(n) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an Institution maintained by the University, and 
includes, where there is no Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as P rincipal, 
and, in the absence of the Principal or the acting Princ ipal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
(o) “recognised institution” means an institution of higher learning recognised by the Univ ersity;  
(p) “recognised teachers” means such persons as may be recognised by the University for the 
purpose of imparting instructions in a College or an Institution maintained by the University;  
                                                           
1. 10th January 1996 , vide notification No. S.O. 18(E), dated 5 th January, 1996 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  Part II, s ec. 
3(ii). 
 4 
 (q) “Regulations” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under this Act 
for the time being in force;  
(r) “School” means a School of Studies of the University;  
(s) “Statutes”  and “Ordinances” mean , respectively, the Statutes and Ordinances of the University 
for the time being in force;  
(t) “teachers of the University” means Professors , Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any College 
or Insti tution maintained by the University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(u) “University” means the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar University established under this Act.  
3. The University .—(1) There shall be establish ed a University by the name of “ Babasah eb Bhimrao 
Ambedkar University”.  
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Lu cknow and it may also establish campuses at 
such other places within its jurisdiction as it may deem fit.  
(3) The first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Board of Management , or the Academic 
Council or the Planning Board and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or members, so 
long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby constituted a body corporate by the 
name of “Babasa heb Bhimrao Ambedkar  University” . 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects of the Univer sity.—The objects of the University shall be to promote advanced 
knowledge by providing instructional and research facilities in such branches of learning as it may deem 
fit, to make provisions for integrated courses in Science and key and frontier areas o f Technology and 
other allied disciplines in the educational programmes of the University; to offer appropriate courses 
relevant for the development of socially and economically depressed sections of the people, including 
agricultural technology and rural crafts; to promote the study of the principles for which Babasaheb 
Bhimrao Ambedkar worked during his life time , namely, national integration, social justice and 
democratic way of life, and also study of the Constitutions of the world to take appropriate m easures for 
promoting innovations in teachi ng-learning processes in inter -disciplinary studies and research and pay 
special attention to the promotion of educational and economic interests and welfare of the people in 
general and of members belonging to the Scheduled Castes and  the Scheduled Tribes in particular by 
providing adequate percentage of seats for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes and the 
University shall, in organising its activities, have due regard to the objects specified in the First Schedule.  
5. Powers of the U niversity .—The University shall have  the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instruction in such branches of learning as the University may, from time to 
time, determine and to make provision for research and for the advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing on, persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extra -mural studies, training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
 (v) to provide facilities through the distance education system to suc h persons as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Principalships, Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or 
academic positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to s uch Principalships, 
Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships or other teaching on academic positions;  5 
 (vii) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such purposes as the University may 
determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any College or Institution maintained by 
the University;  
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or organisation as teacher of the 
University for a specified period;  
(x) to create administrative , ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine;  
(xii) to establish such campuses, special centres, specialised laboratories or other units for 
research and instruction as are, in the opinion of the Un iversity, necessary for the furtherance of its 
objects;  
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and Halls;  
(xv) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industr ial or other organisations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, orientation courses, workshops, seminars and 
other programmes for teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xvii) to make special arrangements in respect  of the residence discipline and teaching of women 
students as the University may consider desirable;  
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors , Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the 
University;  
(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department, as the case may 
be, in accordance with the Statutes;  
(xx) to determine standards of admission to the University which may inclu de examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xxi) to fix quota for students belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes for 
admission purposes;  
(xxii) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xxiii) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting their he alth and general welfare;  
(xxiv) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxv) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxvi) to make arrangem ents for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees;  
(xxvii ) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, mange and dispose of any 
property, movable or immovable includ ing trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the 
University;  
(xxviii ) to borrow, with the prior approval of the Central Government, on the security of the 
property of the University, money for t he purposes of the University;  6 
 (xxix) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects.  
6. Jurisdiction .—The jurisdiction of  the University shall extend to the whole of the State of Uttar 
Pradesh.  
7. University open to  all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to all persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race, class, place of domicile and it shall not be lawful for the 
University to adopt or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order 
to entitle him to be appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or be 
admitted as a st udent in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
 Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or promotion of educational int erests of women, physically handicapped 
or of persons belonging to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes 
and the Scheduled Tribes.  
8. Residence of students .—Every student of the University (other than a student who pursues a 
course of study by distance education system) shall normally reside in a Hall or hostel or under such 
conditions as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
9. The Visi tor.—(1) The President of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including Colleges and Institutions managed by it, and to submit a report thereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the Visitor may, after o btaining the views of the Board of Manag ement 
thereon through the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary 
in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply wi th 
such directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment, and of any College or Institution 
maintained by the Universi ty and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by 
the University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with 
the administration or finances of the University, Colleges or Institution s. 
(4) The Visitor shall, in e very matter referred to in sub -section ( 2), give notice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made to the University and the University shall have the rig ht to 
make such representations to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to be 
made such inspection or  inquiry as is referre d to in sub -section ( 3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be heard at such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or any College or 
Institution main tained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together with suc h views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor 
may be pleased to offer, and on receipt of address  made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall 
communicate to the Board of Management the views of the Visitor with such adv ice as the Visitor may 
offer upon the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Board of Management shall communicate, through the Vice -Chancellor, to the Visitor such 
action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(9) Where, the Board of Management does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the 
satisfaction of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after  considering any explanation furnished or representation 
made by the Board of Management, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Board of 
Management shall comply with such directions.  7 
 (10) Witho ut prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he s hall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powe rs as may be prescribed by the Statues.  
10. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the Univ ersity:— 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellors;  
(4) the Deans of Schools;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer; and  
(7) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocation of the University held for confe rring 
degrees, and may be delegated such powers as may be necessary.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor  in such 
manner as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic head of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter,  
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the action taken by h im on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the V ice-Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right t o appeal against such action to the 
Board of Management within three months from the date on which decision on such action is 
communicated to him and thereupon the Board of Management may confirm, modify or revers e the action 
taken by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Or dinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no dec ision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
13. The Pro -Vice-Chancellor s.—One or more Pro -Vice -Chancellors shall be appointed in such 
manner and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  8 
 14. Deans of Sc hools .—Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as  may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreement, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescrib ed by the Statutes.  
16. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authorit ies of the University, 
namely:— 
(1) the Board of Management;  
(2) the Academic Council;  
(3) the Planning Board;  
(4) the Boards of Studies;  
(5) the Finance Committee; and  
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the 
University.  
19. The Board s of Man agement .—(1) The Board of Management shall be the principal executive 
body of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Management, the term of office of its members and its powers 
and functions shall  be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that the Board of Management shall also have representatives of the House of the People 
and the Counc il of States, the Government of India, the University Grants Commission and the teaching 
community.  
20. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the S tatutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that representation shall be given to students also. 
21. The Planning Board .—(1) The Planning Board s hall be the principal planning b ody of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Planning Board, term of office of its members and its powers and functions 
shall  be prescribed by the Statutes:  
Provided that repres entation shall be given to non -teaching staff . 
22. The Board s of Schools .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Boards of Schools shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  9 
 24. Other  authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions  of other 
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
25. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the Uni versity, as 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the election and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, the 
filling up of vacancies of members, and all other matter s relating to those authorities and other bodies 
for which it may be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emoluments and other conditions of service;  
(e) the appointment  of teachers, academic staff working in any other University or organisation 
for a specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pens ion, insurance and 
provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees or students and the 
University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Board of Manag ement by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an Institution or a Department;  
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(n) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, me dals and prizes;  
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(p) the maintenance of the discipline among the  employees and students;  
(q) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Second Schedule.  
(2) The Board of Management may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or ma y 
amend or repeal t he Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Board of Management shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the 
status, powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Board of Management.  
(3) Every new Statutes or addition to the Stat utes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall 
require the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Board of 
Management for reconsideration.  
(4) A new Statute o r a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  10 
 (5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor, in exceptional 
circumstances, may direct the University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter 
specified by him and if the Board of Management is unable to implement such direction within sixty days 
of its receipt, the Visitor  may, after considering the reasons, if any , communicated by the  Board of 
Management for its in ability to comply with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
27. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any o f the following matters namely: — 
(a) the admission  of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, the qualifications 
for the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and di plomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, i ncluding the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and the prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointments and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the estab lishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Special Centres,  Specialised 
Laboratories and other Committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities and authorities including 
learned bodies or associations;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditio ns of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of Colleges and Institutions established by the University;  
(p) the setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordina nces shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Board of Managem ent in the manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
28. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of  their own business and that of the Committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Board of Management, which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its o bjects.  11 
 (2) The annual report so prepared shall be submitted to the Visitor on or before such date as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(3) A copy of the annua l report as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
30. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Board of Management and s hall, once at least every year and at 
intervals of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or 
by such persons as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Visitor. 
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of t he 
Board of Management and the observations of the Board of Management, if any, shall be submitted to the 
Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Vis itor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid  before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
31. Conditions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Board of Management, one member nominated by the employee concerne d and an umpire appointed 
by the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal in such matters shall be final.  
(4) Every request made by the employee unde r sub -section ( 2), shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the A rbitration Act, 1940 (2 of 1940 ). 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disc iplinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committe e, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examinations of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Board of Management an d the Board of Management may confirm , modify or re verse the 
decision of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitra tion and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 31 shall, as f ar as may be, apply to a  reference made under this sub -section.  
33. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a College or Institution 
maintained by the University shall, notwiths tanding anything contained in this Act, have a right to appeal 
within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Board of Management against the decision 
of any officer or authority of the University or of the Principal of any College or Instit ution, as the case 
may be, and thereupon the Board of Management may confirm, modify or reverse the decision appealed 
against.  12 
 34. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to  such conditions as may  be presc ribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provision of the Provid ent Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925 ), shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
35. Disputes as to constitution of Uni versity authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any authority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
36. Constituti on of Committees .—Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such other person, if any,  as the authority in each case may 
think fit.  
37. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or bod y who appointed, elected or co -opted the member whose place has become vacant and the 
person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacan cy shall be a member of such authority or body for 
the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
38. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalid ated by vacancies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
39. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
40. Mode  of proof of University record .—A copy of any receipt application, notice , order , 
proceeding , resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession 
of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by the 
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of suc h receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, 
resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissib le in 
evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the India n Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ), or in any 
other law for the time being in force.  
41. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary of exp edient for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
42. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything containe d in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and the said officer shall hold 
office for a term of five years;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Board of Management shall consist of not more than eleven members who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for a term of three years;  13 
 (d) the first Academic Council and the first Planning Board shall be nominated by the Visitor for 
a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the ca se may be,  by the Visitor, and the persons so appointed or 
nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or 
nominated would have held that office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
43. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette a nd to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be afte r 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session  or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall therea fter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances o r Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.   14 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 4)  
THE OBJECTS  OF THE  UNIVERSITY  
The University shall endeavour to promote advanced knowledge by providing instructional and 
research facilities in Science and key and frontier areas of Technology and other allied disciplines and to 
offer appro priate courses relevant for the development of socially and economically depressed sections of 
the people, including agricultural technology and rural crafts; to promote the study of the principles for 
which Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar worked during his lif etime, namely, national integration, social 
justice and democratic way of life, and also study of the constitutions  of the world. It would take 
appropriate measures for promoting innovations in teaching -learning processes in inter -disciplinary 
studies and research and pay special attention to the promotion of educational and economic interests and 
welfare of the people in general and of members belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in 
particular by providing adequate percentage of seats for Sch eduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes. The 
University shall, in organising its activities, have due regard to the objects specified in the First Schedule.   15 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 27)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE  UNIVERSITY  
The Chancellor  
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor of the Babasaheb Bhimrao Ambedkar 
University recommended by the Board of Management from amongst persons of eminence in the 
academic  or public life of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended, he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Board o f Management.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
The Vice -Chancellor  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three 
persons who shall be recommended by a Committee a s constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the panel,  he m ay call 
for a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1), shall consist of three persons, none of whom shall be an 
employee of the University or a member of the Board of Management, Academic Council, member of any 
authority of the University or connected with an institution associated with the University and out of the 
three persons, two shall be nominated by the Board of Management and one by the Visitor and the 
nominee of the Visitor shall be  the convenor of the Committee.  
(3) The Vice -Chanc ellor shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and he shall not be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall continue in office 
until his successor is appoin ted and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct an y Vice -Chancellor after his term has expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him.  
(5) The emoluments and other con ditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as follows: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than the house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished residence througho ut his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the Vice -Chancellor in respect of the maintenance  of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as may be 
fixed by the Board of Management with the a pproval of  the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided that where an employee of the University or a College or an Institution maintained by it, 
or of any other University or any Institution maintained by or affiliated to such other University, is 
appointed as  the Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any provident fund 
of which he is a member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that 
provident fund at the same rate at which the person had been contribut ing immediately before his 
appoi ntment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessa ry contribution to such scheme.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitl ed to travelling allowance at such rates as may be fi xed by 
the Board of Management.   16 
 (iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in  two half -yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the 1st day of January and 1st day of July eve ry year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the  
Vice -Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the le ave shall be credited proportionately at the 
rate of two and -a-half days for each completed month of  service.  
(v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause (iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall also be entitled 
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty da ys for each completed year of service. This half pay leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate. When commuted leave 
is availed, twice the amount of half pay leave shall be debi ted against half pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwise or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any ot her cause, one of the Pro -Vice -Chancellors shall 
perform the  duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if no Pro -Vice -Chancellor is available, the senior -most Professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the existing  
Vice -Chancellor attends to the duties of his office, as the case may be . 
Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor  
3. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio  Chairman of the Board of Management, the Academic 
Council, the Planning Board and the Finance Committee and shall, in the absence of the Chancellor, 
preside at the c onvocations held for conferring degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a me mber of such 
authorit y or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the powers neces sary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercis e control over the affairs of the University and shall give effect 
to the decisions of all the aut horities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person  or persons as he may deem fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meeting of the 
Board of Management, the Academic Council, the Planning B oard and the Finance Committe e. 
Pro-Vice-Chancellor  
4. (1) Every Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Board of Management on the 
recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by the Board of 
Management, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person recommended 
by the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend another per son to the Board of 
Management:  
Provided further that the Board of Management may, on the re commendation of the  
Vice -Chancellor, appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to  his 
own duties as a Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the Board of 
Management but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of 
the Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall  be eligible for 
reappointment:  17 
 Provided further that, in any case, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining the age of sixty -five 
years: 
Provided also that the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, whil e discharging the duties of the Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statute 2, continue i n office notwithstanding the expiration of his term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until a new Vice -Chancellor or the existing Vice -Chancellor, as t he case may be, 
assumes office:  
Provided also that when the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant and there is no  
Pro-Vice -Chancellor to perform the functions of the Vice -Chancellor, the Board of Man agement may 
appoint a Pro -Vice -Chancellor and the Pro -Vice -Chancellor so appointed shall cease to hold office as 
such as soon as a Vice -Chancellor is appo inted and en ters upon his office.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such 
as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) A Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matt ers as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated  to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Registrar  
5. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Board of Management on the recommendation of a 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the 
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may 
be prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on at taining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, continue in 
office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period of one 
year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the of fice of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence or 
any other cause unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by 
such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the pur pose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, 
excluding teachers and academic staff, as may be specified in the order of the Board of Management and 
to suspend them pending inquiry, to administer wa rnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure o r the withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d to b e taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in s ub-clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Regis trar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry, make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along with 
his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Board of Management against an order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Board of Management, the Academic Council 
and the Planning Board, but shall not be deemed to be a memb er of any of these authorities.  
  18 
 (7) It shall  be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the  custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University 
as the Board of Manageme nt shall commit to his charges;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Board of Management, the Academic Council, 
the Planning Board an d of any , Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Board of Management, the Academic Council, 
the Planning Board and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspo ndence of the Board of Management, the Academic C ouncil, 
and the Planning Board;  
(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in accordance with the 
manne r prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor copies of the ag enda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued an d the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign  
powers -of-attorney and verify pleadings or de pute his repr esentative for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by the Board of Management or the  
Vice -Chancellor.  
The Finance Officer  
6. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Board of Management on the recommendations 
of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time sala ried officer of the 
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as 
may b e prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that a Finance Officer shall reti re on at taining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable  to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not be 
deemed to  be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general  supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as re gards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Board of 
Management or as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances . 
(7) Subject to the control of the Board of Manageme nt, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including  trust and  endowed 
property;  19 
 (b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Board of Management for recurring and non -recurring 
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for whic h 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the University and for 
their presentat ion to the Board of Management;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances a nd on the state of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories, Colleges and Institut ions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action  against persons at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by the 
Unive rsity any  information or returns that he may consider necessary for  the performance of his 
duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Boa rd of Management for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient disch arge for 
payment of such money.  
Deans of Schools of Studies  
7. (1) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor from among the 
Professors in the School for a period of three years and he shall  be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shall cease to hold office as such : 
Provided further that if at any time there is no Professor in a School, the Vice -Chancellor, or  a Dean 
authorised by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, shall exercise the po wers of the Dean of the School.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform  duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancell or may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall have such other functions 
as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Board of Studies or 
Committees of the School, as the case may  be, but shall not have the right to vote thereat  unless he is a 
member thereof.  
Heads of Departments  
8. (1) In the case of Department  which have more than one Professor, the Head of the Department 
shall be appointed by the Board of Management on the recom mendation of the Vice -Chance llor from 
among the Professors.  
(2) In the case of Departments where there is only one Professor, the Board of Management shall 
have the option to appoint, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, either the Professor or a 
Reader  as the Head of the Department:  
Provided that it shall be open to a Professor or Reader to decline the offer of appointment  as the Head 
of the Department.  
(3) A person appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office as such for a period of three 
years and shall be eligible for re appointment.  20 
 (4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any ti me during his tenure of office.  
(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Proctors  
9. (1) Every Proctor shall be appointed by the Board of Management on the recommendation of the 
Vice -Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned  to him by 
the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) Every Proctor shall hold office for a term  of two years and shall  be eligible for reappointment.  
Librarian  
10. (1) The Librarian shall be appoint ed by the Board of Management on the recommendations of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be , a whole -time officer of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Board of Management.  
Quorum for meetings of the Board of Management.  
11. (1) The Board of Management shall consist of t he following members, namely:— 
(i) Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) Pro -Vice -Chancellors;  
(iii) Dean of Schools of studies to be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor by r otation according to 
seniority;  
(iv) one Head of the Department of the University, who is not a Dean, to be nominated by the 
Vice -Chancellor by r otation according to seniority;  
(v) one Professor, who is not a Dean or Head, to be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor by r otation 
according to seniority;  
(vi) one Reader, who is not a Head, to be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor by r otation according 
to seniority;  
(vii) one Lecturer to be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor by r otation according to seniority;  
(viii) three representatives of the House of the People and the Council of States, two to be 
nominated by the Speaker of the House  of the People and one by the Chairman of the Council of 
States fr om amongst the Members thereof;  
(ix) a representative of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Education) 
Government of India, to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(x) a representative of the University Grants Commission to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(xi) four persons of distinction in academic and/or public life to be nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) All members of the Board of Management, other than ex officio  members , shall hold office for a 
period of three years fro m the date of their nomination.  
(3) Seven members of the Board of Management shall form quorum for the meeting of the Board.  
Powers and funct ions of the Board of Management  
12. ( 1) The Board of Management  shall have the power of management and administration of the 
revenue and property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University not 
otherwise provided  for. 
  21 
 (2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Board of Management 
shall, in addition to all other powers vested in it, have  the following powers , namely:— 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such posts 
and to define the duties and co nditions of service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other 
academic staff and Principals of Colleges and Institution s maintained by the University:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Board of Management in respect of the number, 
qualificati ons and the emoluments of teachers and academic staff otherwise than after consideration 
of the recommend ations of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may be necessary, 
and Principals of Co lleges and Institutions maintained by the University on the recommendation of 
the Selection Committee consituted for the purpose and to fill up temporary vacancies thereto ; 
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make a ppointments 
thereto in the manne r prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of s uch 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with t he Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other 
administrative affairs  of the University, and for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a year on the 
recommenda tions of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to invest any money b elonging to the University, including any unapplied income, in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities , from time to time, as it may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of varying suc h investment from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable proper ty on behalf of the 
University;  
(x) to provide building s, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carryin g 
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter  into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on be half of the University;  
(xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and, if thought fit , to redress any grievances of the employees 
and students of the University who may,  for any reason, feel aggrieved;   
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after c onsulting the Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence an d discipline of 
women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, the Deans, 
the Registrar or the Financ e Officer or such other employee or authority of the University or to a 
committee appo inted by it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Profess ors, Emeritus Professors; Consultants; 
and Scholars and determine the terms and condi tions of such appointments; and  
(xix) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed 
on it by the Act, or the Statutes.  
  22 
 Acade mic Council  
13. (1) The Academic Council shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) Dean of Schools of studies;  
(iv) Heads of the teaching departments;  
(v) All Professors;  
(vi) four Readers to be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor by r otation according to seniority;  
(vii) four Lecturers to be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor by rotation according to seniority;  
(viii) Librarian;  
(ix) four persons not in the service of the University to be nominated by  the Vice -Chancellor on 
the recommendations of the Academic Counc il for their special knowledge;  
(x) two representatives of students , to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor on academic merit, 
one from amongst the research scholars and the other from the po st-graduate students from the 
various schools of studies/Departments of th e University , on rotation basis.  
(2) All members of the Academic Council, other than the ex officio  and the student members, shall 
hold office for a term of three years from the date  of their nomination/appointment:  
Provided that the tenure of student members  shall be one academic year.  
(3) Half of the total members of the Academic Council shall form quorum for a meeting of the  
Academic Council.  
(4) The student members shall not be al lowed to participate in discussions in respect of matters 
relating to examinations, selection committees, appointments and conditions of service of the teaching 
staff and actual process of evaluating academic per formance and merit of students.  
Quorum for m eetings of the Academic Council  
14. Nine Members of the Academic Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Academic 
Council.   
Powers of the Academic Council  
15. Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all 
other powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the University and to g ive directions 
regarding methods of instructions, co -operative teaching among Colleges and Institutions, evaluation of 
research or impr ovements in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -School co -ordination, to establish or appoint committees or boards, for taking 
up projects on an i nter-School basis;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference by a 
School or the Board of Management and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame suc h regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding the 
academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences, admissions, award of fellowships and 
studentships, fees, concessions,  corporate life and attendance.  
  23 
 The Planning Board  
16. ( 1) The Planning Board shall be the principal planning body of the University  and shall be 
responsible for — 
(a) reviewing the educational progra mmes offered by the University;  
(b) organising the structure of education in the University so as to provide opportunities to 
students to offer different combinations of subjects appropriate for the development of personality 
and ski lls for useful work in society;  
(c) creating an atmosphere and environment conductive t o value -oriented education; and 
(d) developing new teaching -learning processes which will combine the lectures, tutor ials, 
seminars, demonstrations, self-studies and  collective practical projects.  
(2) The Planning Board shall have the power to advise on the development of the Univers ity and 
review th e progress implementation of programmes so as to ascertain whether they are on the lines 
recommended by it and shall also have the power to advise the Board of Management and the Academic 
Council on any matter in connection therewith.  
(3) The Academic Council and the Board of Management shall be bound to consider the 
recommendations of the Planning Board and shall implement such of the recomme ndations as are 
accepted by it.  
(4) Such of those recommendations of the Planning Board as have not  been accepted by the Board of 
Management or the Academi c Council under c lause ( 3) shall be submitted by the Vice -Chancellor along 
with the recommendations of the Board of Management or the Academic Council, to the Visitor for 
advise and the advise of the Visitor shall be implemented by the Board of Management or the Academ ic 
Council, as the case may be.  
(5) The Planning Board may constitute such committee s as may be necessary for planning and 
monitoring th e programmes of the University.  
Schools of Studies and Departments  
17. (1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as may be specified by the Ordinances.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall be 
nominated by the Board of Management and shall hold offi ce for a period of three years.  
(3) The powers and functions of a School Board shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances . 
(5) (a) Each School shall consist of such Departments as may be as signed to it by the Ordinances.  
(b) No Department shall be established or ab olished except by the Statutes:  
Provided that the Board of Management may, on the recommendation of the Academic  Council, 
establish Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such teachers of the University as the Board of 
Management may consider necessary.  
(c) Each Department shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the De partment;  
(ii) Per sons conduct ing research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordance with the provisions of 
the Ordinances.  24 
 Board o f Studies  
18. ( 1) Each Department shall have a Board of Post -graduate Studies and a B oard of Under -graduate 
Studies.  
(2) The constitution of a Board of Post -graduate Studies and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by t he Ordinances.  
(3) The functions of a Board of Post -graduate Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for 
various degrees and other requirements of research degrees and to recommend to the concerned School 
Board in the manner prescribed by the Ord inances— 
(a) cour ses of studies and appointment of examiners for Post -graduate courses, but excluding 
research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the impro vement of the standard of post -graduate teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Post -graduate Studies shall, during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.  
(4) The constitution and functions of a Board of Under -graduate Stu dies and the term of its members 
shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Finance Committee  
19. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of t he following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) one or more Pro -Vice -Chancellors, as the case may be;  
(iii) three persons nominated by the Board of Management, out of whom at least one shall be a 
member of the Board of Management; and  
(iv) three pe rsons nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting o f the Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other then ex officio  members, shall hold of fice for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent if he does 
not agree w ith any dec ision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and to 
scruti nise proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the 
Budget, should be examined by the Finance Committee before they are conside red by the Board of 
Management.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the F inance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Board  of Management for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, bas ed on the income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans).  
Selection Committees  
20. ( 1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations to the Board of 
Management for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance Officer, 
Librarian and Principals of Colleges and Institution s maintained by the University.  25 
 (2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the T able b elow 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the persons 
specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table:  
TABLE  
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned if he is a 
Professor.  
 (ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Board of Management, out of a panel 
of names recommended by the Academic Council for 
their special knowledge of, or interest in, the subject 
with which the Professor will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department concerned.  
 (ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
 (iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Board of Management, out of a panel 
of names recommended by the Academic Council for 
their special knowledge of, or interest in, the subject 
with which the Reader or a Lecturer will be concerned.  
Registrar, Finance Officer  (i) Two members of the Board of Management nominated 
by it.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University 
nominated by the Board of Management.  
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University, who 
have special knowledge of the subject  of the Library 
Science /Library Administration to be nominated by the 
Board of Management.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Board of Management.  
Principal of College or Institution 
maintained by the University   Three persons not in the service of the University of 
whom two shall be nominated by the Board of 
Management and one by the Academic Council for their 
special knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in which 
instruction is being provided by the College or 
Institution.  
NOTE : 1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
 2. The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned with the speciality for which 
the selection is being made and that the Vice -Chancellor shall consult the Head of the 
Department and the Dean of School before nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in hi s absence, one of the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall  preside at the 
meetings of a Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, 
and subjec t to the convenience of Visitor’ s nominee and the persons nominated by the Board of 
Management under clause ( 2): 26 
 Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committ ee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor’ s nominee and the persons nominated by the Board of 
Management is four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor’ s nominee and the persons nominated by the Board of 
Management is three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor or in hi s abse nce 
by the Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations shall be laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Board of Management is unable to accept the recommendations made by a Selection 
Commi ttee, it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made i n the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for a duration longer than one academic session, it shall be filled 
on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the procedure indi cated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of work it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointme nt may be made on a purely temporary basis by a local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a p eriod not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case sudden casual vacancies of teaching posts caused by death or any 
other reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Re gistrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall,  if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary 
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular Selection 
Committee, for a t emporary or permanent a ppointment, as the case may be.  
Special mode of appointment  
21. ( 1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 20, the Board of Management may invite a 
person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept a p ost of Professor or Reader 
or any other academic post in the University, as the case may be, on such terms and conditions as it deems 
fit, and on the person agreeing to  do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Board of Management may appoint a teacher or any  other academic staff working in any 
other University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down 
in the Ordinances.  
Appointment for fixed tenure  
22. The Board of Management may appoint a person selected in accordance with the procedure laid 
down in Statute 20 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.  
  27 
 Recognised teachers  
23. (1) The qualifications of recognised teachers sha ll be such as may be prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall be made in such manner as may be laid down 
in the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognised as a teacher except on the recommendation of a S election 
Committee constituted for the purpose in the mann er laid down in the Ordinances.  
(4) The period of recognition of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, be a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -
thirds of the members present and voting, withd raw recognition from a teacher:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, w ithin such time as may be specified in the notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in 
support of them have been considered by the Academic C ouncil.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by an or der of withdrawal under clause ( 5) may, within three months from 
the date of communication to him of such order, appeal to the Board of Management which may pass 
such orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
Committees  
24. ( 1) Any authority of the University may  appoint as many standing or special Committees as it 
may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are  not members of such authority.  
(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject 
to sub sequent confirmati on by the authority appointing.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc.  
25. ( 1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any 
agreement to the contrary, be gove rned by the terms and conditions of service and code of conduct  as are 
specified in the S tatutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a written 
contract, the form of  which shall b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited with the Registrar.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees  
26. All the employees of the University oth er than the teachers and other academic staff of the 
University, shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions 
of service and code of conduct as are specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulati ons.  
Seniority list  
27. ( 1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be a member of 
an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be determined 
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade, and, in accordance with such 
other principles as the Board of Management may , from time to time, prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain, in respect of each class of perso ns to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance wit h 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person, submit the matter to the Board of Management whose decision thereon 
shall be final.  28 
 Removal of employees of the University  
28. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the academic staff 
or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the case of the teacher or member of the 
academic staff, and the authority competent to appoint  (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) 
in the case of other employee, may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of the academic staff 
or other employee, as the case may be , under suspension and shall forthwith report to the Board  of 
Management the circumstanc es in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Board of Management may, if it is of the opinion that the circumstances of the case 
do not warrant the suspension of the teacher or the member of the aca demic staff, revoke suc h order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees , the Board of Management in respect of teachers and 
other academic staff, and the appointing author ity in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff, or as the case may be, other emp loyee on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Board of Management or as the case may be, the appoint ing authority, shall 
not be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months ’ notice or on payment of three months’ salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academ ic staff or other employee shall take effect from 
the date on which t he order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member 
of the academic staff or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee , only after giving three  months’ notice in writing to the Board 
of Management or the appointing authority, as  the case may be, or by paying three month’ s salary in 
lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving on e month’ s notice in writing to the 
Board of Management or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one months’  
salary in lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is accepted 
by the Board of Management or the appointing  authority, as the case may be.  
Honorary degrees  
29. ( 1) The Board of Management ma y, on the recommendation of the Academic Council and by a 
resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, make 
proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergenc y, the Board of Management may, on its o wn motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Board of Management may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of 
the members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor , any honorary degr ee 
conferred by the University.  
  29 
 Withdrawal of degrees, etc.  
30. The Board of Management may, by a special resolution passed  by a majority of not less than  
two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic di stinction conferred on, 
or any certificate or diploma granted to, any person by the University for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been giv en to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may b e specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may produce in support of 
them, have been conside red by the Board of Management.  
Maintenance of discip line among students of the University  
31. ( 1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the 
University shal l vest in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to a Proctor and to 
such other officers as  he may specify is this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of d iscipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled, or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a College, Institution or 
Department of t he University for a stated period, or be punished with fine for a n amount to be specified in 
the order, or be debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the University, 
College, Institution or Department or a School for one or more ye ars, or that the results of the student or 
students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be cancelled.  
(4) The Principals of Colleges and Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching 
Departments in the University shall have the authority to exercise all such disciplinary powers over the 
students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments in the University as 
may be necessary for the proper conduct of such Colleges , Institutions, Sc hools and teaching 
Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor, the Principals and other persons specified 
in clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the University. The 
Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching Departments in 
the University may also make the supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the aforesaid purposes.  
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be  required to sign a declaration to the effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and other  authorities of the 
University.  
Convocations  
32. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes shall be held in 
such manner as may b e prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Acting Chairman of meetings  
33. Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to preside over a meeting of any 
authority of the University or any Committee of suc h authority or when the President or Chairman so 
provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among themselves t o preside at such 
meeting.  
Resignation  
34. Any member, other than an ex-officio  member of the Board of Management, the Acad emic 
Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such authority may resign by letter 
addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received by the 
Registrar.  
  30 
 Disqualifications  
35. ( 1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of any of the 
authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he  is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if h e is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonmen t for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the questio n shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against suc h decision.  
Residence condition for membership and office  
36. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in 
India shall be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the University.  
Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies  
37. Notwithstanding anything contained in  the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the University 
or is a member of any authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular 
authority or body or as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such of office or m embership 
only for so long as he continues to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that 
particular appointment, as the case may be.  
Alumni Association  
38. (1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall b e prescribed by the 
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election unless he has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of the election and is a degree 
holder of the University o f at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to th e completion of one year’ s membership shall not apply in the 
case of the first election.  
Students ’ Council  
39. (1) There shall be constituted  in the University, a Student’s  Council for every  academic year, 
consisting of — 
(i) the Dean of Students’ Welfare who shall be the Cha irman of the Students’ Council;  
(ii) all students who have won prizes in the previous academ ic year in the fields of studies, fine, 
arts, sports and extension work;  
(iii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in studies, 
sports activities and all -round development of personality:  
Provided that any student o f the University shall have the right to bring up any matter concerning the 
University before the Students’ Council if so permitted by the Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discussions at any meeting when the matter  is taken up fo r consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate authorities 
of the University in regard to the p rogrammes of studies, students’ welfare and other matters of 
importance in regard to the working of the University in general and such suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  31 
 (3) The Students’ Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably  in the beginning of 
that year.  
Ordinances how made  
40. ( 1) The first Ordin ances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 28 may be amended, repealed or 
added to at any time by the Board of Management in the manner speci fied below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in section 28 other than those enumerated in 
clause ( n) of sub -section ( 1) thereof, shall be made by the Board of Management unless a draft of such 
Ordinance has been proposed by the Academi c Council.  
(3) The Board of Management shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by 
the Ac ademic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic 
Council for reconsideration, either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the B oard of 
Management may suggest.  
(4) Where the Board of Manageme nt has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by 
the Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the question afresh and in case the original 
draft is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more 
than half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the Board 
of Management which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor  whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Board  of Management shal l come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Board of Management shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks from the date of its adopttion. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four 
weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as 
soon as possible, inform the Board of Management about his objection to the proposed Ordinance. The 
Visitor may, after receiving the commen ts of the Unive rsity, either withdraw the order suspending the 
Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, a nd his decision shall be final.  
Regulations  
41. ( 1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances for t he following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances t o be 
prescribed  by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees appointed by 
them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providin g for the giving of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of meetings.  
(3) The Board of Management may direct the amendment in suc h manner as it may specify, of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
Delegation of powers  
42. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of the University 
may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective 
control and subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated 
shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating su ch powers.  
 
 
--------------------------The Kalakshetra Foundation Act, 1993--------------------------
 
 
 
1 
 THE KALA KSHETRA FOUNDATION ACT, 1993  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of  Kala kshetra as an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE ASSETS AND PROPERTIES OF KALA KSHETRA  
4. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the assets and properties of Kala kshetra.  
5. General effect of vesting.  
6. Central Government to direct vesting of assets and properties in  the Foundation.  
7. Duty of persons to deliver and to account for assets, properties, etc.  
 
CHAPTER III  
KALA KSHETRA  FOUNDATION  
8. Establishment and incorporation of Foundation.  
9. The objects of Foundation.  
10. Authorities of the Foundation.  
11. The Governing Board.  
12. Term of office of Members.  
13. Meetings of the Governing Board.  
14. Governing Board to be the supreme authority of Foundation.  
15. Academic Committee.  
16. Powers and functions of Academic Committee.  
17. Finance Committee.  
18. Powers and functions of Finance Committee.  
19. Appointment and duties of Director.  
20. Transfer of service of existing employees.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
21. Grants by Central Government to the Foundation.  
22. Fund of the Foundation.  
23. Budget.  
   
 
 
2 
 SECTIONS  
24. Accounts and audit of the Foundation.  
25. Duty to fu rnish returns,  annual reports, etc.  
 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Prior approval of the Central Governm ent for alienation of property . 
27. Power of Central Government  to give directions to the Foundation.  
28. Dissolution of the Foundation.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Indemnity.  
31. Power to make rules.  
32. Power to make regulations.  
33. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Repeal and saving.  
  THE FIRST SCH EDULE. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
 
 
 
   
 
 
3 
 THE  KALAKSHETRA  FOUNDATION  ACT,  1993  
ACT NO. 6 OF 1994  
[4th January , 1994. ] 
An Act to declare Kalakshetr a of Madras to be an institution of national importance to provide 
for the establishment and incorporation of a Foundation for its administration, to make 
provisions for further development of Kalakshe tra in accordance with the aims and objects 
for which Kalakshetra was fo unded and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Forty -fourth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Kal akshetra Foundation               
Act, 1993.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on t he 29th day of September, 1993.  
2. Declaration of Kalakshetra as an institution of national importance. —Whereas the objects of 
the institution known as Kalakshetra at Adyar, Madras in the State of Tamil Nadu, founded by the  late 
Thirumathi Rukmini Devi Ar undale, are such as to make the i nstitution one of national importance, it is 
hereby declared that the institution known as Kalakshetra  is an institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Academic Committee”  means the Acad emic Committee constituted under section 15;  
(b) “appointed day”  means the date on which the Found ation is established under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 8;  
(c) “Board of Trustees”  means the Board of Trustees managing the a ffairs of Kalakshetra under 
the „scheme writ‟  approved by the Madras High Co urt in petition No. 716 of 1985 ; 
(d) “constituent units”  means the units of Kalakshetra specified in the First Schedule;  
(e) “Director”  means th e Director appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(f) “Finance Committee”  means the Finance Com mittee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 17;  
(g) “Foundation”  means the Kalakshetra Fo undation established under sub -section ( 1) of              
section 8;  
(h) “Fund”  means the Fund of the Foundation referred to in section 22;  
(i) “Governing Board ” means the Governing Board constituted under section 11;  
(j) “Kalakshetra” means the institution known as  Kalakshetra founded by the late Thirumathi 
Rukmini Devi Arundale, situated at Adyar, Madras, and i ncludes its constituent units;  
(k) “notification”  means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(l) “Member”  means a Member  of the Governing B oard a nd in cludes the Chairperson thereof;  
(m) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(n) “regulations”  means regulations made under section 32;  
(o) “Schedule”  means a Schedule annexed to this Act;  
(p) “State Government”  means the Government of Tamil Nad u. 
   
 
 
4 
 CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE ASSETS AND PROPERTIES OF KALAKSHETRA  
4. Transfer to, and vesting in, the Central Government of the assets and properties of 
Kalakshetra .—On the commencement  of this Act , the right, title  and interest in relation to the assets and 
properties of Kalakshetra specified in the Second Schedule and vested in the Board of Trustees or any 
other body, in whatever capacity, shall Stand transferred to, and vest in, the C entral Government.  
5. General effect of vesting. —(1) The right, title and interest vested in the Central Government under 
section 4 shall be deemed to include all the assets, rights, leaseholds, powers, authorities, licences and 
privileges; all property (movable and immovable) including lands and buildings; musical instruments; 
equipments used in teaching, training and staging of performing arts; tools a nd facilities used in arts and 
crafts; costumes and decorative items; books; stationery, furniture and other equipments used in libraries 
and laboratories; works of art and artefacts; stores, automobiles and other vehicles; workshops;                   
cash balances, funds including reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests arising out of 
such assets and properties as were immediately before the commencement of this Act in the possession 
ownership, power or control of the Board of Truste es or any other body, in whatever capacity, and all 
books of account, registers, maps, plans and all other documents of whatever  nature relating thereto.  
(2) All assets and properties as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under section 4 
shall, by force of such vesting, be freed and discharged from any trust, obligation, mortgage, charge, lien 
and all other encumbrances affecting them or of any attachment, injunction, decree or order of  any court or 
other authority restricting the use of such assets or properties in any manner, or appointing any receiver in 
respect of the whole or any part of such assets and properties shall be deemed to have been withdrawn.  
(3) Any licence, permission, authority, concession, facility, privilege, affiliation or any other 
instrument of similar nature granted to the Board of Trustees or any other body, in whatever capacity, in 
relation to the assets and properties of Kalakshetra or any of its constituent units which has vested in the 
Central Government under section 4, at any time before the commencement of this Act and in force 
immediately before such commencement, shall continu e to be in force on and after such commencement in 
accordance with its tenor in relation to, and for purposes of, such assets and properties, or where the 
direction under section 6 has been issued, the Foundation shall be deemed to be substituted in such 
licence, permission, authority, concession, facility, privilege affiliation or other instrument, as if it had 
been granted to the Foundation and the Foundation shall hold it for the remainder of the period for which 
the Board of Trustees or any other body, in whatever capacity, would have held it under the terms thereof.  
(4) If, on the commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in  
relation to any assets or pro perties w hich have vested in the Central Government under section 4, 
instituted or preferred by the Board of Trustees is pending, the same shall not abate, be discontinued or 
be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of such transfer and vesting, or of anyth ing contained in 
this Act, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced, by the Central 
Government or where the right, title and interest in relation to such assets and properties are directed 
under section 6 to vest in  the Foundation, by the Foundation.  
6. Central Government to direct vesting of assets an d properties in the                              
Foundation. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 4 and 5, the Central Government shall 
direct, by notification, that the right, title and interest in relation to the assets and properties of 
Kalakshetra, which had vested in it under section 4, shall vest in  the Foundation on such date, not being a 
date earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) On and from the date of vesting of the right, title and inte rest in relation to the assets, and 
properties of Kalakshet ra in the Foundation under sub -section ( 1),—  
(a) the Foundation shall be deemed to have become the owner of the assets and properties; and  
(b) the rights and liabilities of the Central Government, in relation to such assets and properties 
shall be deemed to have become the rights and liabilities respectively of the Foundation.  
7. Duty of persons to deliver and to account for assets, properties, etc .—(1) On the vesting in the 
Central Government of the assets and properties of Kalakshetra, all  persons in charge of the management  
 
 
5 
 of the said assets and properties immediately before the date of such vesting, shall be bound to deliver to 
the Central Government or to the Foundation or to such person or body of persons as the Central 
Government or t he Foundation may specify in this behalf, all assets, properties, books of account, registers 
or other, documents in their custody relating to the assets and properties of Kalakshetra.  
(2) Every person w ho has, in his possession or control any assets, properties, books, documents or 
other papers relating to Kalakshetra which have vested in the Central Government or the Foundation under 
this Act, and which belong to, Kalakshetra or would have so belonged i f Kalakshetra had not vested in the 
Central Government or the Foundation, shall be liable to account for the said assets, properties, books, 
documents and other papers to the Central Government or the Foundation, as the case may be, and shall 
deliver them up to the Central Government or the Foundation or to such person or body of persons as the 
Central Government or the Foundation may specify in this behalf.  
(3) The Central Government shall take or cause t o be taken all necessary steps for securing possession 
of assets and properties of Kalakshetra which have vested in it under section 4.  
CHAPTER III  
KALAKSHETRA FOUNDATION  
8. Establishment and incorporation of Foundation .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf there shall be established a Foundation to be 
called t he Kalakshetra Foundation.  
(2) The Foundation shall be a bo dy corporate by the name afore said, having perpetual succession and 
a common seal, with power to ac quire, hold and dispose of property, both mov able and immovable, and to 
contract and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The office of the Foundation shall be located at Thiruvanmiyur, Madras.  
9. The object s of Foundation. —The obje cts of the Foundation shall be, — 
(i) to emphasise the essential unity of all true arts;  
(ii) to work for the recognition of the arts as vital to the individual, national and international 
growth;  
(iii) to maintain the highest traditions of art and culture in their p ristine purity and in conformity 
with traditions;  
(iv) to arrange for the training, research, study, teaching and development of  art and science, 
music, dance -drama, fine arts, and Bharat -Natyam; and  
(v) to ensure that the principles of “education without fear” and  “art without vulgarity”  are 
adhered to in the activities of the Foundation and not to permit any deviation from these high ideals.  
10. Authorities of the Foundation. —(1) The Foundation shall consist of the following, authorities, 
namely:— 
(a) the Governing Board;  
(b) the Academic Committee; and  
(c) the Finance Committee.  
(2) In the discharge of functions and exercise of powers under this Act, the authorities referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) shall be guided by the objects specified in section 9.  
11. The Governing Board. —The G overning Board shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be a person of high eminence in public life, to be appointed by the 
Central Government;  
(b) not more than twelve Members to be nominated by the Central Government from amongst 
person s who— 
(i) have rendered valuable service to Kalakshetra;   
 
 
6 
 (ii) have been connected with, or have knowledge of art, culture, folk arts and crafts;  
(iii) are eminent artistes; and  
(iv) are patrons of art and culture;  
(c) two persons, possessing one or more of the qua lifications referred to in sub -clauses ( i) to ( iv) of 
clause ( b), to be nominated by the State Government;  
(d) two officers of the Central Government, not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary, to be 
nominated by that Government, to represent the Ministry of the Central Government dealing with 
culture, ex officio ; 
(e) one officer of the State Government, not below the rank of Joint Secretary, to be nominated by 
that Government, to represent the Department of Education of that Government, ex officio ; and  
(f) the Director, ex officio . 
12. Term  of office of Members. —(1) The term of office of the Members shall be five years from the 
date of constitution of the Governing Board.  
(2) If a casual v acancy occurs in the office of a Member nominated under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of 
section 11, whether by reason of his death, resignation or i nability to discharge his func tions owing to 
illness or other incapacity, such vacancy shall be filled by making fresh nomination and the Member so 
nominated shall hold office for the remainder  of the term of office of the Member in whose place he is so 
nominated.  
(3) An outgoing, Member sha ll be eligible for re -nomination.  
(4) A Member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government 
but shall continue in office until his resignation is accepted by that Government.  
(5) The Members nominated under clauses ( b) and ( c) of section 11, shall be entitled to such 
allowances as may be prescribed.  
13. Meetings of Governing Board. —(1) The Governing Board shall meet  at least twice in a year at 
Madras at such time as may be fixed by the Chairperson of the Governing Board.  
(2) All decisions at the meeting of the Governing Board shall be taken by majority of the Membe rs 
present and voting:  
Provided that in the case of equality of votes the Chairperson of the Governing Board shall have a 
casting vote.  
(3) The Governing Board shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of its business at its 
meetings (including the quorum at its meetings) as may be specified by regulations.  
(4) No act or proceeding of the Governing Board shall  be invalid merely by reaso n of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Governing Board; or  
(b) any defect in the nomination of a person acting as a Member of the Governing Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Governing Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
14. Governing Board to be the supreme authority of Foundation. —(1) The Governing Board shall 
be the supreme authority of the Foundation and the general s uperintendence, direction and management of 
the affairs of the Foundation shall vest in the Governing Board.  
(2) The Governing Board shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be 
presc ribed.  
15. Academic Committee. —(1) The Acad emic Committee shall consist of — 
(a) the Director;  
(b) the Heads of the constituent units;   
 
 
7 
 (c) three distinguished persons in the field of art and culture including dance, music, folk arts and 
crafts, to  be  nominated by the Central Government;  and  
(d) one person to be nominat ed by the State Government, re presenting the Department of 
Education of that Government.  
(2) The tenure of office and other terms and conditions of the members of the Academic Committee 
shall be such as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) The Academic Committee shall observe su ch procedure in regard to the transaction of its business 
at its meetings (including the quorum at the meetings) as may be specified by regulations . 
16. Powers and functions of Academic Committee .—The Academic Committee shall be responsible 
for the maintenance of standards of education, training and examination conducted by the constituent units 
and shall exercise such other powers and perform such other functions as may be assigned to it, from time 
to time, by the Governing Board.  
17. Finance Committee. —(1) The Fin ance Committee shall consist of — 
(a) the Financial Adviser to the Government of India or his nominee in the Ministry of the Central 
Government dealing with culture;  
(b) an officer of the Central Government, not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary, to be 
nominated by that Government;  
(c) an officer of the State Government not below the rank of a Deputy Secretary, to be nominated 
by that Government, representing the Department of Finance o f that Government; and  
(d) the Director.  
(2) The Finance Committee shall observe such procedure in regard to the transaction of the business at 
its meetings as may be specified by regulations.  
18. Powers and functions of Finance Committee .—The Finance Committee shall — 
(i) scrutinise the annual sta tement of accounts and budget estimates of the Foundation prepared by 
the Director and make recommendations to the Governing Board;  
(ii) prescribe the l imits of the recurring and non -recurring expenditure of the Foundation for each 
financial year;  
(iii) review the financial position of the Foundation from time to time and have an internal audit 
conducted; and  
(iv) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
19. Appo intment and duties of Director. —(1) The Central Government shall, by  notification, 
appoint a Direct or who shall be the principal executive officer of the Foundation and who shall be 
responsible for the proper administration of the affairs of the Foundation and its day -to-day management 
and shall exercise such other powers an d perform such other duties as may be assigned to him by the 
Governing Board.  
(2) The Director shall prepare the annual statement of accounts and budget estimates of the 
Foundation for scrutiny by the Finance Committee.  
(3) The Director shall be a whole time employee of the Foundation and shall be entitled to such salary 
and allowances out of the Fund and shall be subject to such conditions of service in respect of leave, 
pension, provident fund and other matters, as may be prescribed.  
20. Transfer of service of existing employees. —On and from the appointed day, every officer or 
other employee, employ ed immediately before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of 
Kalakshetra shall become an officer or other employee of the Foundation and shall hold office by the same 
tenure and remuneration and on the same terms and conditions as to pension, gratuity and other matters as 
he would have held under the Board of Trustees or any other body, in whatever, capacity, if this Act had 
not been passed and shall continue to do so, unless and until his employment in the Foundation is  
 
 
8 
 terminated or until his  tenure, remuneration and other terms and conditions are duly altered by the 
Foundation:  
 Provided that the tenure, remunera tion and other terms and condi tions of service of any such officer 
or employee shall not be altered to his disadvantage without the previous approval of the Central 
Government.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
21. Grants by Central Government to the Foundation .—For the purpose of enabling the 
Foundation to discharge its functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Foundation in each financial year, such 
sums of money, on such terms and conditions as that Government may determ ine, by way of grant, loan or 
otherwise.  
22. Fund of the Foundation. —(1) The Foundation shall have its own Fund; and all sums which may, 
from time to time, be paid to it by the Central Government and all receipts of the Foundation (including 
any sum to which the State Government or any other authority or person may pay to the Foundation) shall 
be credited to the Fund and all payments by the Foundation s hall be made therefrom.  
(2) All moneys belonging to the Fund shall be deposite d in such banks or invested in such manner as 
may, subject to the approval of the Central Government, be decided by the Governing Board.  
(3) The Foundation may spend such sums as it may think fit for performing its functions under this 
Act, and such sums shall be treated as expenditure payable out of the Fund of the Found ation.  
23. Budget.—The Foundation shall prepare, in such form and at such time each year, as may be 
prescribed, the budget in respect of the financial year next ensu ring showing the estimated receipts an d 
expenditure, and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central  Government . 
24. Accounts and audit of the Foundation. —(1) The Foundation shall main tain proper accounts and 
other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance sheet in such 
form as may be approved by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Foundatio n shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Foundation to 
the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Foundation shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
conne ction with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office of the 
Foundation.  
(4) The accounts of the Foundation as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India or 
any person appointed by him in this behalf toget her with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
25. Duty to furnish returns, a nnual reports, etc .—(1) The Foundation shall furnish to the Central 
Government at such time and in such form and in such manner, as may be prescribed, or as the Central 
Government may direct, such returns  and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or 
existing programme for the promotion and development of the objects of the Foundation, as the Central 
Government may, from time to time, direct.  
(2) Without prej udice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Foundation shall, as soon as possible 
after the end of each financial year, submit to the Central Government an annual report in such form an d 
before such date as may be prescribed, giving a true and full account of its activities and programmes 
during the previous year.   
 
 
9 
 (3) A copy of  the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, a s soon as may be, after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
26. Prior approval of the Central Government for alienation of property. —The Foundation shall 
not, except with the previous approval of the Central Government, sell or otherwise dispose of any 
property vested in the Foundation.  
27. Power of Central Government to giv e directions to the Foundation. —(1) The Central 
Government may, if it is satisfied that it is necessary so to do in the public interest, issue, for reasons to be 
recorded and communicated to the Foundation, such directions as it thinks fi t. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such directions may include dire ctions 
requiring the Foundation — 
(a) to make or ame nd any regulation within such period as may be specified in the direction; and  
(b) to give priority to the work undertaken or to be undertaken by the Foundation in such manner 
as the Central Government may think fit to specify in this behalf.  
(3) Any direction issued under this section shall have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any 
law for the time being in force or in the memorandum or regulations of the Kalakshetra Society.  
28. Dissolution of the Foundation. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification and for 
reasons to be specified therein, dissolve, the Foundation from such date and for such period as may be  
specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Foundation to make representation against the proposed dissolution.  
(2) When the  Foundation is di ssolved under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) all members of the Governing Board, Academic Committee and the Finance Committee, 
notwithstanding that the terms of their office had not expired, shall, from the date of dissolution, 
vacate their offices as such members;  
(b) all powers and duties of the Governing Board, Academic Committee and the Finance 
Committee shall, during the period of dissolution, be exercised and performed by such person or 
persons as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf ; 
(c) all properties and assets vested in the Foundation shall, during the period of dissolution, vest in 
the Central Government; and  
(d) as soon as the  period of dissolution expires, the Foundation shall be recon stituted in 
accordance with the  provisions of this Act  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit , prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Foundation or Member or 
Director or any officer of the Foundation for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done 
under  this Act.  
30. Indemnity .—Every Member of the Governing Board, Academic Committee and the Finance 
Committee and the Director of the Foundation shall be indemnified by the Foundation against all losses 
and expenses incurred by them in relation to the discharge of their duties, except such as are caused by 
their wilful act or default.  
31. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the allowances to the Member s under sub -section ( 5) of section 12;   
 
 
10 
 (b) the powers which the Governing Board shall exercise and the functions whic h it shall 
discharge under sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(c) functions to be performed by the Finance Committee, under clause ( iv) of section 18;  
(d) the salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Director under               
sub-section ( 3) of section 19;  
(e) the form and the manner in which the budget is to be prepared by the Governing Board under 
section 23;  
(f) the form and the manner in which, and the t ime at which, the returns, statements and the annual 
report shall be prepared under section 25;  
(g) any other matter which has to be, or may be, prescribed.  
32. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Foundation may make  regulations, not inconsi stent this 
Act and the rules made  thereunder, for enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act:  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may provide for all or 
any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the ma nagement of the properties and funds, affairs and works of the Foundation;  
(b) the procedure in regard to transaction of business of the Governing Board and the Academic 
Committee (including quorum at th eir meetings) and the transaction of business of t he Finance 
Committee under sub -section ( 3) of section 13, sub -section ( 3) of section 15 and  sub -section ( 2) of 
section 17;  
(c) creation  or abolition of posts and the procedure for appointment of the professional, 
administrative and ministerial staff;  
(d) the tenure of office and other terms and conditions of the members of the Acade mic 
Committee under sub -section ( 2) of section 15; and  
(e) the maintenance of accounts, registers and other records of the Foundation.  
(3) No regulation ma de by the Foundation shall have effect until it has been approved by the Central 
Government and published in the Official Gazette, and the Central Government, in approving the               
regula tion, may make changes therein which appear to it to be nece ssary.  
33. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while  it is 
in session for a total period of th irty days which may be compri sed in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, be fore the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation, should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, how ever, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
34. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of t his Act, remove the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two ye ars, from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid a s soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
   
 
 
11 
 35. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Kalakshetra Foundation Or dinance, 1993 (Ord. 31 of 1 993) is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed, 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under  the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
 
   
 
 
12 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See clause ( d) of section 3 ] 
1. Kalakshetra College of Fine Arts.  
2. Craft Education and  Research Centre consisting of: — 
 (i)  a Weaving Department, and  
 (ii) a Kalamkari unit.  
3. Besant Arundale  Theosophical Senior Secondary School.  
4. Besant Theosophical High School.  
5. Besant Cultural Centre Hostel.  
 
   
 
 
13 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 4)  
PART A 
Sl. 
No. Document 
No. Date  Village  Taluk  District  Survey  
No. Paimash  
No. Extent  
 
                 0-3-8 
                 1-8-4     1. 1541  16-8-49 Thiruvan - 
miyur   Saidapet   Chinglepet  .. 1225/A  
1228 
             1-11-12       Cawnies  
              
2. 1542  16-8-49 Do. Do. Do. .. 1227/E      0-9-0 
   0-75   Cawmies  
     Cents  
3. 1545           16-8-49 Do. Do. Do. .. ..    0-3-12 
   0-6-2  
4. 768 12-5-54 Do. Do. Do. .. 1219  
1224    0-3-12 
  0-6-2  
           (In rectification of Sl. No. 3)   
5. 1544  16-8-49 Do. Do. Do. .. 
 947-C 
1226 -C 
1226 -D                     0-11-0 
                    0-6-0 
                    0-12-0   
                   1-13-0 
6. 1605  25-8-49 Do. Do. Do. .. 1228 B 
1226 A 
1226C/1                     0-6-10   
                   
              0-55    
  Cawnies  
 
Cents  
7. 1960  13-10-49 Do. Do. Do. .. 1227/D                 0-3-12      Cawnies  
8. 1984  15-10-49 Do. Do. Do. .. 1227/F                0-5-8      Cawnies  
9. 1324  26-1 1-49 Do. Do. Do. O.S. 
No.327 
R.S. 
No. 528  House and 
Ground No.                                                                                                                         
18,   
Andiappa 
Gramani   
Street,                                                  
Royapuram
-13.              1491   Sq. ft.  
10. 1324  26-11-49 Do. Do. Do. .. 1229/C                  0-10-0     Cawnies  
                  =1 acr e 14 Cents  
11. 2752  11-12-50 Do. Do. Do. .. 1219/A -3 
1224/D   0-3-12  
             55       Cawnies  
     Cents  
12. 2759  21-12-50 Do. Do. Do. .. 1219  0-3-12  
            =50          Cawnies  
     Cents  
   
 
 
14 
  
  SI. 
No. Document 
No. Date  Village  Taluk  District  Survery 
No. Paimash 
No. Extent    
13. 1865   2-9-52 Thiruvan - 
miyur  Saidapet  Chinglepet  ..   1228  0-3-8  
1-8-4 
          1-11-12 
=1 acre  98 cents   
 14. 621 27-3-59 Do. Do. Do. .. 973-B 
   972                                                                                                                                                                  
961-C/1 
962-L 
964     0-7-0 
   5-7-0 
   0-3-4 
   0-9-10 
    2-5-2 
                   9-0-0  Cawnies  
            =12 acres  
 15. 769 12-5-54 Do. Do. Do. .. 1219  
 1224               
    50   
Cents  
16. 22068 24-8-56 Do. Do. Do. .. 979-C            1-1 1-14    Cawnies  
17. 2151 3-9-56 Do. Do. Do. .. 974/A                   2-0-0   Cawnies  
=2 acres 66 cents  
 
18. 863 April,  
1960  Do. Do. Do. 158/1  
 
 
 
 
 
 
170/1  
 
170/3  882-B 
882-D 
886-D 
957-A 
958-A 
963-A 
          964 
886-C 
     964Part 
     964Part  
975C Part  
975J 
973A 
973A 1 
973A  2 
975C Part  
975G 
975H 
975-I 
975M 
975G 
975H 2 
975K    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
21 acres 6 cents  
  
 
 
15 
  
PART  B 
 
Sl. 
No. Document  
No. Date  Village  Taluk  District  Survey  
No. Paimash  
No. Extent   
1. 448 1881  Thiruvan - 
miyur  Saidapet  Chinglepet  .. 977,1212,1213,1214, 
1215,1216,1217, 1218, 
1219 and 1221  15-7-4    Cawnies  
2. 1224  1908  Do. Do. Do. .. 968C 2-0-8   Cawnie s 
3. 2382  1913  Do. Do. Do. .. 967, 968 C 2-0-8   Cawnies  
4. 2559  1913  Do. Do. Do. .. 967, 968  2-0-8   Cawnies  
5. 4544  1919  Do. Do. Do. .. 532D, 533, 534   3-7-8   Cawnies  
6. 2642  1920  Do. Do. Do. .. 967, 968, 968 C   4-1-0   Cawnies  
7. 1325  1927           Do Do Do  .. 533, 534, 532  3-7-8   Cawnies  
8. 1966  1940  Do. Do. Do. .. 976A, 971 B 2-2-0   Cawnies  
9. 2056  1941  Do. Do. Do. .. 984 0-4-6   Cawnies  
10. 2194  1941  Do. Do. Do. .. 984 0-4-6   Cawnies  
11. 532 1943  Do. Do. Do. .. 976A, 971 B 2-2-0   Cawnies  SI. 
No. Document  
No. Date  Village  Taluk  District  Surve y No. Paimash No.  Extent  
19. 291 6-2-63 Thiruvan
-miyur  Saidat e Chinglepet 166/2  957-B 
962 
963-B 
966 
968-C 22 acres  
approximately  
20. 754 22-3-63 Do. Do. Do. 161/2  857 
882-C (Part)  
877-A 
940 
941 
942 
955-A 
965 
961 H  27 acres 74 cents 
approximately  
21. 1481  April, 1968 Do. Do. Do. 178/3 (Part) 
178/8  1212  
1214  
1184  
1185  
1220  4 ground s 
1988 Sq. ft.  
 
22.  1482  April, 1968 Do. Do. Do. 178/3  
178/8  
 Do. 8 grounds  
96 Sq. ft.  
 
 All the buildings on the above lands, institutions, all assets what soever including Bank balance s and cash of 
the Kala kshetra.   
 
 
16 
 Sl. 
No. Document  
No. Year  Village  Taluk  District  Survey  
No. Paimash  
No.  Extent 
 
12. 1471  1943  Thiruvan - 
miyur  Saidapet  Chinglepet  .. 976A, 971 B 6-2-0   Cawnies  
13. 1380  1937  Do. Do. Do. .. 191 1-4-0 Cawnies  
14. 1381  1937  Do. Do. Do. .. 191 1-4-0   Cawnies  
15. 1032  1945  Do. Do. Do. .. 532, 534  3-7-8   Cawnies  
16. 1744  1929            
        (Parent document of Item 15)  
 17. 1134  1945  Do. Do. Do. .. 984,  
984 0-4-6  
0-4-6  Cawnies  
Cawnies  
18. 1224  1945  Do. Do. Do. .. 971B, 976 A 6-2-0  Cawnies  
19. 1268  1945  Do. Do. Do. .. 970B, 970 D 2-8-0  Cawnies  
20. 1598  1945  Do. Do. Do. .. 967, 968, 978 C 4-1-0  Cawnies  
21. 1941  1945  Do. Do. Do. .. 1226 A/ J 
1226 B/ J 0-5-15  Cawnies  
22. 1942  1945  Do. Do. Do. .. 1226 B/2  0-15-13  Cawnies  
23. 1988  1945  Do. Do. Do. .. 976B, 979 A 2-6-0  Cawnies  
24. 353 1947  Do. Do. Do. .. 976A/ 1 3-0-0  Cawnies  
25. 2275 1947  Do. Do. Do.   O.S. No.267  
             268 
269 
270 
           270A 
271 
278 
279  
 
   0-0-12 
    0-5-12 
   0-15-6                 
3-10-2 
0 -0-12 
2-4-0                 
1-4-0 
1-0-0 
1-0-0                       
  
 
 
1-4-0 
1-4-0 
           4-15-0     
             0-3-0 
 
             
1226, 1226A, 
1226B, 967, 
968A, 968 C, 
970B, 970 D, 
971B, 976 A, 
532D, 533 ,    
979A.  
     0-5-13  
0-5-9  
0-0-6 
1-10-4  
0-5-10 
2-0-8  
0-1-12 
2-1-10 
2-9-0 
0-2-0 
2-4-0 
 
   
 
 
17 
 Sl. 
No Document  
No. Year  Village  Taluk  District  Survey  
No. Paimash  
No. Extent   
26. 3776 1947  Thiruvan - 
miyur . Saidapet  Chinglepet  .. 1214A,1217 A, 
1218A,1218B,  
1221,1213,  
1215,1216,  
1221 . 3-9-6   
6-6-10   Cawnies  
Cawnies  
27. 3777  1947 Do. Do. Do. .. 1212, 1213, 
1215,1216, 
1214A,1217, 
1218 A,  
1219B.  6-6-10  
3-9-6  Cawnies  
Cawnies  
28.     Sowcarpet , Registration  
 District of Madras  
 
 
North Madras , Madras  
 
 
Thiruvanmiyur  Saidapet  Do. (O.S. No.695, 
742) 10168/2  
and 10170  House No.  
2/500  
Mint  Street,               
P. T. Ms.   1,397  Sq.ft.   
      Do. (O.S. No.  
2506)  R. S. 
No. 3376  House  No.117, 
Lingi  Chetty St.,       
G. T. Ms.    1,331 Sq.ft.    
29. 1606  1950  Do.  .. 1214, 1217, 
1218,1219B  2-9-0  Cawnies  
30. 909 1961  Do. Do. Do. ..      500 
    500  0-8-0             Cawnie s 
3 Grounds  1, 270 Sq.ft.  
 
All the buildings on the above lands, institutions, and all the assets whatsoever including Bank balances and cash of the 
Kalakshetra and Besant Centenary Trust/ Hostel in the City of Madras . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Manipur Municipalities Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
 THE MANIPUR MUNICIPALITIES ACT, 1994  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF MUNICIPALITIES  
3. Constitution of municipalities.  
4. Effect o f exclusion of local area from municipality.  
5. Election and maintenance of boundary marks.  
 
CHAPTER III  
NAGAR  PANCHAYAT  
6. Incorporation of Nagar Panchayat.  
7. Composition of Nagar Panchayat.  
8. Application of certain provisions relating to Council in case of Nagar Panchayat.  
9. Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson of Nagar Panchayat.  
10. Election of Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson s. 
11. Resignation by Chairperson, Vice Chairperson and Councillor.  
12. Remuneration to Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson.  
 
CHAPTER IV 
MUNICIPAL  COUNCIL  
13. Incorporation of Municipal Council.  
14. Municipal administration.  
15. Composition of Council.  
16. Constitution and composition of Wards Committees.  
17. Reservation of seats.  
18. Allocation of reserved seats and delimitation of wards.  
19. Disqualifications for  membership.  
20. Oath of office.  
21. Appointment of administrator.  
22. Duration of municipalities, etc.  
23. Every Council to have Chairperson and a Vice -Chairperson.  
24. Election of Chairperson.  
25. Election of Vice -Chairperson.  
26. Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson cease to hold offi ce as such.  
27. Filling up of vacancies and term of office of persons filling up the vacancy.  2 
 SECTIONS  
28. Resignation by Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and Councillor.  
29. Removal of Councillor s. 
30. Effect of removal of a Councillor.  
31. No-confidence motion against Chairperson or Vice -Chairperson.  
32. Grant of leave of absence to Chairperson or Vice -Chairperson.  
33. Powers and functions of the Chairperson.  
34. Function of Vice -Chairperson.  
35. Remuneration of Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson.  
36. Powers, authority and responsibilities o f municipalities.  
37. Obligatory functions of  the municipality . 
38. Special duties of municipalities.  
39. Discretionary functions of municipality.  
40. Management of public institution by municipality to vest in it.  
 
CHAPTER V  
ESTABLISHMENT  
41. Appointment of Executive Officers.  
42. Main functions of the Executive Officer.  
43. Appointment of Health Officer, Revenue Officer and Engineer.  
44. Power of Nagar Panchayat and Council to determine strength of its employees.  
45. Power of Nagar P anchayat and Council to appoint  its officers and em ployees.  
46. Disciplinary action against employees of Nagar Panchayat and Council and conditions of their 
services, etc.  
47. Gratuity and pension.  
48. Power to make rules.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
CONDUCT OF BUSINESS  
49. Meeting of a Nagar Panchayat or of a Council.  
50. Chairperson of meeting.  
51. Manner of deciding questions.  
52. Adjournment of meeting in the absence of quorum.  
53. Minutes of proceedings.  
54. Modification and cancellation of resolution.  
55. Right of Government O fficers to attend, address and take part in the meeting of the Nagar 
Panchayat  or of the Council.  
56. Appointment of Committees.  
57. Chairperson of Committee.  
58. Liability for loss, waste or misapplication of funds and property.  
59. Disqualifications of Councillors having share or interest in contract.  
60. Penalty in case Councillors, e xecutive o fficer, etc., having interest in a contract, etc., with the 
Nagar Panchayat or Council.  
61. Disqualification from voting.  
 3 
 CHAPTER VII  
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY, FINANCE AND CONTRACTS  
SECTIONS  
62. Municipal property and vesting thereof.  
63. Transfer of municipal property.  
64. Executi on of contracts.  
65. Transfer of private roads, etc., to Nagar Panchayat or Council.  
66. Acquisition of land.  
67. Formation and custody for municipal fund.  
68. Credit of moneys to the municipal fund.  
69. Powers of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council to borrow money.  
70. Application of municipal property and fund.  
71. Budget.  
72. Accounts and audit.  
73. Finance Commission for municipalities.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MUNICIPAL TAXATION  
74. Power to impose taxes by and the funds of the municipalities.  
75. Taxes which may be imposed.  
76. Tax on Government hold ings.  
77. Restriction regarding tax on holding.  
78. Collection of taxes are subject to bye -law, etc.  
79. Nagar Panchayat or Council to det ermine the valuation of holding . 
80. Returns required for ascertaining annual value.  
81. Penalty for default in furnishing return and for obstruction of assessor.  
82. Determination of annual value of holding s. 
83. Determination of rate of tax on holding.  
84. Preparation of assessment register.  
85. Powers to assess consolidated tax for building and land on which it stands.  
86. Reduction of valuation, revision of  valuation and assessment and revision of valuation list and 
assessment register.  
87. Notice to be given to Chairperson of transfe rs of title of persons liable of  payment of tax.  
88. Revision s of valuation list.  
89. Appointment of assessor and power of State Government to direct the appointment of assessor.  
90. Revision of assessment register.  
91. Effect of revision of assessment register.  
92. Exemptions and remission.  
93. Power of assessor.  
94. Publication of notice of assessment.  
95. Application for review.  
96. Procedure for review.  
97. Limitation of time for application for review.  
98. Assessment to be questioned only under Act.  
99. Tax not invalid for want of form.  
100. Procedure for imposing taxes, recovery of claims, etc.  4 
 CHAPTER IX  
RECOVERY OF MUNICIPAL CLAIMS  
SECTIONS  
101. Recovery from occupier of tax  due from non -resident.  
102. Recovery from owner  of occupier’s tax in certain ca ses. 
103. Recovery by owner of occupier’s tax paid by owner.  
104. Method of recovery by owner.  
105. Penalty.  
106. Municipality may compound with livery stable keepers.  
107. Rents, tolls and fees in respect of markets.  
108. Recovery of taxes as arrears of land revenue.  
109. Power to sell unclaimed holdings for money due.  
110. Writing off irrecoverable sums due to the Nagar Panchayat or to the Council.  
 
CHAPTER X  
MUNICIPAL POWER AND OFFENCES  
Powers in respect of road  
111. Power to make roads.  
112. Power to repair, etc., of private road, drains, etc.  
113. Prohibition of use of public roads by a class of animals, carts or vehicles.  
114. Penalty for encroachment on public roads, etc.  
115. Use of public road or place by vendors and other person an d pena lty thereof . 
116. Power to remove obstructions , encroachments and projections  in or on public road, etc.  
117. Procedure when person who erected obstruction cannot be found.  
118. Projections from buildings to be removed.  
119. Power of the District Magistrate and Sub -Divisional  Magistrate to remove encroachment 
summarily on requisition by the Government.  
120. Effect of order made under section 116, 117, 118 or 119.  
121. Nagar Panchayat or Council may require land holders to trim hedges, etc.  
122. Penalty for disobeying requisition under sectio n 116, 117, 118 or 119.  
123. Names of public roads and number of buildings.  
Building  
124. Erection of building without sanction.  
125. Special provision for cases where bye -laws have not been made.  
126. Powers of Nagar Panchayat or the Council to sanction or refuse.  
127. Lapse of s anction.  
128. Penalty for building without or in contravention of sanction.  
129. Power of a Nagar Panchayat or a Council in case of disobedience.  
130. Roofs and external walls not to be made of inflammable materials.  
131. Power  to attach brackets for lamps.  
132. Building unfit for  human habitation.  
133. Pending  of building in dangerous state.  
134. Nagar Panchayat or Council may require owners to pull down ruins.  
135. Penalty for disobeying requisition under sections 133 and 134.  
136. Compensation for prohibition of erection or re -erection.  5 
 Powers conn ected with drains  
SECTIONS  
137. Power to require owners to clear noxious vegetation.  
138. Power to require owners to improve bad drainage.  
139. Power to require unwholesome tanks or private premises to be clean sed or drained.  
140. Wells, tanks, etc., to be secured.  
141. Penalty fo r disobeying requisition under sections 137, 138, 139 and 140.  
142. Power of Government to prohibit cultivation, use of manure, or irrigation injurious to health.  
143. Public latrines and urinals.  
144. Power to demolish unauthorised drains leading into public.  
145. Penalty fo r allowing water of any sewer, etc., to run on any public road.  
146. Power to require owner to drain land.  
147. Penalty for disobeyi ng requisition under section 146 . 
Scavenging and cleaning  
148. Establishment for removal of sewage, offensive matter and rubbish.  
149. Sewerage scheme.  
150. Removal of sewage, offensive material, rubbish.  
151. Penalty for placing rubbish on public road.  
152. Penalty on occupier for not removing filth, etc.  
153. Penalty for throwing offensive matter on public roads, etc.  
154. Power of servants of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council.  
Water supply and drainage system  
155. Supply of drinking water.  
156. Removal of latrines, etc., near any source of water supply.  
157. Owner or occupier to take steps to prevent spread of infectious disease.  
158. Unauthorised construction or tree over drain or wat er-works.  
Burial and burning ground for disposal of corpses  
159. Powers in respect of burial and burning places.  
160. Burial of paupers and unclaimed dead bodies.  
161. Powers to cause corpses to be burnt or buried according to the religious tenets of the deceased.  
CHAPTE R XI  
OTHER POWERS AND PENALTIES  
Markets and slaughter houses  
162. Establishment of markets.  
163. Power to remove persons from municipal market.  
164. Places for slaughter of animals for sale.  
165. Inspection before and after slaughter.  
166. Licencing of butcher.  
Nuisances from certain trades, professions, etc.  
167. Regulation of offensive trades.  
168. Certain offensive and dangerous trades not to be established within the limits to be fixed by the 
municipality without licence.  
169. Cinemas, dramatic performances, circuses, etc.  6 
 SECTIONS  
170. Cancellation, revocation, etc., of licences.  
171. Publication of order of refusal, suspension of licences.  
172. Power to close market, tea -stall, etc.  
Infectious or contagious diseases  
173. Penalty for failure to give information of cholera.  
174. Disinfection of building and articles.  
175. Penalty for letting infected house.  
176. Power of entry for purpose of preventing spread of disease.  
177. Removal to hospital of patients suffering from infectious disease.  
Park, playground and open space  
178. Municipality to provide places for recreation.  
179. Func tion and powers in regard to pounds.  
CHAPTER XII  
PROCEDURE  
180. Service of notice.  
181. Reasonable time for act to be fixed.  
182. Service of notice on owner or occupier of land.  
183. Procedure when owners o r occupiers are required by Nagar Panchayat or the Council to execute 
works.  
184. Person required to execute any work may prefer objection to the municipality.  
185. Procedure if person objecting alleges that work will cost more than three thousand rupees.  
186. Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson to make order after hearing objection.  
187. Power of m unicipality on failure of persons to execute works.  
188. Power to apportion expenses among owners and occupiers.  
189. Apportionment among owners and occupiers.  
190. Occupiers may recover cost of works executed at their expenses from owners.  
191. Power to enter upon, possessio n of houses so repaired.  
192. Sale of materials of houses pulled down.  
193. Cognizance.  
194. Offences under the Act compoundable.  
195. Power and duties of police in respect of offences.  
196. Appeals from order refusing licences.  
197. Appeal s from orders in other cases.  
198. Appeal not to be  dismissed without giving reasonable opportunity.  
199. Dispute as to compensation payable by municipality.  
200. Indemnity.  
201. Bar of suits in absence of notice.  
CHAPTER XIII  
CONTROL  
202. Control by Deputy Commissioner.  
203. Power to suspend action under the Act.  
204. Powers of Deputy  Commissioner in case of emergency.  
205. Power to dissolve Nagar Panchayat or Council in certain cases.  
206. Consequence of dissolution.  7 
 SECTIONS  
207. Decision of disputes between local authorities.  
CHAPTER XIV  
RULES AND BYE -LAWS  
208. Power s of State Government to make rules.  
209. Power of municipality to frame bye -laws.  
210. Additional power to frame bye -laws in hill areas.  
211. Confirmation of bye -laws.  
212. Publication of bye -laws.  
213. Model bye -laws.  
 
CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
214. Validity of acts and proceedings.  
215. Petition for challenging election.  
216. Power to make rules for election and election petition.  
217. Bar of jurisdiction of Civil Courts in election matters.  
218. Election to the municipalities.  
219. Electoral roll for a municipal area.  
220. Conditions for registration as a voter.  
221. Power to remove difficulties.  
222. Overriding effect of the provisions of the Act.  
223. Mode of proof of municipal record and fee for certified copy.  
224. Restriction on the summoning of municipal servants to produce documents.  
225. Penalty for violating the provision of this Act.  
226. Public servants.  
227. District Planning Committee.  
228. Committee for Metropolitan Planning.  
229. Delegation of powers of State Government.  
230. Repeal of Manipur Act 26 of 1976 and saving.  
231. Repeal and saving.  
 THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  8 
 THE MANIPUR MUNICIPALITIES ACT,  1994  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1994  
[8th July , 1994.]  
An Act to provide for constitution and organisation of munic ipalities in the Urban areas of 
Manipur and for matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act , may be called the M anipur Municipalities 
Act, 1994 . 
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Manipur except the Hill Areas to which the Manipur  
(Hill Areas) District Council Act, 1971 (Mani pur Act 76 of 1971 ) extends or any area which is included 
in a C antonment under the Can tonment Act, 1924 (2 of 1924 ). 
(3) It shall be deemed to have come int o force on the 24th day of May, 1994.  
2. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “Adhyaksha” means an Adhyaksha of a Zilla Parishad elected under the provisions of the 
Manipur Panch ayati Raj Act, 1994 (26 of 1994 ); 
(2) “building ” means a house, out house, stable, latrine, urinal, shed, hut, wall (other than a 
boundary wall) or any other structure, whether of masonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or other 
material but does  not include any portable shelter;  
(3) “bye-law” means a bye -law made under this Act by notification;  
(4) “Committee” means a C ommittee other than a War d Com mittee constituted under this Act;  
(5) “compound ” means land whether enclosed or not, which is the appurtenance of a building or 
the common appurtenance of several buildings;  
(6) “conservancy ” means the removal and disposal of sewage, offensive matter and rubbish;  
(7) “Corporation ” means a Municipal Corporation;  
(8) “Council ” means a Municipal Council;  
(9) “Councillor ” means a member of a Municipal Council or  Nagar Panchayat, as the case may 
be, elected or appoi nted under this Act;  
(10) “Deputy Commissioner ” means the Deputy Commissioner of a district of Manipur having 
jurisdiction over the Municipality, or any other officer at any time appointed by the Governme nt to 
perform, in any district or di stricts the functions of a Deputy Commissioner under this Act;  
(11) “Director ” means the Director of Municipal Administration, Housing and Urban 
Development of the Gov ernment of Manipur  or such other officer as may be appointed by the 
Government to exercise the functions of the Director of Municipal Administration, Housing and 
Urban Development of Manipur;  
(12) “district ” means a district in the State of Manipur;  
(13) “District Magistrate ” means the District Magistrate and includes the Additional District 
Magistrate or any such Magistrate as may be appointed in this behalf by the Government, having 
territorial jurisdiction over the Municipality;  
(14) “drain ” includes a sewer, a house -drain, a drain of any other description, a tunnel, a culvert, a 
ditch, a channel and any other d evice for carrying off sullage, sewage, offensive matter, polluted 
water, waste water, rain water or subsoil water;   9 
 (15) “Election Commission ” means the State Election Commission c onstituted under section 98 
of the Man ipur Panchayati Raj Act, 1994  (26 of 1994 ); 
(16) “Executive Officer ” means Executive Officer of a municipality appointed under this Act;  
(17) “financial year ” means the year commencing on the 1st day of April of a year and ending on 
31st day of March of the succeeding year;  
(18) “food” includes every article used for food or drink by man other than drugs or water, and 
any article which ordinarily ente rs into or used in the composition or preparation of human food and 
also includes confectionery, flavouring and colouring matter, spices a nd condiments;  
(19) “Government ” means the State Government of Manipur;  
(20) “half-year” means a half -year commencing on the 1st day of April or the 1 st day of October, 
or such other date as the State Government may, by notification , appoint;  
(21) “holding ” means land held und er one title or agreement and surro unded by one set of 
boundaries:  
Provided t hat where two or more adjoining holdings form part and parcel of the site or premises 
of a dwelling -house, manufactory, warehouse or place of trade or business, such holdings shall be 
deemed to be one holdin g for the purposes of this Act:  
Provided further that where land has been let out to occupants in separate parcels paying rent 
separately, each such parcel shall be treated as a distinct holding in spite of such parcels of lan d being  
held under one title.  
Explanation  I.—Holding s separated by a road or other means of communication shall be deemed 
to be adjoining with in the meaning of this proviso.  
Explanation II .—Any plot of land having clear boundaries and lying entirely vacant, if fit for 
building purposes or if yielding any income, shall when not appu rtenant to any agricultural purposes, 
be regarded as a  “holding ”; 
(22) “house ” means any hut, shop, warehouse, workshop, masonry or framed;  
(23) “house -gully ” or “service passage” means a passage or strip of land constructed, set apart or 
utilised, for the purpose of serving as or carrying a drain or affording access to a latrine, privy , urinal, 
cess-pool or other receptacle of filthy or polluted matter b y municipal employees or other persons 
employed in the cleansing thereof or in the removal of such matter therefrom, and includes the  
air-space above such pas sage or land;  
(24) “ hut” means any building,  which is constructed principally of wood, bamboo, mud, leaves, 
grass or th atch and includes any temporary structure of whatever size or any small building of 
whatever material made;  
(25) “infectious or c ontagious disease ” means cholera, plague, small -pox, chicken -pox, 
kala-azar, tuberc ulosis, diphtheria and typhoid or enteric fever or such other dangerous disease as the 
Government may notify in this behalf;  
(26) “inhabitant ” used with reference to a local area means any person ordinarily residing or 
carrying on business or owning or occupying immovable property therein;  
(27) “joint family ” means a family of which the members live together, have a common mess and 
are descendants from a common ancestor and shall include wives or husbands, as the case may be, of 
its members, but shall exclude married daughters and their children;  
(28) “land” includes benefits arising out of land, houses and things attached to the earth or 
permanently fastened to anything attached to the earth and also land covered by water;  
(29) “Legislative Assembly ” means the Legislative Assembly of Manipur;  
(30) “Local Authority ” includes District Council, Municipal Council, Nagar Panchayat, 
Municipal Corporati on and Panchayat;   10 
 (31) “lodging house ” means a house in which visitors or other persons are lodged on hire for a 
night or more;  
(32) “market ” or “bazar ” means any place, by whatever name called, where persons assemble for 
the sale of meat , fish, fruit, vegetables, live stock or any other article of food or merchandise, declared 
and licensed by the municipality as a market;  
(33) “municipal area ” means the territorial area of a municipality as is notified by the Governor;  
(34) “municipality ” means the Nagar Panchayat or the Municipal Council, as the case may be, 
constituted under the provisions of this Act;  
(35) “municipal market ” means  a market belonging to or main tained by the municipality;  
(36) “notification ” means notification in the Official Gazette of Manipur;  
(37) “nuisance ” includes any act, omission, place or thing which causes or is likely to cause 
injury, danger, annoyance or offence to the sense or sight, smelling or hearing or disturbance to rest 
or sleep or which is or may be, dangerous to life or injurious to health o r property;  
(38) “occupier ” includes — 
(a) any person who is paying or is liable to pa y to the owner the rent or any portion of the rent 
of the land or b uilding in respect of which such rent is paid or is payable;  
(b) an owner in occupation of or otherwise using his own land or building;  
(c) a rent free tenant of any land or building;  
(d) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; and  
(e) any person who is liable to pay to the owner of land or b uilding damages for the use and 
occupation of such land or building;  
(39) “offensive matter ” includes animal, carcases, kitchen or stable refuse, dung, dirt, putrid or 
putrefying substance and filth of any kind which is not included in sewage;  
(40) “owner ” includes — 
(a) a person who for the ti me being is receiving or is en titled to receive, the rent o f any land 
or building or of any part of any land or building whether on his own account or on account of 
himself and others or as an agent, trustee for any person or society or for any religious or 
charitable purpose, guardian or as a receiver or who woul d so receive such rent or be enti tled to 
receive it if the land, building or part thereof were let to a tenant, and  
(b) the head of a Government department in respect of properties under their respective  
control;  
(41) “Panchayat ” means an institution of self -government at the district or village level 
constituted under the Man ipur Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (26 of 1994 ); 
(42) “platform ” means any structure which is placed on or covers or projects over, any public 
road or any open drain, sewer or aqueduct;  
(43) “population ” means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which the 
relevant figures have been published;  
(44) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(45) “private road ” means any street, road, square, court alley or passage which is not a public 
road and includes a pathway made by the owner or premises on his own land to secure access to, or 
the convenient use of, such p remises;  
(46) the expression  “re-erect ” when used with reference to building, includes — 
(a) the reconstruction of a building after more than one -half of  its cubical extent has been 
taken down or burnt down or has fallen down;  11 
 (b) the conversion of one or more huts or temporary structures into a masonry or framed 
building;  
(c) the conversion into place for human habitation of any building not originally constructed 
for such habitation; and  
(d) the extension of a building;  
(47) “private slaughter house ” means a slaughter house which is not a municipal slaughter house;  
(48) “public place ” means a space, not being private property which is open to the use or 
enjoyment of the public whether such space is vested in a municipality or not;  
(49) “public road ” means any street, road, square, co urt alley, passage or pathway over which the 
public have a right of way whether a th oroughfare or not, and includes — 
(a) the roadway over any public bridge or causeway;  
(b) the footway attached to any such road, public bridge or causeway; and  
(c) the drains attached to any such road, public bridge or causeway, and the land, whether 
covered or not by any  pavement, verandah or other structure, which lies on either side of the 
roadway up to the boundaries of the adjacent property whether that property is private property or 
Government property;  
(50) “regul ation ” means a regulation made by the municipality under this Act, by notification;  
(51) “rubbish ” means  ashes, broken brick, mortar, broken glass, dust or refuse of any kind which 
is not filth;  
(52) “rule” means a rule made under this Act;  
(53) “Scheduled Castes ” means such castes, races or tribes or parts of groups within such castes, 
tribes as  are specified to be Scheduled Castes, in relation to the State of Manipur under article 341 of 
the Constitution of India;  
(54) “Scheduled Tribes ” means such tribes or tribal communities or parts of grou ps within such 
tribes or tribal communities as are specified to be Scheduled Tribes in relation to the State of Manipur 
under article 342 of the Constitution of India;  
(55) “sewage ” means night -soil and other contents of privies, latrines, urinals, cesspools and 
drains, and includes polluted water from si nk, bathrooms, stables, cattle -sheds and other like places 
and also discharges from manufactories of all kinds;  
(56) “slaughter house ” means any place ordinarily used for the slaughter of animals for the 
purpose of selling the flesh thereof for human consumption;  
(57) “urban areas ” means the areas in the S tate of Manipur which are not rural areas;  
(58) “vehicle ” includes bicycles, tricycles and automotor cars and every wheeled conveyance 
whether a carriage, cart, v an, dray which is used or capable of being used on a public road;  
(59) “ward ” means a municipal ward constituted under section 18;  
(60) “water works ” includes all tanks, streams, cisterns, springs, pumps, wells, reservoirs, 
aqueducts, sluices mains, pipes, hydrants, stand pipes and conduits and all lands, buildings, 
machinery and things used for, or intended for the purpose of, supplying water;  
(61) “Zilla Parishad ” means a Zilla Parishad of a district constituted under the Manipur 
Panchay ati Raj Act, 1994 (26 of 1994).   
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITU TION OF MUNICIPALITIES  
3. Constitution of municipalities .—(1) The Governor sha ll, by notification, constitute — 
(a) a Nagar Panchayat for a transitional area, that is to say, an area in transition from a rural area 
to an urban area;   12 
 (b) a Municipal Council for a smaller urban area; and  
(c) a Municipal Corporation for a larger urban area, in accordance with the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that a m unicipality under this section may not be constituted in such urban area or part 
thereof as the Governor may, having r egard to the size of the area and the municipal services being 
provided or proposed  to be provided by an industrial establishment in that area and such other factors as it 
may deem fit, by notification, specif y to be an industrial township.  
Explanation .—In this section,  “a transitional area ”, “a smaller urban area ” or “a larger urban area ” 
means such areas as the Governor may, having regard to the population of the area, the density of the 
population therein, the revenue generated for local administration, the percentage of employment in non - 
agricultural activities, the economic importance  or such other factors as it may deem fit, specify by 
notificati on for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Notwithstan ding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), any local area, except in Scheduled Area, 
which was declared as a small town or a municipality under the Manipur Municipalities Act, 1976  
(Manipur Act 26 of 1976) , before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been declared 
as a transitional area or a smaller urban area, as the case may b e, for the purpose of this Act.  
(3) Before is sue of notification under sub -section ( 1) a draft of the notification is to be published 
indicating local limits of the area to be included or excluded from th e municipality.  
(4) Any person who is ordinarily resident of the local area in respect of which the draft notificatio n 
has been published under sub -section ( 3) may, object to the proposal contained in su ch notification in 
writing to the De puty Commissioner within forty -five days from the date of publication of the said draft 
notification.  
(5) On rece ipt of the objection under sub -section (4), the Deputy Commissioner shall within  
forty -five days of the receipt of objection forward the same with his comments to the Government for its 
consideration.  
4. Effect of exclusion of local ar ea from municipality .—(1) When a local area is excluded from a 
municipali ty by a notification under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, and is included in the other local 
authority the Government shall frame a scheme determining what portion of the balance of the municipal 
fund and all other property vested in that municipality,  shall, on such exclusion, vest — 
(i) when such area is included within the limits of any other local authority, in such authority; and  
(ii) in any other case, in the Government and in what manner the liability of the municipality shall 
be apportioned between the municipality and such local authority or the Government, as the case may 
be, and on the publication of such a scheme in the Official  Gazette, such property and liability shall 
vest and be apportioned accordingly:  
Provided that before framing of any such scheme, the Govern ment shall consult the municipality 
and where the area is included within the limits of any local authority, such au thority also.  
(2) All money due to the municipality, immediately before the date of such exc lusion on account of 
tax, toll, fee, rate or otherwise may in respect of the areas so excluded be recovered by t he municipality as 
if such area has not been excluded.  
5. Election and maintenance of bound ary marks .—Every municipality shall cause to be erected 
and set up and maintain boundary marks defining th e limit s of the area subject to its authority as set out 
by the notification.  
CHAPTER III  
NAGAR  PANCHAYAT  
6. Incorporation of Nagar Panchayat .—A Nagar Panchayat shall be a body corporate by its name, 
having a perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and 
to contract, and shall sue and be sued in its name.  
7. Composition of Nagar Panchayat .—(1) Every Nagar Panchayat shall consist of such number of 
Councillors as may be fixed by the Government from time to time by notification.  13 
 (2) Save as otherwise provided in  sub-section ( 3), all the seats in a Nagar Panchayat shall be filled by 
persons chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies to be known as wards in the municipal 
area of Nagar Panchayat.  
(3) The Government may appoint a person having special knowledge or experience in municipal 
administration to be a Cou ncillor of the Nagar Panchayat:  
Provided that such person shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the Nagar Panchayat.  
8. Application of certain provisions relating to Council in case of Nagar Panchayat .—The 
provisions of sections 17, 19 and 20 of this Act relating to Council shall also apply in case of Nagar 
Panchayat.  
9. Chair person and Vice -Chair person of Nagar Panchayat .—For every Nagar Panchayat there 
shall be a Chairperson and a Vice -Chairperson.  
10. Election of Chai rperson and Vice -Chair person s.—(1) Save as otherwise provided in the Act, 
the Councillors at the first meeting of the Nagar Panchaya t to be called at the instance of the Deputy 
Commissioner after a General Election shall elect one of them to be the Chairperson in accordance with 
the rules made in this behalf.  
(2) An election under sub -section ( 1) shall take place — 
(a) within twenty -one days from the date of notification of the result under section 22;  
(b) in the case of vacancy in the office of the Chairperson on account of any reason other than the 
expiry of the term of office of the Chairperson, within twenty -one days from the date of the 
occurrence of the vacancy.  
(3) The State Government shall appoint a person to preside over the meeting and for the purpose of  
the business mentioned in sub -section  (1). 
(4) The Councillors shall, either at the meeting referred to in sub -section ( 1) or at any subsequen t 
meeting elect one among them selves, other than the  Chairperson elected under sub -section ( 1), to be a 
Vice -Chairperson.  
11. Resignation  by Chair person,  Vice-Chair person and Councillor .—(1) The Chairperson may 
resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Executive Officer.  
(2) The Vice -Chairperson or a Councillor may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed 
to the Chairperson, who shall forward it to the Executive Officer.  
(3) The resignation under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall take effec t from the date on which it 
is accepted by the Government.  
(4) The Executive Officer shall forthwith intimate the fact of resignation received under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) to the Nagar Panchayat and the State Government.  
(5) On r eceipt of intimation under sub -section ( 4) the State Government shall notify the fact of the 
resignation and occurrence of casual vacan cy consequent thereon.  
12. Remuneration to Chair person and Vice -Chair person .—The Chairperson or Vice -Chairperson 
or any other Councillor  of Nagar Panchayat may be granted by that Nagar Panchayat such remuneration 
or such allowance as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
MUNICIPAL COUNCIL  
13. Incorporation of Municipal Cou ncil.—A Municipal Council shall be a body corporate by its 
name, having a perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of 
property and to contract, and shall sue and be sued in its name.  
14. Municipal administration .—Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the municipal 
administration of a municipality shall vest in the Council or the Nagar Panchayat, as the case may be.  14 
 15. Composition of Council .—(1) Every Council shall consist of such number of councillors as may 
be fixed by the State Government from time to time by notification.  
(2) Save as provided in sub -section ( 3), all the seats in a municipality shall be fill ed by persons 
chosen by direct election from the territorial constituencies to be known as wards in the municipal area.  
(3) The State Government may appoint a person having spec ial knowledge or experience in 
Municipal administration to be a m ember of the Municipal Council:  
Provided that such person shall not have the right to vote in the meetings of the Council.  
16. Constitution and c omposition of Wards Committees .—(1) In respect of a municipality having 
population of three lakhs or more there shall be constituted by the State Government, by order, such 
number  of Wards Committees as may be determined by it, so however, that each Wards Committee shall 
consi st of not less  than five wards:  
Provided that in constituting Wards Committees, the State Government shall maintain geographical 
contiguity as far as possible.  
(2) Each W ards Committee shall consist of — 
(i) the members elected from the wards for which Wards Committee is constituted;  
(ii) the Executive Officer who shall be the ex officio  member; and 
(iii) such other officers of the municipality as the State Government may specify to be ex officio  
members of whom one specified officer shall be the Se cretary of the Wards Committee:  
Provided that the ex officio  members shall have the right to speak and participate in the meetings of 
the Wards Committee but shall not have the right to vote.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Wards Committee shall be elected by t he elected members thereof from 
among themselves.  
(4) The Chairperson shall cease to h old office if he ceases to be a member of the Wards Committee. 
Any casual vacancy in the office of the Chairperson sh all be filled by election of another Chairperson 
from among the elected members of the Wards Committee as soon as may be after the occurrence of the 
vacancy.  
(5) The powers and functions of the Wards Com mittee and the manner of conduct of business at its 
meetings shall be such as may be prescribed.  
17. Reservation of seats .—(1) In every municipality, out of the total strength of elected members 
determined under section 15, the State Government shall subject to such rules as may be presc ribed, by 
notification, reserve — 
(i) such number of seats to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes as may be determined 
by them, subject to the condition that the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, 
the same proportion to the total number of seats to be fille d by direct election to the Municipal 
Council, as the population of the Scheduled Castes, or as the case may be, of the Scheduled Tribes in 
that m unicipality bears to the total population of that municipality; and such seats may be allotted by 
rotation to diffe rent wards in the municipality;  
(ii) not less than one -third of the total numb er of seats reserved under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or as the case may b e, the Scheduled Tribes;  
(iii) not less than one -third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled Tribes and the Scheduled Castes) of the total number of seats to be fil led by direct election 
to every Council, for women; and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different wards in a  
municipality.  
Explanation .—In this section the expressions  “Scheduled Castes ”, “Scheduled Tribes ” shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in clauses ( 24) and ( 25) of article 366 of the Constitution of India.   15 
 (2) The office of Chairpersons of the municipalities shall be reserved for the  Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes and women in such manner as the State Government may prescribe by notification in 
this regard.  
(3) The reservation of seats under sub -section ( 1) including the res ervation of office of Chairperson 
(other than the re servation for w omen) under sub -section ( 2) shall cease t o have effect on the expiration  
of the period specified in article 334 of the Constitution of India.  
18. Allocation of reserved se ats and delimitation  of wards .—The State Government shall carr y out 
the determination of the boundaries of the wards in a municipality and the al location of seats reserved in 
favour of the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and women among the wards in the prescribed 
manner.  
19. Disqualifications for membership .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as and 
for be ing, a member of a municipality — 
(a) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purposes of 
elections to  the Manipur Legislative Assembly:  
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the grou nd that he is less than twenty -five years 
of age, if he has attained the age of twenty -one years;  
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Manipur Legislative Assembly;  
(c) if he is not registered as an elector in the electoral roll for a ward;  
(d) if he is not ordinarily reside nt within the ward from which h e is seeking election.  
Explanation .—The expression  “ordinarily resident ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in 
section 20 of the Representation of t he People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950 ). 
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a municipality has become subject to any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in sub -section ( 1) the question shall be referred for the decision of the 
Election Tribunal in such manner as may be prescribed.  
20. Oath of office .—(1) Every person who is elected or appointed as a Councillor of a municipality 
shall, before entering upon his office under this Act, make and subscribe before such authority as may be 
prescribed for the purpose, an oath or affirmation of his allegiance to th e Constitution of India in the 
prescribed form.  
(2) Any person, having been elected, or appointed as a Councillor fails to make and subscribe, within 
three months from the date of the first meeting of the municipality the oath o r affirmation laid down in 
sub-section ( 1) shall cease to hold his office and h is office sh all be deemed to have become vacant.  
21. Appointment of administrator .—The State Government shall appoint a person as an 
administrator to exercise the powers and perform the duties and functi ons of a municipality until a 
municipality is constitute d for such area under this Act:  
Provided that the period of such appointme nt shall not exceed six months:  
Provided further that an administrator appointed under the provisions of the Manipur Municipal ities 
Act, 1976 (Manipur Act 26 of 1976 ) on or before the 12th day of October, 1993 shall be deemed to have 
been validly appointed under that Act and the term of such administrator shall cease to have effect on the 
commencement of this Act.  
22. Duration of municipalities,  etc.—(1) Every municipality, unless sooner dissolved under this 
Act, shall continue for five years from the date appoint ed for its first meeting after a general election at 
which a quorum is present and no longer:  
Provided that a municipality which is functioning immediately before the commencement of this Act 
shall continue till the expiration of its duration, unless soone r dissolved by a resolution passed to that 
effect by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Manipur.  
(2) An election to constitute a municipality shall be completed — 
(a) before the expiry of  its duration specified in sub -section ( 1); 16 
 (b) before the expiration of a period of six months fr om the date of its dissolution:  
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved municipality would have  
continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to ho ld any election under this sub -section for 
constituting th e municipality for such period:  
Prov ided further that the result of election shall be notified.  
(3) A municipality constituted upon the dissolution of a municipality before the expiration of its 
duration shall continue only for t he remainder of the period for which the dissolved municipality would 
have continued under sub -section ( 1) had it not been so dissolved.  
23. Every Council to have Chairp erson and a Vice -Chairperson .—For every Council , there sha ll 
be a Chairperson and a Vice -Chairperson.  
24. Election of Chairperson .—(1) Save as othe rwise provided in this Act, the Counci llors at the first 
meeting of the Council to be called at the instance of the Deputy Commissioner after a general election 
shall elect one of them to be the Chairperson in accordance with rules made in this behalf.  
(2) Such election shall take place within twenty -one days from the date of notification of the result 
under section 22; and in the case of vacancy in the office of the Chairperson on account of any reason 
other than expiry of the term of office of the Chairperson, within twenty -one days from the date of the 
occurrence of the vacancy.  
(3) The State Government shall appoint a person to preside over the meet ing and for the purpose of  
the business mentioned in sub -section ( 1). 
25. Election of Vice -Chairperson .—The Councillors shall, either at the meeting mentioned in  
sub-section  (1) of section 24 or at subsequent meeting elect one among themselves other than the  
Chairperson elected under sub -section ( 1) of section 24 to be the Vice -Chairperson.  
26. Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson  cease to hold office as such .—When a Councillor who 
holds the off ice of Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson ceases, for any reason whatsoever to be a 
Councillor, he shall, at the same time, cease to hol d office of the Chairp erson or the Vice -Chairperson, as 
the case may be.  
27. Filling up of vacancies and term of office of p ersons filling up the vacancy .—If any 
Councillor is by reason of his death, resignation or removal or otherwise, is unable to complete his full 
term of office, the vacancy so caused shall be filled up by election or appointment, as the case may be, of 
a person under the provisions of this Act and the person so elected or appointed  shall hold office for the 
unexpired term of his predecessor:  
Provided that no election for filling up a casual vacancy shall be held if the vacancy occurs within a 
period of six months preceding the date on which the term of office of the Councillor expir es. 
28. Resignation by Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and Councillor .—(1) The Chairperson may 
resign his office by writing a letter of res ignation addressed to the Vice -Chairperson, who shall forthwith 
deliver the letter to the Executive Officer.  
(2) The Vice -Chairperson or a Councillor may resign his office by writing a letter of resignation 
addres sed to the Chairperson, who shall forthwith deliver the letter to the Executive Officer.  
(3) The resignation under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall take effect from the date on which it 
is accept ed by the Government.  
(4) The Executive Officer shall forthwith intimate the fact of resignation received under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) to the Council and the State Government.  
(5) On recei pt of the intimation under sub -section ( 4), the State Government shall notify in the 
Official Gazette the fact of the resignation and occurrence of casual vacancy consequent thereon.  
29. Removal of Councillors .—(1) The State Government may remove any elected Councillor on the 
ground of his misconduct in the discharge of his duties if the removal is recommended by a resolution of 
the municipality passed at a special meeting called for the purpose and supported by a m ajority of the  17 
 total number of Councillors of the municipality and by a  majority of not less than two -third of  
Councillors present and voting in such a meeting.  
(2) The State Gover nment may remove any Co uncillor — 
(a) if he ceases to reside within the municipality continuously for a period of twelve months ; or 
(b) if he has been declared by the State Government by notification to have violated his oath or 
affirmation of allegiance; or  
(c) if he becomes disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force f or the purposes of 
elections to the Manipur Legislative Assembly; or  
(d) if he has, within the meaning of section 59 knowingly acquired or continued to hold without 
the permission in writing of the State Government, directly or indirectly or as a partner, any share or 
interest in any contract or employment with, by or on behalf, of the municipality; or  
(e) if he is in arrears of any kind of dues to the m unicipality fo r more than six months after a b ill 
or a notice has been duly served on him:  
Provided that no Council lor shall be removed under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) unless he has 
been  given an opportunity of being h eard.  
30. Effect of removal of a Councillor .—No Councillor of a Nagar Panchayat or a Council who has 
been rem oved from his office under sub -section  (1) or under clau se (b), (c), (d) or ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 29 shall be eligible for election or re -election as a Councillor for such period as may be 
prescribed.  
31. No-confidence motion against  Chairperson or Vice -Chairperson .—(1) The State Government 
may remove by a notification in the Official Gazette, from office the Chairperson or the  
Vice -Chairperson, in pursuance of a resolution passed by a majority of the total number of the 
Councillors and supported by not les s than two -third of the Coun cillors present and voting at a meeting 
specially conv ened for the purpose under sub -section ( 2). 
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1) a meeting of the Naga r Panchayat or of the Council shall be 
held i n the following manner, namely: — 
(i) the meeting shall be convened by the Executive Officer on a requisit ion signed by not less than  
one-fifth of the total numb er of Councillors constituting the Nagar Panchayat or the Council for the 
time being;  
(ii) the notice of such a meeting specifying the time and place thereof shall be despatched by the 
Executive Officer to every Councillor ten days before the meeting;  
(iii) the Chairperson or the Vi ce-Chairperson, as the case may be, against whom the  resolution 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) is to be moved, shall not preside over the meeting;  
(iv) a copy of the notice shall be sent to the State Government.  
(3) If the office of the Chairperson becomes vacant all powers and duties of the Chairperson, may, 
until the election of a new Chairperson be exerc ised and performed by the Vice -Chairperson.  
(4) The removal of the Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson under sub -section ( 1) shall be effective 
from the date of its resolution in this regard.  
32. Grant of leave of absence to Chairperson or Vice -Chairperson .—(1) The Nagar Panchayat or 
the Council, as the case may be, may, from time to time, grant  such leave of absence to the Chairperson or 
the Vice -Chairperson as it may deem fit.  
(2) If a Chairperson or a Vice -Chairperson remains absent from office owing to illness or any other 
cause for a period  exceeding three months without the leave of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the 
case may be, he shall c ease to be Chairperson or Vice -Chairperson, as the case may be, and his office 
shall become vacant.  
(3) During the absence on leave of the Chairperson, t he Vice -Chairperson and in the li ke event in the 
case of a Vice -Chairperson such one of the Councillors as may be elected by them to act as  18 
 Vice -Chairperson, shall discharge the functions of the  Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson, as the case 
may be.  
(4) The Vice -Chairperson or the Councillor shall, during and in respect of the period in which he is 
acting as, or discharging the funct ion of Ch airperson or Vice -Chairperson, as the case may be, exercise 
the powers conferred and perform the duties impo sed on a Chairperson or a Vice -Chairperson by or under 
this Act or by any other law for the time being in force.  
33. Powers and functions of the C hairperson .—It shall be the function of the Chairperson — 
(a) to preside, unless prevented by reasonable cause, over all meetings of the Nagar Panchayat or 
the Council, as the case may be, and subject to  the provisions of the bye -laws for the time being in  
force, to regulate the conduct of business at such meetings;  
(b) to watch over the financial and executive administration of the Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council, as the case may be, and perform such executive functions as may be allotted to him by or 
under this Ac t and rules or bye -laws framed thereunder;  
(c) to exercise supervisory and executive control over acts and duties of all officers and 
employees of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, in matters respecting their 
executive functions and the accounts and records of the Nagar Panchayat or  the Council , as the case 
may be;  
(d) to direct , in case of emergency, the execution or stoppage of an y work or doing of any act 
which requires the sanction of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, and the 
immediate execution or doing of which is, in his opinion necessary for the service or safety of the 
public, and the expenses incurred in the execution of such work or doing of such act sha ll be paid 
from Municipal Fund:  
Provided that — 
(a) he shall not act under clause ( d) in contravention of any order of the Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council, as the case may be, prohibiting the execution of any particular work or the doing of any 
particular act; and  
(b) he shall report forthwith the action taken under clause ( d) and the reasons there for to the 
Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, at its next meeting.  
34. Function of Vice -Chairperson .—It shall be the fu nction of the Vice -Chairperson — 
(a) in the absence of the Chairperson and unless prevented by reasonable cause, to preside over 
the meetings of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, and he shall, when so 
presiding, exer cise the same autho rity as is vested in the Chair person under clause ( a) of section 33;  
(b) pending the election of a Chairperson, or during the absence of the Chairperson to exercise the 
powers and perfo rm the duties of the Chairperson.  
35. Remune ration of Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson. —The Chairperson,  the  
Vice -Chairperson or  any other Councillor of a Council may be granted by the Council such remuneration 
or such allowance as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the expenditure to be incurred under this s ection shall without prejudice to the 
provisions of section 71, be paid out o f the Municipal Fund.  
36. Powers , authority and resp onsibilities of municipalities .—(1) The State Government as and 
when it considers expedient may, by noti fication, entrust — 
(a) the muni cipalities with the function of — 
(i) the preparatio n of plans for economic development and social justice;  
(ii) the performance of functions and the implementation of schemes as may be entrusted to 
including those in relation to the matters listed in the Schedule;   19 
 (b) the Committees with such powers and authority  as may be necessary to enable them to carry 
out the responsibilities conferred upon them including those in relation to the matters listed in the 
Schedule.  
(2) On entr ustment of functions under sub -section ( 1), the Government shall allot to the municipality 
such fund and personnel as may be necessary to enable the municipality to discharge the functions and 
duties so entrusted.  
37. Obligatory funct ions of the municipality .—It shall be the duty of every municipality to make 
reasonable provision for the following matters within the municipality under its jurisdiction, namely: — 
(a) lighting public ro ads and places;  
(b) watering public roads and places;  
(c) cleaning public roads, places and sewers and all spaces not being private property, which are  
open to the enjoyment of the public whether such spaces are vested in the municipality or not, 
removing noxious vegetation and abating all public nuisance;  
(d) removing filth, rubbish, night -soil, odour  or any other noxious or offensive matter from 
privies, latrines, urinals, cess -pools or other common receptacles or such matter in or pertaining to a 
building or buildings;  
(e) extinguishing fires and pr otecting life and property when fire occurs;  
(f) regulating offensive or dangerous trades or practices;  
(g) removi ng obstructions and projections  in pub lic roads or places and in spaces not being 
private property, which are open to the enjoyment of the public whether such spaces are vested in the 
municipality or belong to the State Government;  
(h) securi ng or removing dangerous buildings or places and reclaiming unhealthy localities;  
(i) acquiring, maintaining, changing and regulating places for the disposal of dead bodies and of 
the carcasses of dead animals;  
(j) constructing, altering and maintaining public roads, culverts, municipal b oundary marks, 
markets, slaughter -houses, drains, sewers, drainage -works, sewerage -works, baths, washing -places, 
drinking -fountains, tanks, wells, dams and the like;  
(k) constructing public latrines, priv ies and urinals;  
(l) obtaining a supply or an additional supply of water, proper and sufficient for preventing 
dange r to the health of inhabitants f rom the insufficiency or unwholesomeness of the existing supply;  
(m) naming streets and numbering houses;  
(n) registering births and deaths;  
(o) suitable accommodation for any calves, cows or buffaloes required within the municipality for 
the supply of animal lymph;  
(p) printing such annual report s on the administration of the m unicipality as may b e necessary or 
as the State Government may by general or special orders require the municipality to print;  
(q) making arrangements for preparatio n of compost manure from night -soil and rubbish; and  
(r) establi shing and maintaining cattle po nds. 
38. Special duties of municipalities .—Subject to suc h reasonable provisions as may b e made under 
section 37 every municipality shall make reasonable provision for the fol lowing special matters, 
namely: — 
(a) providing special medical aid and accommodation for the sick in times of a dangerous disease 
and taking s uch measures as may be required to prevent the outbreak or suppress and prevent the 
recurrence of the disease; and  
(b) giving relief and establishing and maintaining relief works, in times of famine or s carcity, to 
or for destitute persons within the limits of the municipality.  20 
 39. Discretion ary functions of municipality .—A municipality may, at its discretion, provide out of 
the municipal property and fu nd, either wholly or partly, for — 
(a) laying out, whether in areas previously built upon or not, new public roads and acquiring land 
for the purpose, including land acquired for the construction of buildings for curtilages thereof, to 
about on such roads;  
(b) constructing, establishing, maint aining, or contributing to the maintenance of public parks, 
gardens, libraries, museums, reading rooms, hall s, offices, dharmashalas, rest -houses, encamping 
grounds and other public buildings and places;  
(c) constructions and maintaining, where necessary suitable sanitary houses for the habitation of 
the poor and granting loans for the construction o f such houses or for effecting necessary 
improvements co nnected therewith;  
(d) providing accommodation for any class of servants employed by the municipality or granting 
loans t o such servants for construction of houses subject to the rules made in this behal f; 
(e) planting and maintaining trees in the roadside;  
(f) securing or assisting to secure suitable places for the carrying on the offensive trades 
ment ioned in section 167;  
(g) supplying, constructing and maintaining receptacles, fitting pipes, and other appliances 
whatsoever on or for the use of private premises, for receiving and conducting the sewage  thereof into 
sewers under the control of the municipality;  
(h) the public health and infant welfare;  
(i) contribution towards any public fund raised for the relief of human suffering within or without 
the municipality;  
(j) any public reception, ceremony, entertainment, or exhibition within the municipality  by a 
resolution passed at a general  meeting and supported by one -half of the total number of Councillors;  
(k) the organisation or maintenance of shops or stall for the sale of necessities of life;  
(l) holding fairs and exhibitions;  
(m) supply of milk;  
(n) establishing labour welfare centres for its e mployees and subsidizing the activities of any 
association, union or club of such employees by grant of loan for its general advancement;  
(o) maintenance of ambulance service;  
(p) establishing and maintaining public hospitals and dispensaries and providing public medical 
service;  
(q) providing facilities for antifrabic treatment and meeting the expenses of indigent person 
undergoing antifrabic treatment within or outside the municipal limits;  
(r) housing and maintaining destitute, o rphans and cripples and maintaining maternity centre and 
child welfare clinics;  
(s) establishing rescue homes;  
(t) any other matter which is likely to promote education or the public health safety or 
convenience or the advancement of economic condition of the inhabitants of the municipality or 
which is necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
40. Manage ment of public institution  by municipality to vest in it .—The management, control and 
administration of every public institution exclusively maintained out of the municipal property and fund 
shall vest in the municipalit y by which it is so maintained.  
  21 
 CHAPTER V  
ESTABLISHMENT  
41. Appointment of Executive Officers .—(1) There shall be an Executive Officer of every Nagar 
Panchayat or Council, as the case may be, who shall also function as Secretary to the Nagar Panchayat or 
Council, as the case may be, and all other officers and employees of the Nagar Panchayat or Council , as 
the case may be, shall be subordinate to him.  
(2) A Nagar Panchayat or Council, as the case may be, shall appoint an Executive Officer with the 
concurrence of the State Government and the State Gover nment may, if any particular Nagar Panchayat 
or Council, as the case may be, does not make such appointment, appoint any person as such officer in 
respect of that Nagar Panchayat or Council, as the case may be.  
(3) A Nagar Panchayat or Council, as the case may be, may in addition to the Executive Officer, also 
appoint other officer to assist the Executive Officer with the concurrence of the State Government.  
42. Main funct ions of the Executive Officer .—The Executive Officer shall, — 
(a) subject to the general control of the Chairperson, watch over the financial and executive 
administration of the Nagar Panchayat or Council, as the case may be, and perform all the duties and 
exercise all the powers imposed or conferred upon him, by or delegated to hi m un der this Act and 
rules and bye -laws framed thereunder; and  
(b) give effect to the decision taken by the Nagar Panchayat or Council, as the case may be, and 
submit periodical reports, if the Nagar Panc hayat or Council, as the case may be, so directs, regarding 
the progress made in respect thereof.  
43. Appointment of Health Officer , Revenue Officer and Engineer .—(1) Every Nagar Panchayat 
or Council, as the case may be, shall have a Health Officer, a Revenue Officer and an Engineer for the 
efficient discharge of its functions and duties.  
(2) The Nagar Panchayat or Council, as the case may be, shall appoint a Health Officer, a Revenue 
Officer and the Engineer with the concurrence of the State Government.  
44. Power of Nagar Panchayat and Council to dete rmine strength of its employees .—(1) Except 
as provided in sections 41 and 43 and subject to the approval of the State Government, a Nagar Panchayat 
or a Council may, by a special resolution determine th e category and strength of employees required by it, 
for discharge of its functions and duties.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 71, the expenditure incurred on the establishment 
of Nagar Panchayat or a Council shall be paid out of the Municipal Fund.  
45. Power of Nagar Panchayat and Council to appoi nt its officers and employees .—Subject to 
the provisions contained in sections 41 and 43 a Nagar Panchayat or a Council shall have power to 
appoint its officers and employees:   
Provided that the Ch airperson may fill up such non -technical posts in the Grades  III and IV in such 
manner as may be laid down in bye -laws framed in this behalf.  
46. Disciplinary action against employees of Nagar Panchayat and Council and conditions of 
their ser vices, etc .—(1) An employee of a Nagar Panchayat or a Council who is aggrieved by an order of 
the Chairperson in a disciplinary proceeding against him shall have right to appeal to the Nagar Panchayat 
or the Council within thirty days from the date of service of such ord er on him.  
(2) An employee who is aggrieved by an order of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council may prefer an 
appeal to the State Government against such an order within sixty days from the  date of service  of such 
order:  
Provided that no appeal against an order other than an order for removal or dismissal shall lie to the 
State Government.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of  this Act, the disciplinary ac tion, conditions of the service and 
qualifications in respect of the employees of a Nagar Panchayat or a Council shall be the same as 
applicable to the employees of the State Government, from time to time.   22 
 47. Gratuity and pension .—The rules relating to gratuities and pensions applicable to the employees 
of the State Government shall apply to the employees of the Nagar Panchayat or, as the case may be, the 
Council and shall be paid out of the Fund of the Naga r Panchayat or, as the case may be, of the Council.  
48. Power to make rules .—The State Government may make rules regarding the appointment, 
salaries, condition of services, powers, duties and funct ions of the Executive Officer, other officers and 
employees of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council and other rele vant matters connected thereof:  
Provided that no disciplinary action shall be taken against the Executive Officer except with the 
approval of th e State Government.  
CHAPTER VI  
CONDUCT OF BUSINESS  
49. Meeting of  a Nagar Panchayat or of a Council .—(1) There shall be at least one meeting of the 
Nagar Panchayat or the Council for transaction of its business in every month to be held on such date as is 
fixed by the Nagar Panchayat or the Council at a special meeting convened for the purpose, at the 
munici pal office, if any, or other convenient place of which notice has been duly given.  
(2) If there be no business to be la id before the Nagar Panchayat or  the Council at any monthly 
meeting, the Chairperson  shall, instead of calling the meeting, give notice of the fact to each Councillor 
three days before the date which is fixed for the monthly meeting.  
(3) The Chairpers on, or in his absence the Vice -Chair person may, on a written requis ition of not not 
less than one -half of the total number of Councillors, call a special meeting.  
(4) If the Chairperson or the Vic e-Chairperson, as the case may be, fails to  call a special meeting 
within fifteen days after any such requisition has been made, the meeting may be called by the 
Councillors who made the requisition.  
50. Chairperson of meeting .—If at a meeting nei ther the Chairperson nor the Vice -Chairperson is 
present, the Councillors present shall elect one of them to preside over the meeting and such Councillor 
shall perform all the duties and exercise all the powers of the Chairperson of Nagar Panchayat or a 
Council  when presiding over a meeting:  
Provided that no candidate for election to the office of the Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson shall  
preside at such election.  
51. Manner of deciding questions .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in or under this Act, all 
questions brought before any meeting of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council or of any of its 
committees shall be decided by a majority of votes of the Councillors present and voting and in th e case 
of equality of votes, on any question the persons presiding shall  have a second or casting vote:  
Provided that at the election — 
(a) of Chairperson or Vice -Chairperson; or  
(b) of a Councillor to represent the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, under the 
provisions of any other law for the time being in force,  
in case of equality of votes, the person presiding shall not exercise hi s casting vote and the result shall be 
decided by lot.  
52. Adjournment of me eting in the absence of quorum .—(1) No business shall be transacted at a 
meeting unless a quorum of one -third of the total number of Councillors of a Nagar Panc hayat, or a 
Council be present:  
Provided that in cases where the total number of Co uncillors of a Nagar Panchayat or a Council is not 
divisible by three, the total numbe r shall be increase  by such minimum number as to make the total 
number divisible by three.  
(2) If there be no quorum present at a meeting the Chairperson or in his absence the  
Vice -Chairperson shall adjo urn the meeting to such hour of any future day as he may reasonably fix. A 
notice of such adjournment shall be fixed upon a notice board in the municipal office, and the business 
which would have been brought b efore the original meeting , has there been a quorum thereat, shall be 23 
 brought before the adjourned meeting and may be disposed of at such meeting or at any subsequent 
adjournments thereof whether there be a quorum present or not.  
(3) A notice of adjournment exhibited in the notice board of the municipal office on the day on which 
the meeting is adjourned, shall be sufficient notice of the subsequent meeting.  
53. Minutes of proceedin gs.—(1) Minutes of the proceedings of each meeting of a Nagar Panchayat 
or of a Council or any of its Committee shall be recorded in a book to be kept for the purpose separately 
for the Nagar Panchayat o r the Council and for each of its Committees and shall be signed by the persons 
who presided over the meeting.  
(2) The minutes of the meeting of a Nagar Panchayat or of a Council shall at all reasonable times and 
without charge, be open to inspection, by any member of the public.  
(3) The minutes of the proceedings of all meetings of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council shall 
forthwith be forwarded by th e Executive Officer to the Deputy Commissioner, the Director and to the 
State Government.  
54. Modification and canc ellation of resolution .—No resolution of a Nagar Panchayat or of a 
Council shall be modified or cancelled except by a resolution supported by not less than two -thirds of the 
total number of Councillors and passed at a meeting whereof notice shall be given setting forth fully the 
proposed resolution to modify or cancel at such meeting and the motion of proposition for modification or 
cancellation of such resolution.  
55. Right of Government Officers to attend, address and take part in the meeting of the Naga r 
Panchayat or of the Council .—The Deputy Commissioner, the D irector and such other officers as the 
State Government may, by general or special order specify in this behalf, shall be entitled to attend any 
meeting of a Nagar Panchayat or of a Council within their jurisdiction, address it on any matter affecting 
the wor k of their department and take part in the meetings thereof, but shall not have the right to vote.  
56. Appointment of Committees .—(1) The Nagar Panchayat or the Council at a meeting may 
appoint, from time to time, committees to be called  “Standing Committee” to assist it in the discharge of 
any specific duties devolved upon it under this Act, within the whole or any portion of the municipality 
and may delegate to any such committee all or any of its powers which may be necessary for the purpose 
of rendering such assistance, or withdraw all or any such powers, so delegated.  
(2) Each Committee shall consist of Councillors and, when necessary, of such residents with special 
qualification when the Nagar Panchayat or the Council at a meeting desires to appoint, in such a case the 
number of Councill ors shall not be less th an two -thirds of the total number o f the members of the 
Committee:  
Provided that no Councillor who has been appointe d as a member of one committee, shall be 
appointed as such in another committee at a time.  
(3) The members of such committees shall be liable to all the obligations imposed by this Act on the 
Councillors of the Nag ar Panchayat or of the Council i n respect of such powers as may be delegated to 
them.  
(4) All the proceedings of any such committee shall be subject to confirmation by the Nagar 
Panchayat or the Council at a meeting.  
(5) All questions connected with the removal or resignation of m embers of committee shall be settled 
by the Nagar Panchayat or the Council at a meeting.  
57. Chairperson of Committee .—(1) The Chairperson of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Coun cil, as 
the case may be, if he i s a member of any committee, shall be ex officio , Chairperson, thereof.  
(2) The Vice -Chairperson of the Na gar Panchay at or of the Council, as the case may be, if appointed 
a member of any committee of which the Chairperson is not a member, shall be ex officio  Chairperson 
thereof.  
(3) When neithe r the Chairperson nor th e Vice -Chairperson of N agar Panchayat or of a Council,  as 
the case may be, is a member of a committee, the Chairperson of such committee shall be nominated by 
the Chairperson of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council, as the case may be.   24 
 58. Liability for loss, waste or misappl ication of funds and property .—Every Chairperson,  
Vice -Chairperson, Councillor, officer or employees of a Nagar Panchayat or of a Council including a 
Government servant whose services are lent to the Nagar Panchayat or to the Council, shall be liable for 
the loss, waste or misapplication of any money o r other property owned by or vested in the Nagar 
Panchayat or the Council, if such  loss, waste or misapplication i s a dire ct consequence of any illegal act, 
omission, neglect or misconduct on his part; and a suit for compensation may be instituted against him in 
any Court of competent jurisdiction by the Nagar Panchayat or by the Council, as the case may be.  
59. Disqualifications of Councillors having share or interest in contract .—No Councillor of a 
Nagar Panchayat or of a Council shall have without the written permission of the State Government, 
directly or indirectly, any share or i nterest in any contract, lease, sale or purchase of land or any 
agreement for the same or any kind whatsoever to which the Nagar Panchayat or Council is a party, or 
shall hold any office of profit under it, and if any Councillor shall have such s hare or interest or shall hold 
such office he shall thereby become disqualified to cont inue in office as a Councillor:  
Provided that a Councillor shall not be so disqualified o r liable by reason — 
(a) of having a share or interest in — 
(i) a contract entered into between the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, 
and any incorporated or registere d company or any registered Co -operative Society of which such 
Councillor is a member or shareholder; or  
(ii) any a greement for the loan of money, or any security for the payment of money only; or  
(iii) any newspaper in which any advertisement relating to the affairs of the municipality is 
inserted; or  
(b) of his being professionally engaged on behalf of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, a s the 
case may be, as a legal or medical practitioner and receiving a fee for services rendered in his 
professional capacity.  
60. Penalty in case Councillors, executive officer, etc,  having interest in a  contract , etc., with t he 
Nagar Panchayat or Council .—In a Nagar Panchayat or in a Council — 
(a) subject to the proviso to section 59 any Councillor who acquires, directly or indirectly any 
share or interest in any contract or employment with, under, by or on behalf of a Nagar Panchayat or a 
Council of which he is a Councillor;  
(b) any executive officer or employee who acquires directly or indirectly any share or interest in 
any contract with, under, by or on behalf of a Nagar Panchayat or a Council except in so far as it 
relates to h is own employme nt as executive officer or an employee, shall be punishable with fine 
which may extend to five thousand rupees.  
61. Disqualification from voting .—No Councillor of a Nagar Panchayat or of a Council or no 
member of a committee shall vote or take part in the discussion of any question at a meeting of the Nagar 
Panchayat or of a Council or committee if the question is one in which he has direct or indirect pecuniary 
interest.  
CHAPTER VII  
MUNICIPAL PROPERTY, FINANCE AND CONTRACTS  
62. Municipa l property and vesting thereof .—(1) All property within the municipality, other than 
private property or property maintained by the Government or other local authority, shall vest in the 
Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, and shall, with all other property of whatever natur e 
and kind which may become vested in the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, be under 
its direction, management and control, unless the State Government otherwise d irects by notification, 
namely: — 
(a) all public roads including the soil, the pavements, stones and other materials thereof, and all 
drains, bridges, trees, erections, materials, implements and other things provided for such roads;  
(b) all public streams, channels, water courses, springs, tanks, reservoirs, cisterns, wells, 
aqueducts, conduits, tunnels , pipes, pumps and other water -works, whether made, laid or created at 25 
 the cost of  the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council or othe rwise and all bridges, buildings, engines, 
works, materials and things connected therewith or appertaining thereto and also any adjacent land, 
not being private property, ap pertaining to any public tanks:  
Provided that water -pipes and water -works connected  therewith or appertaining thereto which 
with the consent of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council are laid or set up in any street by the 
owners of any mill, factory, workshop or the like primarily for the use of their employees shall no t be 
deemed to be public water -works by reason of their use by the public;  
(c) all public sewers and drains, and all works, materials and things appertaining thereto and other 
conservancy works;  
(d) all sewage, rubbish and offensive matter collected by the Nagar Panchayat or by the Council 
from roads, latrines, sewers, cesspools and other places;  
(e) all public lamps, lamp -posts and apparatus connected there with or appertaining thereto, and 
all public gates, markets, slaughter houses and public buildings of every description which have been 
constructed or are maintained out of the municipal fund ; and  
(f) all land or other property transferred to the Nagar Panchayat or Council, as the case may be, by 
the Government or acquired by the Nagar Panchayat or Council , as the case may be, by gift, purcha se 
or otherwise for local public purposes.  
(2) The State Government may , by notification direct that any property which has vested in the Nagar 
Panchayat or  the Council, as the case may be, shall cease to be so vested, and the State Government may 
pass such orders as it may deem fit regarding the disposal and management of such property.  
(3) The State Government may resume any immovable property transferre d to the Nagar Panchayat or 
the Council, as the case may be, by itself or any other local authority for a publi c purpose on payment of 
the amount paid by the Nagar Panchayat or by the Council, as the case may be, for such transfer and the 
market value at the date of resumption of any building or works subsequently created or executed thereon 
by the Nagar Panchayat or by t he Council, as the case may be:  
Provided that compensation need not be paid for buildings or works constructed or created in 
contravention of the terms of the transfer.  
63. Transfer of municipal property .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 6 or 13, no 
Nagar Pancha yat or the Council, as the case  may be, shall transfe r any immovable property except in 
pursuance of a resolution passed at a meeting thereof by a majority of not less than t wo-third of its 
members and except when it is not requ ired for local public purposes:  
Provided that in the case of property which has b een transferred to it by the State Government the 
transfer under this section shall be subject to the previous sanction of the State Government:  
Provided further that nothing in this section shall apply to leases of immovable property for a term not 
exceed ing two years in total.  
64. Execution of contracts .—(1) The Nagar Panchayat or  the Council, as the case  may be, may enter 
into any contract necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Every contract made by or on behalf of the Nagar Pa nchayat or the Council, as the c ase may be, in 
respect of any sum exceed ing ten thousand rupees shall be sanctioned by the Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council, as the case may be, at a meeting and shall be in writing and shall be signed by at least two 
Councillors one of whom shall  be the Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson an d in absence of both the 
Execu tive Officer. Every such contract sh all be sealed with common seal o f the N agar Panchayat or the 
Council, as the case may be.  
(3) Any contrac t made in contravention of sub -sectio n (2) shall not be binding on the Nagar 
Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be.  
65. Transfer of private roads, etc.,  to Nagar Panchayat or Council .—(1) The Nagar Panchayat or 
the Council at a meeting may agree with the person in whom the properly in any road, bridge , tank, ghat, 
well, channel, or drain, vests to take over the property therein or  the control  thereof,  and after                      
such agreement may declare by notice in writing put up thereon or near thereto that such roads, bridge, 
tank, ghat, well, channel or drain has been transferred to the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case 
may be.  26 
 (2) On completion of the transfer, the property shal l vest in the Nagar Panchayat or  the Council, as 
the case may be, and shall thencefo rth be repaired and maintained out of the municipal fund.  
66. Acquisition of land .—When any land, whether within or without the limits of a municipality is 
required for the purposes of this Act, the State Government may, at the request of the Nagar Panchayat or 
the Council , proceed to acquire it under the provisions of the Land A cquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894 ), and 
on payment by the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, of the compensation awarded 
under that Act and of any other charges incurred in acquiring the land, the land shall vest in the Nagar 
Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be.  
67. Formation and custody for municipal fund .—(1) There shall be formed for each Nagar 
Panchayat and for each Council a municipal fund to be called the  “Municipal Fund ” and it shall be held 
by the Nagar Panchayat or by the Council, a s the case may be, for the pur poses of this Act and subject to 
the provisions thereof . 
(2) The Municipal Fund shall vest in the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be.  
68. Credit of mo neys to the municipal fund .—(1) There shall be credited to the municipal fund: — 
(a) all sums received by or on behalf of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council under the provisions 
of this Act or of any other law for the time being in force or under any contract;  
(b) the balance, if any, st anding at the credit of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council at the 
commencement of this Act;  
(c) all proceeds of the disposal of property by, or on behalf of, the Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council;  
(d) all rents accruing from any property of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council;  
(e) all moneys raised by a ny tax levied for the purposes of this Act;  
(f) all fees payable and levied under this Act;  
(g) all moneys received by the Nagar Panchayat or by the Council by way of compensation or for 
compounding  offences under the provisions of this Act;  
(h) all moneys received by, or on behalf of, the Nagar Panchayat or the Council from the State 
Government or private individuals by way of grants, contribution , gift or deposits; and  
(i) all interest and profit, arising from any investment of, or from any transaction in connection 
with, any money belonging to the Nagar Panchayat or the Council.  
(2) Nothing in this section or in this Act shall affect any oblig ation of a Nagar Panchayat or of  a 
Council arising from a trust legally imposed upon or accepted by the Nagar Panchayat or by the Council, 
as the case may  be. 
69. Powers of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council to borrow money .—(1) A Nagar Panchayat 
or a Council may, with the previous sanction of the State Government and subject to such conditions as 
may be prescribed as to security, the rate of interest and the repayment of principal and interest, borrow 
either from the State Gover nment or any financial institution, any sum of money  required or empowered 
to under take under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) or the rules made thereunder shall apply  to grants or loans or 
advance made to a Nagar Panchayat or to a Council by any department, office or authority of the State 
Government or by any local authority or by any other institution towards, and for the purpose of, the 
implementation, achievement a nd accomplishment of community development  schemes and a Nagar 
Panchayat or a Council may accept any such grant or loan which shall be regulated and governed by the 
terms on which, and the conditions subject to which, the same is made or advanced.  
70. Application of municipal property and fund .—(1) All proper ty vested in a Nagar Panchayat or 
in a Council under this Act, all funds received by it in accor dance with the provisions of this Act and all   27 
 sums accruing to under the provisions of any law for the time being in force shall, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, be applied for the purposes of this Act, within the limits of the municipality.  
(2) Notwithstan ding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for a Nagar Panchayat or 
a Council, as the case may be, subjec t to rules made under this Act: — 
(a) to incur expenditure beyond the municipal limits on the acquisition of land, or on the 
construction, maintenance or repair of works, for the purpose of obtaining supply of water required 
for inhabitants of the municipality or on es tablishing slaughter houses or pl aces for the disposal of 
night -soil or sewage or carcasses of animals or for drainage works, or for the purpose of providing 
mechanically propelled transport facilities for the conveyance of the public or for the purpose of  
setting up dairies or farms for the supply, distr ibution and procuring of milk -products for the benefit 
of the inhabitants of the municipality or for any other purpose calculated to promote the health, safety 
or convenience of the inhabitants of the munic ipality; or  
(b) to take a contribution towards expenditure incurred by any other local authority or out o f any 
public fund for measures affecting the health, safety or convenience of public calculated to  benefit the 
residents within the limits of the contributing municipality; or  
(c) to create scholarship tenable outside the limits of municipality; or  
(d) to utilise the municipal fire brigade and other mechanical appliance beyond the municipal 
limits; or  
(e) to make with the previou s sanction of the State Govern ment any other kind of contribution as 
may be deemed necessary by the Nagar Panchayat or the Council:  
Provided that nothing in this section or in any other provision of this Act shall be deemed to make it 
unlawful for a Nagar Panchayat or a Council, when i t has constructed works beyond the limits of the 
municipality for the supply of water or electrical ener gy or for drainage as aforesaid — 
(a) to supply or extend to or for the benefit of any person or bui lding or lands in any place 
whether such place is not within the limits of the said municipality, any quantity of water or elec trical 
energy not required for the purpose of this Act within the said municipality or the advantages 
afforded by the system of d rainage works, on such terms and conditions with regard to payment and 
to the continuance or such supply advantages as shall be settled by agreement between the Nagar 
Panchayat or the Council, as the case may  be, and such persons or the occupier or owner o f such 
buildings or land; or  
(b) to incur any ex penditure on such terms with reg ard to payment as may be settled as aforesaid 
for the construction, maintenance, repair or charge of any connection pipe or  any electric supply lines 
or other works  necessary for the purposes of such supply or for the extension of such supply or for the 
extension of such advantages.  
71. Budget .—(1) A Nagar Panchayat or a Council at a meeting specially convened for the purpose, 
two months before the close of the financial year, shall prepare in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed, a budget sh owing inter alia  the probable r eceipts and expenditure during the ensuing year and 
after such revision as may appear requisite it shall pass the budget and such budget shall be submitted to 
the Director for obtaining ap proval of the State Government:  
Provi ded that if the approval is not intimated within one month from the date of the receipt of the 
budget by the State Government or the receipt of such other information as is called for by the State 
Government, it shall be taken that the budget is approved.  
(2) The Nagar Panchayat or  the Council may, from time to time, revise any estimates of expenditure 
with the view of providing for any modification which it may deem advisable to make in the 
appropriation of the amount at its disposal and such revised budget shall be passed  in the manner 
provided in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) When the budget has been passed, the Nagar Panchayat or the Council shall not incur any 
expen diture u nder any of the heads of the budget in excess of the amount sanctioned under that head 
without making a provision for such excess by a revision of the budget in the manner specified in  
sub-section ( 2).  28 
 72. Accounts and audit .—(1) Every municipality shall maintain such accounts for every financial 
year in such forms as may be prescribed and submit such s tatement to the Deputy Commissioner, the 
Director and the State Government and such accounts shall be audited by the Director, Local Fund Audit 
and Accounts of the Government of Manipur in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The municipality shall comply with such directions as the State Government may deem fit to issue 
after going through the audit report respecting it.  
(3) The mu nicipality shall pay out of the  municipal fund such sum as may be determined by the State 
Government by way of charges for such audit.  
73. Finance  Commission for municipalities .—(1) The State Finance Commission constituted under 
section 97 of the Man ipur Panchayati Raj Act, 1994 (26 of 1994), shall also review  the financi al position 
of the  municipalities and make recomm endations to  the Governor as to — 
(a) the principles which should govern — 
(i) the distribution between the State and the municipalities of the net proceeds of the taxes, 
duties, tolls and fees leviable by the State, which may be divided between them under this Act 
and the allocation between the municipalities at all levels of their  respective shares of such 
proceeds;  
(ii) the determinati on of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to , or 
appropriated by, the municipalities;  
(iii) the grant -in-aid to the municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the State;  
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of the m unicipalities;  
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interests of sound 
finance of the municipalities.  
(2) The Governor shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission under this section 
together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before the Legislature 
of the State.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MUNICIPAL TAXATION  
74. Power to impose taxes by and th e funds of the municipalities .—The State Government may, 
from time to time, by notif ication in the O fficial Gazette — 
(a) authorize a municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls and fees in 
accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits to be prescribed by it;  
(b) assign to a municipal ity such taxes, duties, tolls and fees levied and collected by the State 
Government for such purposes and subject to such conditions and limits to be prescribed by it;  
(c) provide for making such grant -in-aid to the municipalities from the Consolidated Fund of the 
State.  
75. Taxes wh ich may be imposed .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Chapter and with the 
previous approval of the State Government, municipality may, from time to time, impose in the whole or 
in any part of the municipality any of the fol lowing taxes and tolls, namely: — 
(a) a tax on holding situated within the municipality assessed on their annual value, payable by 
the owner of the building or land or both;  
(b) a tax on all or any of the vehicles, other than covered by  the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988  
(59 of 1988 ), or animals used for riding, driving, draught or burden and used within the limits of the 
municipality whether they are actually kept within or outside the said li mits;  
(c) an octroi on goods brought within the limits of the municipalit y for sale, consumption or use 
within such limits;   29 
 (d) a latrine -tax payable by the owners or occupiers for collections, removal and disposal of 
excrement or offensive matter from latrines, privies, urinals, cess -pools o r compounds by the 
municipality , within the limits of the municipality;  
(e) a scavenging -tax; 
(f) lighting -tax where the lighting arrangement is made by the municipality;  
(g) a drainage tax where a system of drainage has been introduced by the municipality;  
(h) a tax on deeds of transfer of immovable property situated within the limits of the municipality;  
(i) a tax on advertisements made within the limits of t he municipality other than non -commercial 
undertaking advertisements published in newspapers;  
(j) a water -tax where water is sup plied by the municipality;  
(k) market fees on person exposing goods for sale in any market or any place belonging to or 
under the control of the State Government or of the municipality;  
(l) a betterment charge on properties the value of which may be increased as a result of town 
planning scheme implemented by the municipality; and  
(m) any o ther tax, toll, rate, charge or fee.  
(2) With the previous sanction of the State Government a municipality may, from time to time, charge 
a fee in respect of  the issue and renewal of any licence which ma y be granted by the municipality under 
this Act and in respect of whic h no fee is leviable under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Subject to the provisions of any law that may be made by Parliament, any tax or fee wh ich 
immediately before the comme ncement of this Act, was being lawfully levied under the Manipur 
Municipalities Act , 1976 (Manipur Act 26 of 1976) notwithstanding that such tax or fee is not specified in 
sub-section ( 1) shall continue to be levied by the Nagar Pa nchayat or, as the case may be, by the Council.  
(4) The State Government may from time to time direct the municipality to impose any tax or to 
modify the rate of any tax already imposed.  
(5) On default of the municipality to comply with the decision under sub -section ( 4) within three 
months from the receipt of the dir ection the municipality may be required to furnish reason as to why the 
tax shou ld not be imposed or modified, as the case may be.  
76. Tax on Government holdings .—Notwithstanding any provision s to the contrary all municipal 
taxes including services charges except under clause ( a) of sub-section  (1) of section 75 in respect of 
Government holdings shall be payable to municipality by the Government Department which is in control 
and management of the holdings.  
77. Restric tion regarding tax on holding .—The State Government shall have the power to exempt 
by an order published in the Official Gazette any class of building or holding from levying any tax under 
sectio n 75 of this Act.  
78. Collection of taxes  are subject to bye -law, etc .—All the taxes mentioned in section 75 shall be 
collected in the manner provided in the bye -laws.  
79. Nagar Panchayat or Council to determ ine the valuation of holding .—When it has been 
decided to impose any tax on the annual value of holdings, the assessor after making such enqui ries as 
may be necessary, shall determine the valuation o f all holdings within the municipality as hereinafter 
provided, and shall enter the same in a list called the valuation list, which shall be in the prescribed form:  
Provided that valuatio n other than general valuation m ay be made by the municipality throug h such 
person as may be authorised by the municipality in this behalf.  
80. Returns required for ascertaining annual value .—The assessor, in order to prepare the 
valuation list, may whenever he thi nks fit,  by notice require the o wners or occupiers  of all holdings to 
furnish him, within fi fteen days with returns of the rent or annual value thereof and a description of the 
holdings in such detail as the municipality may direct; and the assessor, at any time between sunrise and 
sunset may enter, inspect and measure any such holdings :   30 
 Provided that at least forty -eight hours , previous notice of the intention to enter, inspect and measure 
any holding shall be given to the owner or occupier thereof, unless he w aives his right to such notice.  
81. Penalty for default in furnishing return a nd for obstruction of assessor .—(1) Whoever 
refuses or fails to f urnish an y such return for the period of fifteen days from the day on which he ha s been 
required to do so, or kno wingly furnishes a false or incorrect return or description shall be punishable 
with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees and with further fine not ex ceeding fifty rupees for each day 
during which he omits to furnish a true and correct return.  
(2) Whoever obstructs, hinders or prevents the assessor appointed by the municipality from entering 
or inspect ion or measuring any such holding shall be punishable with fine not exceeding two thousand 
rupees.  
82. Determinat ion of annual value of holding s.—“Annual value ” means — 
(a) in the case of hotels, colleges, schools, hospitals, factories and such other buildings, a 
proportion not exceeding five per centum, to be fixed by rule made in this behalf of the sum obtained 
by addin g the estimated present cost of erecting the building, less depreciation at the rate to be fixed 
by rule to the estimated value of the land appurtenant thereto, and  
(b) in the case of a building or land n ot fa lling within the provisions of clause ( a), the gross 
annual rent for which such buildings, exclusive of furniture or machinery therein or such land is 
actually let, or where the building or land is not let or in the opinion of the municipality is let for a 
sum less than its fair letting value, might reasonably be exp ected to let from year to year:  
Provided that where the annual value of any building would, by reason of exceptional  
circumstances, in the opinion of the municipality be excessive if calcul ated in the aforesaid manner , 
the municipality may fix the annual value at any less amoun t which appears to it suitable:  
Provided further that the rules framed in this behalf shall be subject to the prior approval of the 
Government.  
83. Determinat ion of rate of tax on holding .—The mode of procedure and system of tax on the land 
and holdings will be such as may be prescribed by the rules to be framed by Government from time to 
time in thi s behalf.  
84. Prepa ration of assessment register .—As soon as possible after the percentage at which the tax 
is to be levied shall have  been determined under section 83, the municipality shall cause to be prepared an 
assessment register which shall contain the following particulars, and any other matters which the 
municipal ity may think proper to include — 
(a) number of the holding on the register with the  name of the road, if any, in which the holding is 
situated;  
(b) annual value of the holding (as stated in the valuation list);  
(c) names of owner and occupier;  
(d) amount of tax payable for the financial year;  
(e) amount of taxes payable separately under clau se (a), (d), (f) or ( j) of sub -section ( 1) of  
section 75;  
(f) amounts of quarterly instalments; and  
(g) if the holding is exempted from assessment, a note to that effect.  
85. Powers to assess consolidated tax for buildi ng and land on which it stands .—(1) If any 
building belongs to one owner and the land on which it stands and any adjacent land which is usually 
occupied therewith belongs to another the municipality ma y value such building and land together and 
may impose thereon one consolidated tax.  
(2) The total amou nt of the tax shall be payable by the owners of the building, who shall thereafter be 
entitled to deduct from the rent which he pays for the land such proportion of the tax so paid by him as is 
equal to the proportio n which such rent bears to the annual value of the holdings.   31 
 (3) In case of disputes, the municipality shall determine what amount the owner of the building and of 
the land shall  pay respectively.  
86. Reduction of valuation, revision of valuation and assessment and revision of valuatio n list 
and assessment register .—(1) The municipality may, at any time, direct an alteration in, or amend ment 
of the assessment register — 
(a) by entering therein the name of any person or any property which in its opinion ought to have 
been entered, or any prop erty which has become liable to taxation after the preparation of the 
assessment register, or  
(b) by substituting the rein with effect from the date of succession or transfer, as the case may be, 
for the name of the owner of any holdi ng the name of any other person who has succeeded by transfer 
or otherwise, to the ownership of the holding, or  
(c) by altering the valuation of or asse ssment on any holding which in its opinion has been 
incorrectly valued or assessed, or  
(d) by re -valuing or re -assessing any holding the value of which has been increased by additions 
or alterations to buildings,  or 
(e) by reducing, upon the  application of the owner the valuation of any holding which has been 
wholly or partly demolis hed or destroyed, or the value of which has diminished from any cause 
beyond the control of the owner, or  
(f) by correcting any clerical or arithmetical error.  
(2) The municipality  shall give at least one month’ s notice to  any person interested in any alteration 
which the municipality proposes to make under clau se (a), (b), (c) or ( d) of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Every alteration made under sub -section ( 1) in the assessment reg ister shall be signed by the 
Chairperson or the V ice-Chairperson.  
87. Notice to be given to Chairperson , of transfers of title of pe rsons liable of payment of tax .—
(1) Whenever the title to any holding is transferred both the transferor and the transferee shall for th e 
purpose of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 86 within three months after the execution of t he 
instrument of transfer, or if no such instrument is executed, within three months after the transfer is 
effected, give notice in writing of such transfer to the municipality.  
(2) in the event of the death of the person in whom s uch title vests, the person to whom as heir or 
otherwise, t he title of the deceased is transferred by descent or demise, shall within one year, from the 
death of the deceased, give notice in writing of such succession to the municipality.  
(3) Every person liable for the payment of taxes on any holding, who transfers his title to or over such 
property, without giving notice of such transfer to the municipality, as aforesaid, shall unless the 
municipality on the ground of hardship arising out of special circumstances, otherwise directs, continue to 
be liable for the payment of all such taxes from time to time payable in respect of the said property until 
he gives such notice, o r until the transfer shall have been recorded in the municipal books.  
(4) The municipality may levy a fee not exceeding one hundred rupees for every such transfer of title 
to a holding in addition to the tax pro vided for in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 75.  
88. Revision s of valuation list .—(1) A new valuation list shall, unless otherwise orde red by the State 
Government, be prepared in the same manner as the original list, once in every five years.  
(2) Subject to any alteration or amendment made under section 86 and to the result of any application 
made under section 95 every valuation list or the assessment register shall be valid from the date on which 
the list or register takes effect in the municipa lity. 
89. Appointment of assessor and power of State Government to dire ct the appointment of 
assessor .—(1) The municipality, for the purpose of genera l valuation may, with the concurrence of the 
Government, appoint an assessor who shall neither be an employee nor a Councillor of the municipality 
on such pay and with such establishment as it may determine.   32 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 88 if at any time it appears to the State 
Government that the valuation in any municipality is insufficient, excessive or inequitable, the State 
Government may, by an order in writing, require the mun icipality to revise the valuation or to show cause 
against revision w ithin a specified time, and if the municipality fails to comply with the order or in the 
opinion of the Government the cause shown is inadequate, the State Government may by an order in 
writing require the municipality to appoint with the approval of the State Government an assessor for the 
municipality within a time and for a period to be specified in the order. The order shall fix the pay of the 
assessor  and the cost of his establishment , and the pay and cost shall be paid monthly by the municipality.  
90. Revision of assessment register .—Whenever the valuation list is revised or altered wholly or in 
part or a new percentage is fixed under section 83 the assessment register also shall be revised and all 
consequential changes, made therein.  
91. Effect of re vision of assessment register .—The first assessment register prepared for any 
municipality under the Act and any revision thereof or alteration therein made under the foregoing section 
shall subject to the provision of sections 86 and 96 take effect, from the beginning of the quarter 
following the publication of the notice mentioned  in sections 96.  
92. Exemptions and remission .—(1) The taxes mentioned in c lauses ( a), (g) and ( l) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 75 shall not be assessed or levied on any building which is used exclusively as a 
place of public worship, or on any holding which is duly registered as a public burial or burning ground 
under this Act.  
(2) The municipal ity may exempt from assessment of the tax mentioned in clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 75 on any holding used for the purpose of a public charity.  
(3) The municipality may reduce the amount paya ble on account of any of the taxes mentioned in 
clause s (a), (b), (f) and ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 75 or remit the same on the ground of excessive 
hardship to the  person liable to pay the same:  
Provided that such reduction or remission shall not, unless renewed by the municipality, have effect 
for more than one financial year.  
93. Power of assessor .—An assessor appointed by the municipality under section 89 shall exercise 
all such powers of valuation as may be vested in him by the municipality or as may be prescribed.  
94. Publi cation of notice of assessment .—(1) When the valuation list ment ioned in section 79 and 
the assessment register mentioned in section 84 shall have been prepared or revised the Chairperson shall 
sign the same and shall cause them to be deposited in the office of the Nagar Panchayat or as the case 
may be, of the Council , and shall cause a notice to be published in such form and manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) In all cases in which any property is for the first time assessed or the assessment is increased, the 
Executive  Officer shall also give notice thereof to the owner or occupier of the property.  
95. Application for review .—(1) Any person who is dissatisfied with the amount assessed upon him 
or with the valuation or assessment of any holding or who disputes his occupation of any holding or his 
liability to be assessed, may apply to the municipality to review the amount of assessmen t of valuation or 
to exempt him from the assessment of tax:  
Provided that no application shall be entertained unless the applicant has paid all arrears of dues to the 
municipal ity accorded up to the date of s uch application other than the sum which has bee n enhanced by 
the val uation or assessment against which the review application has been filed.  
(2) When an assessor has been appointed unde r section 89 notice of every such  application shall be 
given by t he municipality to the assessor.  
96. Procedure for review .—(1) Every application presented under section 95 shall be heard and 
determined by a Committee consisting of not more than five members.  
(2) The Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson shall be one of the member s of such committee  
ex officio , and the other members shall be appointed from among the Councillors by the Nagar Panchayat 
or, as the case may be, by the Council:   33 
 Provided that no member so appointed shall take part in hearing or determining any applicat ion from 
the ward in which he resides, or in the case of an elected member the ward which he  represents, but 
nothing in this proviso, shall prevent any such member from giving evidence with regard to the matter 
under enquiry.  
(3) No such application shall be heard or determined by the committee unless at least three members 
includi ng the Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson are present.  
(4) The committee s hall give notice to the applicant of the time and place at which application shall 
be heard, and after taking such evidence and making such enquiries as may be deemed necessary in the 
presence of the objector or his agent, if he appears the committee shall  pass such orders as it may deem fit 
in respect of such application.  
(5) If the committee orders that any valuation to which the application relates shall be reduced, brief 
reasons for such reduction shall be recorded.  
(6) The decision of the committee or of a majority of th e members thereof, in respect of any 
application referr ed to in this section shall be final.  
97. Limitation of ti me for application for review .—Unless good cause shall be shown to the 
satisfaction of the  committee referred to in section 96 for extending the time allowed, and save as is 
otherwise expressly provided in this Act, no such application shall be received after the expiry of one 
month from the date of publication of the notice required by section  94 relating to the list or register 
containing the assessment, in respect of which the  application is made, or after the expiry of fifteen days 
from the date of service of the first notice of demand for payment at the rate in respect of which the 
applicat ion is made whic hever period shall last expire:  
Provided that, if the municipality has served a notice under section 94 on any person, no such 
application shall be received from him after the expiry of fifteen days from the date of such service.  
98. Assessment to  be questioned only under Act .—No objection shall be taken to any assessment 
or valuation in any other manner than is provided in this Act.  
99. Tax not invalid for want of form .—No assessment of tax on property and no charge or demand 
of any tax made under authority of this Act shall be invalid for error, defect in form, and it shall be 
enough in any valuation or assessment for purpose if the property so valued or assessed is so described as 
to be generally known and it shall not be necessary to name the owner or occupier thereof.  
100. Procedure for imposing t axes, recovery of claims, etc .—The various procedure that may be 
prescribed by the Government from time to time will be followed for imposing and recovery of tax, tolls,  
fees and rates under this Act.  
CHAPTER IX  
RECOVERY OF MUNICIPAL CLAIMS  
101. Recovery fro m occupier of tax due from non -resident .—If any tax payable under this Act by 
the owner of any holding remains unpaid after the notice of demand has been duly served, and if such 
owner is not resident within the municipality, or the place of abode of such owner is unknown, the tax 
may be recovered from the occupier for the time being of such holding, who may deduct, from the next 
and following payment s of his rent the amount which may be so paid by or recovered from him:  
Provided that  if any such holdin g is occupied by more than one person, the sum to be recovered from 
any one of such persons shall be proportionate to the value of the part of the holding in the respective 
occupation of such persons.  
102. Recovery from owner of oc cupier' s tax in certain cases .—If any ho lding is o ccupied by more 
than o ne tenant holding severally it shall be lawful for the municipality , to recover from the owner of s uch 
holding, any taxes payable under t his Act by the occupier of the holding.  
103. Recovery by owner of occupier’s tax paid by owner .—Whenever any tax shall be recovered 
from any owner of any holding under the provisions of section 102, it s hall be lawful for such owner, if  
there shall be but  one occupying tenant of such entire holding, to recover from such tenant of the entire 
amount of the tax which shall have been so paid by such owner, and if there shall be one occupying te nant 
of a p art of such holding, or m ore than one occupying tenant of such holding then to  recover from each 34 
 tenant such sum as shall bear to the entire amount of tax which may have been so re covered from such 
owner at the same p roportion as the value of the proportion of  such holding in the occupation of each 
tenant bears to the entire value of such holding.  
104. Method of recovery by owner .—Every owner who under the provisions of section 102 may be 
entitled to recover any sum from any occupying tenant of any holding or of any portion thereof, shall 
have for the recovery of such sum all such and the same remedies, powers, rights and authorities as if  
such sum were  rent payable to s uch owner by such tenant in respect of s o much of such holding as may be 
in the occupation of such tenant.  
105. Penalty .—Whoever keeps or is in possession of any cart, carriage or animal without the licence 
as required under this Act shall be liable to a fine not exceeding four times the fee payable by him in 
respect of such licence, in addition to the licence fee due.  
106. Municipality may compou nd with livery stable keepers .—The municipality,  may compound 
for any period not exceeding one year, with livery stablekeepers and other persons keeping carts, 
carriages or animals for hire, for a certain sum to be paid for the carts , carriages or animal  so kept by such 
person in lieu of the licence fee s spe cified in any order made by the municipality.  
107. Rents, tolls and fees in respect of markets .—(1) The municipality may use its own land or 
building, or purchase, take on lease or otherwise acquire any land or building for the purpose of 
establishing a municipal market or improving any existing municipal market.  
(2) The municipality may levy rents, tolls and fees at such rates as it may think proper for the right to 
expose goods for sale in a municipal market and for the use of shops, stalls and standings therein and may 
also regulate such rates in resp ect of private markets or places used or declared by the municipality as a 
market place by a public notice in the locality.  
(3) The municipality may grant a lease for a period not exceeding three years f or collection of rents, 
tolls and fees in municipal markets at the rates fixed  by the municipality under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) A lessee of a munici pal market appointed under sub -section ( 3) may refuse to allow any person to 
expose goods for sale in the market or to use shops, stalls and standings  therein until the proper rents , tolls 
and fees have been paid.  
(5) Whoever, having render ed himself liable to the payment of rents, tolls or fees refuses to pay the 
same shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(6) When resistance is offered to any person authorised to collect rents , tolls or fees, any police 
offic er whom he may call to his aid , shall be bound to assist him; and such police officer shall, for that 
purpose have the same powers as he has in the exercise of his ordinary police duties.  
108. Recovery of ta xes as arrears of land revenue .—(1) Where any sum is due on account of a tax, 
other than octroi or tolls or any similar tax payable upon immediate demand, from a person  to a 
municipality, the municipality may, without prejudice to any other mode of recovery provided in this Act 
apply to the Deputy Commissioner to recover such sum together with costs of proceedings incurred in 
that behalf.  
(2) The Deputy Co mmissioner, on being satisfied that the sum mentione d in the application under 
sub-section ( 1) is due, shall proceed to recover it as soon as may be thereafter, as arrears of land revenue.  
109. Power to sell un claimed holdings for money due .—(1) If money be due under this Act in 
respect of any holding from the owner thereof, on account of a ny tax, expenses or charges recoverable 
under this Act, if the owner of such holding or his whereabouts are unknown or the ownership thereof is 
disputed or when the owner lives outside the municipality and has failed to pay it in spite of service of 
demand  notice twice, the municipality may publish twice, at an interval of three months, a notification of 
sale of such holding and after the expiry of not less than three months from the date of the last 
publication, unless the amount recoverable be paid, may s ell such holding to the highest bidder, who 
shall, at the time of sale, deposit forthwith twenty -five per cent , of the purchase money. The balance shall 
be paid with in fifteen days of the date of s ale. In default of payment of the balance amount, the money  if 
any, so deposited shall be forfeit ed and the holding shall be re -sold. After deducting the amount due to the 
municipality, the surplus sale -proceeds, if any, shall be credited to the municipal fund and may be paid on 35 
 demand to any person who establishe s his right of claim to the satisfaction of such municipality or in a 
Court of competent jurisdiction.  
(2) Any person may pay the amount due at any time before the completion of the sale and may 
recover such amount by a suit in a Court of competent jurisdiction from any person beneficially interested 
in such property.  
110. Writing off irrecoverable sums due to the Naga r Panchayat or to the Council .—The 
irrecoverable sum due t o a Nagar Panchayat, or as the case may be, to a Council may be written off in 
such manner and by such authority as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER X  
MUNICIPAL POWER AND OFFENCES   
Powers in respect of road  
111. Power to make roads .—(1) A Nagar Panchayat or as  the case may be, a Council may — 
(a) layout or make new public road; or  
(b) widen , open, enlarge or otherwise improve any public road and construct tunnels and other 
works subsidiary to such road; or  
(c) divert, discontinue or close permanently any public road; or  
(d) sell or lease the land forming such road or any part thereof, acq uired for the purpose of such 
road or for  any other purpose of this Act:  
Provided that no such public road  shall be discontinued, perman ently closed or used for any other 
purposes without the previous sanction of the Government.  
(2) In laying out, making, turnin g, diverting, widening, opening ; enlarging or otherwise improving 
any public road, the Nagar Panchayat or the Council may, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, 
acquire land required for the  carriage -way, footways and drains thereof.  
112. Power to repair, etc ., of private road, drains, etc.—(1) Where a Nagar Panchayat or a Council 
consider s that in any road not being a public road, or in any part of such road within the municipality, it is 
necessary for the public health, convenience or safety that any work should be done for the levelling, 
paving, metalling, flagging, channelling, draining , lighting or cleaning thereof, the Nagar Panchayat or as 
the case may be, the Council may, by written notice, require the owner or owners of the several lands or 
buildings fronting or adjoining the said road or abutting thereon to carry out such work in s uch manner 
and within such time as may be specified in such notice.  
(2) If the notice under sub -section ( 1) is not complied with, such work may be executed by the Nagar 
Panchayat or the Council, the expe nses thereby incurred, shall be apportioned by the Nagar Panchayat or 
the Council, between such owners, and in such manner as it may think fit, regard being had, if it deems it 
necessary, to the amount and value of any work already done by the owners or oc cupiers of such lands 
and buildings.  
(3) After such work has been carried out by the owner or by the owners or on the failure of the 
owners to do so, by the Nagar Panchayat or the Council at the expenses of such owners the road or part 
thereof in which such work has been done, may, and on the joint requisition of a majority of the said 
owners, shall be de clared by public notice put up  therein by the Nagar Panchayat or the Council to be a 
public road.  
113. Prohibition of use of public roads by a class  of animals, carts or vehicles .—(1) The Nagar 
Panchayat or as th e case may be, the Council may , by publi c notice prohibit or regulate the driving, riding 
or leading of animals or vehicles of any particular kind along any public road or part of any such road.  
(2) Any person who disobeys an order passed by  the Nagar Panchayat or as the c ase may be, the 
Counc il under the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine not exceeding two hundred 
rupees.  
  36 
 114. Penalty for encr oachment on public roads, etc .—Any person, who without the permission of 
the Naga r Panchayat or of the Council, — 
(a) encroaches  upon any public road or house -gully  or upon any public  drain, sewer, aqueduct, 
water -course or  that by making any excavation or by erecting any wall, fence, rail, post, projection or 
other obstruction, or by deposing any movable property thereon, or  
(b) takes up or alters the pavements or other mat erials, fences or posts on any public road,  
shall, for every such offence, be punishable with fine not exceeding two thousand and five hundred rupees 
and with a further fine not exceeding two hundred rupees for every day during which the encroachment 
continues after the first conviction.  
115. Use of public road or place by vendors and ot her person and penalty thereof .—(1) Subject 
to the provisions of this Act and the r ules and bye -laws made ther eunder, no itinerant vend or or any other 
person shall use or occupy any public road or place for the sale of articles or for the exercise of any 
calling, or for setting up any booth  or stall without the permission of the Nagar Panchayat or of the 
Council.  
(2) Whoeve r violate the provision of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to two thousand five hundred  rupees and with fine which may extend to  five hundred rupees for every 
subsequent offence after the first conviction.  
116. Power to remove obstructions, encroachments and project ions in or on public road , etc.—
The Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council may, notwithstanding any proceedings which 
may have been started against him under this Act, issue a notice requiring any person to remove any 
building which he may have built or any fence, rail , post or other obstruction or encroachment which he 
may have erected or stacked, on a ny part of a public road, house -gully, public drain, sewer, aqueduct, 
watercourse, ghat or any land vested in the Nagar Panchayat or in the Council and, if such person fails to 
comply with such requisition within forty -eight hours of th e receipt of the same, the Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate may, on the application of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council, order that such obstruction 
or encroachment be removed and thereupon the Nagar Panchayat or the Council may remove any such 
obstruction of encroachment and the expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by the person who erected or 
stacked the same.  
117. Procedure when perso n who erect ed obstruction cannot be found .—(1) If the person who 
built, erected or stacked the said building, fence, rail, post or other obstruction or encroachment referred 
to in the preceding section i s not known or cannot be found, the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, 
the Council may cause a notice to be posted in the neighbourhood of the said building, fence, rail, post or 
other obstruction or encroachment requiring any person interested in the same to remove it, and it shall 
not be necessary to name any person in such requisition.  
(2) If the said building, fence, rail, post or other obstruction or encroachment be not removed in 
compl iance with  the requisition con tained in such notice within forty -eight hours of the posting of the  
same, the Sub -Divisional Magistrate may, on the application of the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may 
be, the Council, order that such obstruction or encroachment be r emoved, and thereupon the Nagar 
Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council may remove any such obstruction or encroachment, and 
may recover the cost of such removal, by sale of the materials so removed.  
(3) The surplus sale -proceeds, if any, shall be credited to the Municipal Fund, and may be paid on 
demand to any person who established his right to the satisfaction of the Nagar Panchayat or as the case 
may be, the Council or in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
118. Projectio ns from buildings to be removed .—(1) The Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, 
the Council may issue a notice requiring the owner or occupier of any building to remove or alter any 
projection, obstruction or encroachment erected or placed against or in front of such building, if the same 
overhangs the public road or just into or any way projects or encroaches upon, or is an obs truction to the 
safe and convenient passage along any public road or house -gully, or obstructs, or projects or encroaches 
into or upon any drain, sewer  or aqueduct in any public road or  into or upon any public water -course or 
ghat or any land in the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be.  
(2) If such owner or occupier fails to comply with such requisitio n within forty -eight hours of the 
receipt of the notice, or within such further time as the Nagar Panc hayat or the Council may allow the 37 
 Sub-Divisional Magistrate may, on the application of Nagar Panchayat or of the Council, order that such 
projection, obstruction or encroachment be removed or altered ; and thereupon the Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council may remove or alter such projection, obstruction or encroachment, and any reasonable expense 
incurred for the purposes of such removal or alteration shall be recovered from the defaulting owner or 
occupier.  
(3) If the expen se of removing or altering any such structure or fixture is paid by the occupier of the 
building, in any case in which the same was not erected by himself, he shall be entitled to deduct any 
reasonable expense incurred for the pu rposes of such removal or alteration from the rent payable by him 
to the owner of the building.  
119. Power of t he District Magistrate and Sub -Divisional Magistrate to remove encroachment 
summarily on requisition by the Government .—Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 116 
and 118, a District Magistrate or a Sub -Divisional Magistrate shall, on being so required by the 
Government, order any person responsible for any obstruction or encroachment or projection as specified 
in sections 116 and 118 to remove or alter such obstruction or encroachment or projection within a  period 
of not less than forty -eight  hours and on non -compliance the D istrict Magistrate or the Sub -Divisional 
Magistrate as the case may be, shall remove such obstruction or encroachment or projection and realise 
the expenses, thereby incurred from the person concerned as fine in a Criminal Court:  
Provided that in case the person or persons responsible for such obstruction, encroachment  or 
projection is or are not known or cannot be found the procedure laid down in section 117 shall be 
followed.  
120. Effect of order made under  section 116, 117, 118 or 119 .—Every order made by a Sub - 
Divisional Magistrate or a District Magistrate as the case may be, under section 116, 117, 118 or 119 shall 
be deemed to be an order made by him in the discharge of his judicial duty and the Nagar Panchayat or as 
the case may b e, the Council shall be deemed to be person bound to execute such order within the 
meaning of the Judicial Officer’ s Protection Act, 1850 (Act XVII of 1850 ).  
121. Nagar Panchayat or Council may require lan d holders to trim hedges, et c.—The Nagar 
Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council may require the owner or occupier of any land within three 
days to trim or prune the hedges thereon bordering on any public road or drains, and to cut and trim any 
trees or bamboos thereon ove rhangi ng the public road, drain  or tank, or any well used for drinking 
purpose or obstructing any public road or drain or causing or likely to cause damage to a ny public road or 
drain or any property of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council or likely to cause damage to person using 
any public road or likely to foul the water of any well or tank.  
122. Penalty for d isobeying requisition under  section 116, 117, 118 or 119 .—Whoever, being the 
owner or occupier of any house on land within a municipality, fails to comply with a requisition issued by 
the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council under the provisi ons of section 116, 117, 118 or 
119 shall be punishable with fine not exceeding two thousand rupees, and with a further fine not 
exceeding one hundred rupees for every day during which the default is continued after the first 
conviction.  
123. Names of publi c roads and number of building .—(1) The Nagar Panchayat or as the case may 
be, the Council may cause a name to be given to any public road and to be f ixed in such place as it may 
think fit, and may also cause a number to be affixed to every building, and in like manner may, from time 
to time, cause such names and numbers to be altered.  
(2) Any person who destroys, pulls down, defaces o r alters any -name or number pu t up by the Nagar 
Panchayat or as the case  may be, the Council under sub -section ( 1) shall, for every such offence be 
punishable with fine which may extend to two hundred rupees.  
Building  
124. Erectio n of building without sanction .—(1) No person shall  erect, materially alter or re -erect 
or commence to  erect, materially alter or re -erect any building without the sanction of the Nagar 
Panchayat or of the Council, as the case may be.  
(2) Every person w ho intends to erect, materially a lter or re -erect any building shall give notice in 
writing to the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, to the Council of such erection.   38 
 (3) When bye -laws have been framed under this Act no notice unde r sub -section ( 2) shall be 
considered to be valid until such notice has complied  with the provision of the bye -laws.  
Explanation .—An alteration in a building for the purpo ses of this section and of bye -laws be deemed 
to be material if it — 
(a) affects or is likely to affect prejudicially the stability or safety of the building, or the condition 
of the building in respect of drainage, ventilation, sanitation or hygiene;  
(b) increase or diminishes the height or area covered by, or the cubical capacity of the building, or 
of any room in the building.  
(4) In the municipalities where water works are maintained it shall be compuls ory for persons 
erecting or re -erecting buildings costing rupees two lakhs or more (excluding cost of land and of 
improvement of land) to install sanitary latrines. The municipality shall withhold sanction if the plan and 
specification of the building submitted with the notice do not contain provision for installation of sanitary 
latrines.  
125. Special  provision for cases where bye -laws have not been made .—In any case in w hich no 
bye-laws have been made under this Act the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council may, 
within fourteen days of the receipt  of the notice required by sub -section ( 2) of section 124, require a 
person who has given such notice to furnish, within one week of the re ceipt by him of the requisition,  
information on all or an y of the matters as to which bye -laws might have been made and in such case the 
notice shall not be valid until such information has been furnished.  
126. Powers of Nagar Panchayat or the  Council to sanction or refuse .—(1) Within sixty days 
after the receipt of the notice, required by sub -section ( 2) of section 124, the Nagar Panchayat or as the 
case may be, the Council may refuse to sanction the building or may sanction it either absolutely or 
subject to such modification as it may deem fit in respect of all or any of the matters specified in  
bye-laws and the person erecting,  materially altering or re -erecting any such building as aforesaid shall 
comply with the sanction of the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council as granted in every 
particular.  
(2) When within a period of sixty days, the Nagar Panchayat or the Council fails, after  the receipt of a 
valid notice , to make and deliver to the person who has given such notice, an order of sanction or refusal 
in respect thereof, it shall be de emed to have sanctioned the p roposal of building absolutely:  
Provided that the time taken by the applicant in furnishing any information requisitioned by the Nagar 
Panchayat or by the Council, if any, after the receipt of the valid notice shall not be coun ted in the period 
of sixt y days referred to in this sub -section.  
Explanation .—The Nagar Panchayat or the Council may refuse to sanction the erect ion, material 
alteration or re -erection of any building either on the grounds affecting the particular building  or in 
pursuance of general scheme adopted by the Nagar Panchayat or by the Council at a meeting r estricting 
the erection or re -erection of building or any class of building within specified limits for the prevention of 
overcrowding or in the interest of t he residents within such limits or for any other public purpose. 
Permission may also be refused in any case  in whic h there is any dispute between the Nagar Panchayat or 
as the case may be, the Council and the applicant as to the title of the land on which it is proposed to erect 
the building until such dispute is decided.  
127. Lapse of sanction .—A permission to  erect, materially alter or re -erect building granted under 
this Chapter or deemed to have been g iven by the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council, 
shall unless it is renewed on an a pplication made to the Nagar Panchayat or the Council for this purpose 
continue only for one year after the date on which it is granted.  
128. Penalty for building without or  in contravention of sanction .—Whoever e rects, materially 
alters or re -erects or commences to  erect, materially alter or re -erect any building without the previous 
sanction of the Nagar Pa nchayat or as the case may be, the Council or in contravention of any directions 
given by the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council granting sanction under section 123 
shall be liable to a fine not exceeding one thousand rupees for every such offence, and to a further fine not 
exceeding two hundred rupees for ea ch day during which the offence  is continued after his first 
conviction.  39 
 129. Power of a Nagar Panchayat or a C ouncil in case of disobedience .—(1) If the construction of 
a building is started, or if a building i s materially altered or erected — 
(a) without sanction as required by section 126 ( 1); or 
(b) without notice as required by section 124 ( 2); or 
(c) when sanction has been refused; or  
(d) in contravention of the terms of any sanction granted; or  
(e) when the sanction has lapsed; or  
(f) in contravention of any bye -laws made under clause ( vi) of sub -section ( 1) of section 209,  
the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be,  or the Council may, by notice to be delivered within a 
reasonable time, require the building to be altered or demolished as it may deem necessary, within the 
period of thirty days from the date  of the service of such notice:  
Provided that the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, or the Council may instead of requiring the 
alteration or demolition of any such building accept by way of composition such sum as it may deem 
reasonable.  
(2) Any person who fails to comply with a requisition issued by the Nagar Panch ayat or as the case 
may be, or t he Council under the provision s of sub -section ( 1) shall be liable  to a fine not exceeding five 
hundred rupees and to a further fine not exceeding one hundred rupees for every day during which the 
person continues to make such default after service on him of such requisition.  
130. Roofs and external walls not to be made of inflammable materials .—The Nagar Panchayat 
or as the case may be, the Council by written notice, may require any person who has made any external 
roof or wall with thatch mats, leaves or other inflammable materia ls and in contravention of bye -laws 
made under section 209 to remove or alter such roof or wall within a period to be specified in the notice.  
131. Power  to attach brackets for lamps .—The Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council 
may, attach or cause to be attached to the outside of any building brackets for lamps in such manner as 
not to occasion any injury thereto or inconvenience.  
132. Build ing unfit for human habitation .—(1) If a building, or a room in a building is in the 
opinion of the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council unfit for human habitation in 
consequence of the want of proper means of drains or ventilation or otherwise, the Nagar Panchayat or as 
the c ase may be, the Council may , by notice, prohibit the owner or occupier thereof from using the 
building or room for human habitation or suffering it to be so used whether absolutely or not unless, 
within a time to be specified in the notice he effects such alteration therein as is specified in the notice.  
(2) Upon failure of a person to w hom notice is issued under sub -section ( 1) to comply therewith, the 
Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council ma y require by further notice the demolition of the 
building or room.  
(3) Any person who uses a building or room or suffers to be used contrary to the provision of  
sub-section ( 1) shall be punishable with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees, and with a further fine 
not exceeding one hundred rupees for every day during which the offence is continued after the first 
conviction.  
133. Pending of building in  dangerous state .—(1) A Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, a 
Council may require by notice the owner or o ccupier of any land or building — 
(a) to demolish, secure or repair within eight days from the date of service of the notice in such 
manner as it deems necessary any building, portion of a building, wall or other structure or anything 
affixed thereto which appear s to it to be in ruinous condi tion or dangerous to inmates if any,  
passers -by or other property, or  
(b) to repair, secure or enclose, within eight days from the date of service of the notice, in such 
manner as it deems necessary any tank, well or excavation belonging to such owner or in the 
possession of such occupier which appear to the Nagar Panchayat or the Council to be dangerous to 
persons by reason of its situation, want of repairs or other such circumstances.   40 
 (2) Where it appears to the Nagar Panchayat or the Council that immediate action is necessary for the 
purpose of preventing imminent danger to any person or property, it shall be the duty of the Nagar 
Panchayat or as the  case may be, of the Council to take immediate action and recover the expense so 
incurred from the owner or occupier of the building or the owner or occupier of the land to which such 
building or other structure or anything is affixed.  
134. Nagar Panchayat or Council may requ ire owners to pull down ruins .—Whenever it appears 
to the Nagar Panchayat or Council that any building by reason of abandonment or disputed ownership or 
other cause is undaunted or by  reason of having fal len into ruins, affords facili ties for the commission of a 
nuisance by disorderly persons or for the harbouring of snakes or other noxious animals, the Nagar 
Panchayat or the Council may require the owner of such building or the land to which such building is 
attached, to properly secure the same, or to remove or level such ruins, as the case may require.  
135. Penalty for disobeying requisiti on under sections 133 and 134 .—Any owner or occupier of a 
house or land who fails to comply w ith requisition issued by the Nagar Panchayat or the Council under 
the provisions of sections 133 and 134, shall be liable, for every such default, to a penalty not exceeding 
one thousand rupees , and to a further penalty not exceeding two hundred rupees, for every day during 
which the default is continued after the expiry of eight days from the date of service on him of such 
requisition.  
136. Compensation  for prohibition of erection or re -erection .—Subject to any other provision in 
this Act as regard compensation, no compensations shall be claimable by an owner for any damage which 
he may sustain in consequence of the prohibition o f the erection of any building.  
Powers connected with drains  
137. Power to require owners to clear no xious  vegetation .—The Nagar Panchayat or the Council 
may, by notice, require the owner or occupier of any land within such time as the Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council may fix to cut and remove any tree or bamboos or branches thereof, or eradicate and destroy 
vegetation and u ndergrowth which may appear to the Nagar Panchayat or the Council to be insanitary, 
injurious to health or offensive to the neighbourhood or to be causing or likely to cause damage or 
destruction to any crop growing or to be grown, or to be obstruction or likely to obstruct the free passage 
for men or animals along a public road, or of any boat of stream vessel along a public water way.  
138. Power to require owners to improve bad drainage .—Whenever any la nd, being private 
property or within any private enclosure, appears to the Nagar Pancha yat or the Council by want of  
drainage to be in a state injurious to health or offensive to the neighbourhood, or by reason of inequalities 
of a surface to afford facili ties for the commission of a nuisance, the Nagar Panchayat or the Council may 
require the owner or the occupier of such land or both within fifteen days, to dr ain such land or level 
surface:  
Provided that, if for the purpose of effecting any drainage under  this section it shall be necessary to 
acquire any land not being the property of the person who is required to drain his land, or to pay 
compensation to any other person , the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council shall provide 
such l and and p ay such compensation.  
139. Power to require unwhole some tanks or private prem ises to be cleansed or drained .—(1) 
The Nagar Panchayat or the Council may require the owner or occupier of any land within eight days or 
such longer period as the Nagar Panchayat or the  Council may fix, either to re -excavate or at his option 
fill up with suita ble material or to cleanse any  well, water -course, private tank or pool therein, and to 
drain off and remove any waste or stagnant water which may appear to be injurious to health or offensive 
to the neighbourhood:  
Provided that if, for the purpose of effecting any drainage under this section, it shall be necessary to 
acquire any land not being the property of  the person who is required to drain his land  or to pay 
compensation to any o ther person, Nagar Panchayat or as the case m ay be , the Council shall provide such 
land and pay such co mpensation.  
(2) If under the provisions of this Act the Nagar Panchayat or the Counc il execute the work of such 
re-excavation or filling up with suitable material, it may take possession of the tank or p ool or the sites of 
such tank or pool and retain such possession and turn the same to profitable account until the expenses 
thereby incurred shall have been realised.  41 
 140. Wells, tanks, etc., to be secured .—If any well, tank or other excavation, whether on public or 
private ground, be, for want of sufficient repair or p rotection, dangerous to passers by the Nagar 
Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council shall forthwith require  by notice such owner or occupier, or 
both within eight days, properly to secure or protect such well, tank or other excavation; and if after the 
said period the work is not executed, the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council shall cause a 
temporary hoard or fence to be pu t for the protection of passers -by and recover the expenses so incurred 
from the owner or occupier or the owners and occupiers of the land on which such tank, well or other 
excavation is situated.  
141. Penalty for disobeying requisition under s ections 137, 138, 139 and 140 .—Any owner or 
occupier of a house or land who fails to comply with a requisition issued by the Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council under the provisions of sectio n 137, 138, 139 or 140 shall be pu nishable w ith fine not exceeding 
one thousand rupees, and with a further fine not exceeding two hundred rupees for every day during 
which the default is continued after the expiry of eight days from the date of service on him of such 
requisition.  
142. Power of Government to prohibit cultivation, use of manure , or irrigation injurious to 
health .—If the Director of Medical Health and Family Planning Services, Public Health Officer of the 
Government or Health Officer of the municipality or such other Medical Officer of the Medical 
Department of Manipur as may be prescribed, certifies that the cultivation of any description of crops, or 
the use of any kind of manure, or the ir rigation of land in any specified m anner — 
(a) in any place within the limit of the municipality, is injurious to the health of person dwelling 
in the neighbourhood; or  
(b) in any place within or without the limits of the municipality is likely to contaminate the water 
supply of the municipality or otherwise renders it unfit for drinking purposes the Government, on 
receipt of an application from the muni cipality by public notice, prohibit the cultivation of such crop, 
the use of manure or the use of the method of irrigation so certified to be injurious, or impose such 
conditions with respect thereto as may prevent the injury.  
143. Public latrines and urinals .—The municipality may provide and maintain in sufficient n umber 
and in proper situation, public latrines and urinals for the separate use of each sex, and shall cause the 
same to be kept in proper order and to b e properly cleansed.  
144. Power to demolish unauthori sed drains leading into public .—(1) If any person, withou t the 
written permission of the municipality first obtained, marks or causes to be made, or alter s or causes to be 
altered, any drain leadin g into any sewer, drain, water -course, road or land vested in the municipality, the 
municipality may cause such branch drain to be demolished, altered, made or otherwise dealt with as it 
may deem fit, and the  expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by such person, making or altering such 
branch drain.  
(2) The person so ma king or altering such branch drain shall also be liable for every such offence to a 
fine not exceeding five hundred rupees.  
145. Penalty for allowing water of any sewer, etc., to r un on any public road .—Whoever causes 
or allows the water of any sink, sewer, latrine, urinal, cesspool or any other offensive matter be longing to 
him or being on his l and to run, drain or be thrown or put upon any public road, or causes or allows a ny 
offensive matter to run, dra in or be thrown into a surface drain near any public road shall be liable to a 
fine not exceeding two hundred rupees and a daily fine not exceeding fifty rupees during which the 
offence is continued.  
146. Power t o require owner to drain land .—If any la nd, near a se wer, drain or other outlet into 
which such land may, in the opinion of the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council, be 
drained, is not drained to the satisfaction o f the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, of the Council, it 
may require the owner within one month to drain the said land into such sewer, drain or outlet.  
147. Penalty for disobeying requisition under section 14 6.—Any person who fails to comply with 
a requisition issued by the Nagar Panchayat or, as the case may be, by the Council under the provision of 
section 146 shall be liable for every such offence, to a fine not exceeding two hundred rupees and a 
further fi ne not exceeding fifty rupees for every day during which he shall continue to make such default 
after service on him of such requ isition.  42 
 Scavenging and cleaning  
148. Establishment for removal of sewage,  offensive matter and rubbish .—The Nagar Panchayat 
or, as the case may be, the Counci l shall provide for the removal — 
(a) of sewage, rubbish and offensive matter from all public latrines, urinals and drai ns and from 
all public roads and all other property vested in the municipality, and  
(b) in any municipality wherein a latrine tax has been imposed under sub -section ( 1) of section 75 
of sewage and offens ive matter from all private latrines, privies, urinals, cesspools and compounds.  
149. Sewerage scheme .—A mu nicipality may also introduce a  sewerage scheme for removal of 
sewage by flushing with water through underground closed sewers. When a municipality introduces such 
a scheme in its area the municipality may, where it is felt necessary, with the ap proval of the State 
Government , levy addi tional latrine and water taxes to meet the cost and maintenance of such scheme.  
150. Removal of sewag e, offensive material, rubbish .—(1) The munic ipalit y may, from time to 
time, by an order published in the prescribed manner, appoint the hour within which sewage and offensive 
matter may be moved, the manner in which the same shall be moved, as also the hours within which only 
every occupier of any house or land may place rubbish in a receptacle provided by the municipality on or 
by the side of the public road.  
(2) The municipality may provide pla ces convenient for the deposit of sewage and offensive matte r 
and require the occupiers of houses to cause the same to be deposited daily or at other stated intervals in 
such places, and may remove the same at the expense of the occupiers from any house if the occupier 
thereof fails to do so.  
151. Penalty for placing rubb ish on public road .—Any person who places or allows to  place 
rubbish o n a public road or in a receptacle provided by the municipality at a time other than the time 
appointed  by the municipality un der sub -section  (1) of section 150 shall , for every such offence, be 
punishable with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees.  
152. Penalty on occupie r for not removing fil th, etc .—Any occupier of a house on or near a public 
road who keeps or allows to  be kept, for more than twenty -four hours, or for more than such shorter time 
as may be appointed by the municipality, otherwise than in some proper recepta ble, any house, ashes, 
sewage or any noxious or offensive matter in or upon such house, or in any out -house, yard or ground 
attached to and occupied with the house or suffers such receptacle to be in a filthy or noxious state, or 
neglects to employ  means t o cleanse the same shall , be punishable with fine not  exceeding five hundred 
rupees.  
153. Penalty for throwing offensiv e matter on public roads, etc .—Any person who, without t he 
permission of the municipality throws or puts, or permits his servants to throw or put any sewage or 
offensive matter on any public road, or who throws or puts or permits his servants to throw or put, any 
earth, rubbish, sewage or offensive matter into any drain communicati ng therewith shall be puni shable 
with fine not exceeding five hundred rupees.  
154. Power of servants of the Naga r Panchayat or of the Council .—All servants of the Nagar 
Panchayat, or as the case may be, of the Council employed for the purposes mentioned in section 163 
may, within such hours as may be fixed by the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, enter any premises, of 
which the occupier or owner is liable to pay latrine tax and do all things necessary for the performance of 
their duties.  
Water supply and drainage system  
155. Supply of drinking water .—(1) Every Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be , the Council 
shall provide or arrange for the provision of a sufficient supply of drinking water for the inhabitants of the 
areas within its jurisdiction.  
(2) Every Nagar Pa nchayat or as the case may be , the Council shall provide sufficient and regular 
supply of drinking water fit for human consumption or for domestic purpose s within the juris diction of 
the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council.  
156. Removal of l atrines, etc., ne ar any source of water supply .—The municipality may, by 
notice, require an owner or occupier on whose land a drain, privy, latrine, urinal, cesspool or other 43 
 receptacle for filth or refuse exists as is likely to endanger the p urity of wate r, a spring, well, tank, 
reservoir or other source from which water is , or may be, derived for public use , to remove or c lose the 
same within one week from the service of such notice.  
157. Owner or occupier to take steps to prevent spread of infectious disease .—In the event of a 
municipality, or any part thereof, being visited with an outbreak of cholera or other infectious disease 
notified in this behalf, the owner or occupier may during t he continuance of the epidemic, without notice 
and at any time, inspect and disinfect any well , tank or other place from which water , is or is likely to be 
taken for the purpose of drinking  and may further take such step  as he deems fit to prevent the  remo val of 
water therefrom.  
158. Unauthorised construction or tree o ver drain or wa ter-works .—(1) Where any road or way  
has been made or any building, wall or other structure has been erected or any tree has been planted over 
a public drain culvert or a water -work vested in the municipality, without the permission in writing of the 
municipality, the municipality may  withou t prejudice to the generality of the other provision of this Act — 
(a) by notice require the person who has made the road, erected the structure or planted the tree, 
or the owner or occupier of the land on which, the road has been made, structure erected or tree 
planted, to remove or deal in any other way as the municipality  thinks fit with the road, structure or 
tree; or 
(b) itself remove or deal in any other way as it thinks fit with the road, structure or tree.  
(2) Any expense incurred by a municipality for action  taken under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall 
be recoverable from the person by whom the road or way made, structure erected or tree planted.  
Burial and burning ground or disposal of corpses  
159. Powers in respec t of burial and burning places .—(1) The municipality may, from time to 
time, out of the Municipal fund, provide suitable places to be used as burial or burning grounds either 
within or without the limits of the municipality and may charge such fees on the persons using the  places 
as may be fixed by bye -laws which may be framed in that behalf.  
(2) The municipality may, by public notice, order any burial or burning ground situated within 
municipal limits or any municipal burial or burning gr ound outside such limits which is certified by the 
Director of Medical, Health and Family Planning Service or a Public Health Officer of the State 
Government or a Health Officer of the municipality to be dangerous to the health of persons living in the 
neighbourhood, to be closed, from a date to be specified in the notice, and shall, in such case, if no 
suitable place for burial or burning exists within a reasonable distance, provide a fitting place for the 
purpose.  
(3) If any person, without the permission of the municipality bury or burn any corpse, or permit, to be 
buried or burnt, any corpse at any place which is not any burial or burning ground made or formed 
according to the provisions of this section , or after the date fixed thereunder for closing the same, he shall 
be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(4) Private burial places may be exempted from the order subject to suc h conditions as the 
municipality may impose in this behalf:  
Provided that the limits of such burial places are sufficiently defined and that they shall only be used 
for the burial of members of the family of the owners thereof.  
(5) No private burial or burning ground shall be made or formed within the municipality after  the 
commencement of this Act, w ithout the permission in writing of the municipality.  
160. Burial of paup ers and unclaimed dead bodies .—The municipality may from time to time, out 
of the M unicipal fund, provide for the burial or burning of paupers and unclaimed dead bodies, free of 
charge, within the limits of the municipality or otherwise arrange to dispose of as it thinks fit.  
161. Powers to cause corpses to be burnt or buried according to the re ligious tenets of the 
deceased .—After the expi ration of not less than twenty -four hou rs from the death of any person, the 
Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, Council may cause the corpse of such person to be burnt or 
buried, and the expenses thereby incurred shall be recoverable as a debt due from the estate of such 44 
 person . In every suc h case, the corpse shall be disposed of, so far as may be possible in manner consistent 
with the re ligious tenets of the deceased.  
CHAPTER XI  
OTHER POWERS AND PENALTIES  
Markets and slaughter houses  
162. Establishment of markets .—A municipality may establish and maintain markets at suitable 
places of the Municipality for the convenience of the people.  
163. Power to remove persons from municipal market .—If any officer specially empowered in 
this behalf by the Nagar Panchayat or by the Council is satisfied that any person occupying any stall or 
space in any municipal market is in unauthorised occupation of the stall or space or continues to occupy 
the stal l or space after authority to occupy has ceased, he may, with the previous sanction of the Nagar 
Panchayat or of the Council, require such person to vacate the stall or space within such time as may be 
mentioned in the requisition and such person may, in a ddition to any penalty to which he may be liable 
under this Act, be summarily removed from the stall or space.  
164. Places for  slaughter of animals for sale .—(1) The Nagar Panchayat or, as the case may be, the 
Council may, and when required by the Government shall fix places with the approval of the State 
Government for slaughter of animals for sale, and the Nagar Panchayat or Council may grant and 
withdraw licence for the use of such premises, or, if they vest in the Nagar Panchayat or Council, may 
charge rent for fees of the use of the places.  
(2) When any such premises have been fixed, no person shall slaughter any such animal for sale 
within the Municipal area at any other place.  
(3) Any person who slaughters for sale any animals at any place w ithin the Municipal area other than  
the one fixed by the Nagar Pan chayat or as the case may be, the Council under this section shall be 
punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
165. Inspecti on before and after slaughter .—A Nagar Panchayat or, as the case may be, the 
Council shall arrange f or inspection of the animal by a Veterinary Surgeon or a competent pers on before 
the animal is killed and may also arrange for inspection of the meat  and organs for the purpose of 
certificati on, as may be laid down by bye -laws of the meat for use as food.  
166. Licensing of butcher .—No person shall carry on the profession of a butcher except under a  
licence from the municipality .  
Nuisances fr om certain trades, professions, etc. 
167. Regulation of offensive trades .—(1) If it is shown to the satisfaction of a Nagar Panchayat or of 
a Council that any building or place within the limits of the Municipality which an y person uses or 
intends to use as a factory or other place  of business for the manufacture, storage, treatmen t or disposal of 
any article, by reason of such use, or by reason of such intended use, occasions or is likely to cause a 
public nuisance, the Nagar Panchayat or the Council may at its option require by notice the owner or 
occupier of the building or place — 
(a) to desist or refrain, as the case may be, from using, or allowing to be used, the building or 
place for such purpose, or  
(b) only to use, or allo w to be used, the building or place for such purpose under such conditions 
or after such structural alterations as the Nagar Panchayat or the Council imposes or prescribes in the 
notice with the object of rendering the use of the building or place for such  purpose free from 
objection.  
(2) Whoever, after rece iving a notice given under sub -section ( 1), uses or allows to be used any 
building or place in contravention of the notice shall be punisha ble with fi ne which may extend to four 
hundred rupees for every day on which he so uses or allows to be used the place or building after the date 
of the first conviction.  
168. Certain offensive and dangerous trades not to be established within the limits to be fixed 
by th e municipality without licence .—(1)Within such local limits a s may be fixed by the municipalit y 45 
 no place shall be used without a licence from the municipality which shal l be renewable annually, for an y 
of the following purposes, namely: — 
(a) melting tallow;  
(b) boiling offal or blood;  
(c) skinning or disembowelling animal;  
(d) the manufactur e of bricks, pottery, tiles or l ime in a klin, panja or lamp or by any other 
similiar method;  
(e) as a soap -house, oil -boiling house, dyeing house;  
(f) as tannery, slaughter -house;  
(g) as a manuf actory or place of business from which offensive or unwholesome odour may arise;  
(h) as a yard or depot for hay, straw, bamboo, thatching grass , jute or other dangerously 
inflammable material for the pur pose of any trade;  
(i) any store -house for k erosene, petroleum napthamcoal -tar or any inflammable oil or wholesale 
stock of matches exceeding one hundred gross;  
(j) as a shop for the sale of meat;  
(k) as a place for the storage of rags or bones, or both;  
(l) tea stall;  
(m) sweetmeat stall;  
(n) hotel or eating house;  
(o) aerated water;  
(p) bakery , including biscuit factory.  
(2) Such licence shall not be withheld unless the municipality has reason to believe that the business 
which it is intended to establish or maintain would be offensive or dangerous to persons residing in or 
frequenting the neighbourhood.  
(3) The municipality may, subject, to such restrictions, if any, as it may impose, extend the provisions 
of this section to yards or depots for trade in coal, coke, timber or wood.  
(4) The grant of a licence for the purposes mentioned in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) shall be 
consistent with the provision of the Petroleum Act, 1934 (30 of 1934 ) and no such licences shall be 
granted unless the said provisions have been compli ed with by the applicant for the licence.  
169. Cinemas, dramat ic performances, circuses, etc .—(1) No place within a municipality shall be 
kept open for  the purposes of regular gain or otherwise by means of public cinematographic exhibitions, 
dramatic performances, circuses, variety shows, or for purposes of public resort for similar recreations or 
amusements unless a licence has been granted therefor by the municipality, which licence shall be 
annually renewable and in accordance with such conditions as the municipality, subject to  rules, may 
deem fit to impose:  
Provided that such conditions shall not be inconsistent with the terms of any licence which may be 
required for such place under any other Act.  
(2) No place within the municipality shall be used for the purposes of public cinematographic, 
performance, circus, variety shows, or as a place of publ ic resort for similar recreations or amusements, 
otherwise than for the purpose of regular gain, unless a licence has been granted for such purpose by the 
municipality and in accordance with such conditions as the municipality, subject to rules, may think fit to 
impose:  
Provided that such conditions shall not be inconsistent with the terms of any licence which may be 
required for s uch places under any other Act:  46 
 Provided further that this sub -section shall not app ly to private amateur performances or to 
performances held wholly for the benefit of charity, in any su ch place.  
(3) If within a period of three months following the receipt of an application for licence under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) the Nagar Panchayat or the Council at a meeting has not passed order 
thereon, either granting or refusing a licence, it shall be deemed to have granted t he licence.  
170. Cancellation,  revocation , etc., of licences .—Subject to the provisions of section 196, any 
licence granted under section 169 by the municipality may, at any time, be suspended or revoked by it, if 
any of the restriction, limitations or conditions attached to the licence, be evaded  or infringed by the 
grantee or if the grantee be convicted of a breach of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule or 
bye-law made thereunder in any matter to which such licence relates or if the grantee has obtained the 
same by misrepresentation or fraud.  
171. Publication of order of re fusal, suspension of licences .—Every order granting, refusing, 
suspending, revoking, or modifying a licence under section 169 or section 170, as the case may be, s hall 
be, in writing, shall state the ground on which it proceeds, shall be published on the notice board of the 
office of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council and shall also be served on the owner of the premises 
concerned within fourteen days of the order.  
172. Power to  close market, tea -stall, etc .—(1) The Nagar Panchayat or, as the case may be, the 
Council may, with a view to preventing the spread of any infectious or contagious disease, order that for a 
specified ti me, any market, tea -stall o r restaurant, hotel or lodging -house within the Municipality shall be 
closed, or forbid any persons to attend any such market, tea -stall or restaurant, hotel or lodgi ng-house.  
(2) Such order shall be notified in such manner and at such places as the Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council may direct, and notice thereof shall be served on the owner, occupier or vendor of the market or 
the keeper of the hotel or lodging -house, tea -stall or re staurant.  
(3) After complying with the notice to the owner or occupier, or vendor of the market or the keeper of 
the hotel or lodging -house, tea -stall or restaurant or any person interested may appeal to the Deputy 
Commissioner, and if he considers the notice to be unreasonable, the order of the Deputy Commissioner 
shall be final.  
(4) When an ord er has been notified under sub -section ( 2) and has not been  set aside under  
sub-section ( 3) any owner, occupier or vendor of a market or the keeper of hotel or lodging -house,  
tea-stall or restaurant w ho neglects to clos e the market, hotel or lodging -house, tea -stall or restaurant shall 
be liable to a fine which may extend to five thousand rupees; and any person who attends  such market, 
hotel or lodging -house, tea -stall or restaurant in contravention of the terms of the order shall be liable to 
fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
Infectious or contagiou s diseases  
173. Penalty for failure t o give information of cholera .—Whoever — 
(a) being a medical practitioner and in the course of such practice becoming cognizant of the 
existence of cholera, plague, small pox or other infectious  disease, that may be notified i n this behalf 
by the Government in any dwelling -house other than a public hospital in the municipality, or  
(b) being the owner or occupier of such dwelling house, and being cognizant of the existence of 
any such infectious disease therein , or 
(c) being the person in charge of,  or in attend ance, on a person s uffering from any such infec tious 
disease in such dwelling -house, and being cognizant of the ex istence of the disease therein,  
fails to give information within twenty -four hours of becoming so cognizant or gives false information to 
such officer as the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council may appoint in this behalf 
respecting the existence of such disease shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees.  
174. Disinfe ction of building and articles .—(1) If the Nagar Panchayat or, as the case may be, the 
Council is of opinion that the cleansing or disinfecting of a building or any part thereof or of any ar ticle 
therein, which is likely to retain infection, will tend to prevent or check the spread of any disease, it may, 47 
 by notice require the owner or occupier to  cleanse or disinfect the same i n the manner and within the time 
prescribed in such notice.  
(2) If— 
(a) within the time specified as aforesaid from the receipt of the notice the person on whom the 
notice is served to have the building or part thereof or the article disinfected, or  
(b) the occupier or owne r, as the case may be, gives his consent,  
the Nagar Panchayat or the Council may, at the cost of such owner or occupier, cause the building or part 
thereof and articles to be cleansed and disinfected:  
Provided that the Nagar Panchayat or the Council may, i n its discretion pay the whole or any part of 
such cost.  
175. Penalty fo r letting infected house .—Every person knowingly letting a house or other building 
or part of a house or building in which any pers on suffering from an infectious or contagious disease, had 
lived without having such house or other building or part thereof and all articles therein liable to retain 
infection, disinfected thereafter to the satisfaction of the Nagar Panchayat or the Counc il, shall be 
punishable with fine no t exceeding two thousand rupees.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section a hotel or lodging -house keeper shall be deemed to let 
part of hi s house to any person admitted as a g uest into his hotel or lodging -house.  
176. Power of entry for purpose of  preventing spread of disease .—The Nagar Panchayat or, as the 
case may be, the Council may authorise any officer to enter, at any time between sunrise and sunset, after 
three hours notice into any building or premises in which any infectious or contagious disease is reported 
or suspected to exist, for the purposes of inspecting such building or premises on the basis of the report of 
the officer. The Nagar Panchayat or the C ouncil will have the power to declare that a person is suffering 
from contagious disease and that house is infectious.  
177. Removal to hospital of patients suff ering from infectious disease .—In any munic ipality when 
any person suffering from any in fectious disease is found to be — 
(a) without proper lodging or accomodation, or  
(b) living in a Serai or other public hostel, or  
(c) living in a room or house which neither he nor any one, of whom he is a dependen t, either 
own or pays rent for,  
the Nagar Panchayat or, as the case may b e, the Council, b y any persons authorised by it i n this behalf 
may, on the advice of an Assistant Surgeon, remove the patient to any hospital or place at which persons 
suffering from such diseases are received for medical treatment and may do anything nece ssary for such 
removal.  
Park, playground and open space  
178. Municipality to provide pla ces for recreation .—The municipality may provide open spaces, 
parks, playgrounds, common swimming pools and amenities for the use and enjoyment o f the people and 
may frame bye -laws regulating their use.  
179. Function a nd powers in regard to pounds .—Every municipality shall, in regard to the 
establishment, main tenance and management of pounds, perform such function as may be transferred to it 
by notification under section 31 of the Cattle Trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871 ) and lease out pound, when 
so transferred , according to r ules framed under this section.  
CHAPT ER XII  
PROCEDURE  
180. Service of notice .—(1) Every notice, bill, form, summons or notic e of demand under this Act, 
may— 
(a) be served personally on or presented to the person to whom the same is addressed; or  48 
 (b) if it cannot be so served, presented or delivered, be affixed on some conspicuous part of his 
place of abode or of the land, building or other thing in respect of which the notice, bill, form, 
summons or notice of demand is intended to be served; or  
(c) be sent by post in registered cover.  
(2) Every such notice, bill, form, summons or notice of' demand shall be signed by or bear a facsimile 
signature of  Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or any other officer  authorised by the Chairperson i n that 
behalf . 
181. Reason able time for act to be fixed .—When any notice under this Act r equires any act to be 
done for which no time is fixed by this Act, the Nagar Panchayat or Council shall fix a reasonable time 
for doing the  same.  
182. Service of notice  on owner or occupier of land .—When any notice is required to be gi ven to 
the owner or to the occupier of any land, or both, such notice addressed to the owner or occupier or both, 
as the case may require, may be served on the occupier  of such land, or otherwise in the m anner 
mentioned in section 180:  
Provided that when t he owner and his place of abode are known to the Nagar Panchayat or to the 
Council or other authorities issuing the notice they shall, if such place of abode be within the limits of 
their authority, cause such notice to be served on such owner , or left wit h some adult member or servant 
of his family; and if the place of abode of the owner be not within such limits, they shall send every such 
notice by post in a registered cover addressed to his place of abode and such service shall be deemed to  be 
good serv ice of the notice:  
Provided further that when the name of the owner or occupier or  of both is not known it shall be 
sufficient to designate him or them as “the owner ” or “the occupier ” of the land in respect of which the 
notice is served.  
183. Procedure when owners o r occupiers are required by Nagar Panchayat or the Council to 
execut e works .—(1) Whenever it is provided in this Act, that the Nagar Panchayat or, the Council may 
require the owner or the occupiers, of any land or both to execute any work or to do anything, such 
requisition shall be made, as far as possible, by a notice to be served a s provided in sections 180 and 182 
on every owner or occupier who is required to execute such work or to do such thing; but if there be any 
doubt as to the persons who are owners or occupiers, such requisition may be made by a notice to be 
affixed or poste d upon or near the spot at which the work is required to be executed or the thing done 
requiring the owners or the occupiers, of any land or both , to execute such notice. It shall not be necessary 
to name the owners or occupiers.  
(2) Every such requisition shall give  notice to the persons to whom it is addressed that, if they fail to 
comply wi th the requisition or prefer an objection against such requisition as provided hereafter in section 
184 the munici pality may enter upon the land and cause the required work to be executed, or the required 
thing to be done; and that in such case the expenses incurred thereby shall be recovered from the persons 
who are required in such requisition to execute such work o r do such thing.  
184. Person required to execute any work may prefer objection to the municipality .—Any 
person who is required by such requisition to execute any work or to do anything may instead of 
executing the work or doing the thing required, prefer an objection in writing to the municipality against 
such requisition within fifteen days of the service of the notice  affixing or posting up of the notification 
containing the requisition, or if the time within which he is required  to comply with the requisition be less 
than fifteen days, then within such less time.  
185. Procedure if person objecting alleges that work will cost mo re than three thousand 
rupees.—If the objector alleges that the cost of executing the work or of doing the thing required may 
exceed three thousand rupees, such objection shall be heard and disposed of by the municipality at a 
meeting,  unless the Chairperson or Vice -Chairperson sh all certify that such cost may not exceed three 
thousand rupees, in which case the objection shall be heard and disposed of b y the Chairperson and the 
Vice -Chairperson:  
Provided that in any case in whi ch the Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson shall have c ertified his 
opinion and the objection shall in consequence thereof have been heard and disposed of b y the 49 
 Chairperson and the Vice -Chairperson, the person making the objection may, if the requisition made upon 
him is not withdrawn on the hearing of his ob jection, pay in the said sum of three thousand rupees to the 
municipality as the cost of e xecuting the work or doing the thing required, whereupon such person shall 
be relieved of all further liability and obligation, in respect of executing the work or do ing the thing 
required and in respect of paying the expenses thereof and the municipality itself shall execute such work 
or do such thing, and shall exercise all powers necessary therefor.  
186. Chairperson, Vice -Chair person to make order after hearing objection .—The Chairperson or 
the Vice -Chairperson, of the Nagar Panchayat or, the council as the case may be, shall after hearing the 
objection and making any enquiry which the y may deem necessary, record an  order withdrawing, 
modifying, or making absolut e the requisition against which the objection is preferred and if such order 
does not withdraw the requisition it shall specify the time within which the requisition shall be carried 
out, which shall n ot be less than the shortest time which might have been  mentioned in the original 
requisition under this Act.  
187. Power of municipality on failur e of persons to execute works .—If the person or persons 
required to execute the work or to do the thing fail, within the time specified in any requisition as 
aforesaid, to begin to execute such work or to do such thing, and thereafter diligently to execute the same 
to the satisfaction of the municipality until it is completed, the municipality or any person author ised by it 
in that b ehalf, may, after giving forty -eight hours notice of its intention by a notification to be affixed or 
posted upon or near the spot, enter upon the land and perform all necessary acts for the execution of the 
work or doing of the thing r equired; and the expenses thereby incurred shall be paid by the owners or by 
the occupiers, if such requisition was addressed to the owners or to the occupiers, as the case may be, and 
by the owners and the occupiers, if such requisition was addressed to t he owners and the occupiers.  
188. Power to apportion expe nses among owners and occupiers .—(1) Whenever any expenses 
incurred by the municipality are to be paid by the owners of any land as provided in section 187 the  
municipality may, if there be more than one owner, apportion the said expenses among such of the 
owners as are known in such manner as the municipality may deem fit.  
(2) Whenever any such e xpenses are to be paid by the occupiers of any land as provided in section 
187 the municipality may, if there be  more than one occupie r, apportion the said expenses among such of 
the occupiers , as are kn own in such manner as th e municipality may deem fit.  
189. Apportionme nt among owners and occupiers .—Whenever any expenses incurred by the 
municipality are to be paid by the owners and occupiers of any land, as provided in section 187 the 
municipality may apportion the said expenses among the said owners and occupiers or such of them as 
are known in such manner as the municipality may deem fit.  
190. Occupiers may recover cost of works executed at their expenses from owners .—Whenever 
any works or alterations and improvements, of which the municipality is authorised by this Act to require 
the execution, are executed by the occupier on the requisition of t he municipality, or are executed by the 
municipality and cost thereof is recovered from the occupier, the cost thereof may, if the municipality 
certify that such cost ought to be borne by the owner, be deducted by such occupier from the next and 
following payment of his rent due or becoming due to such owner, or may be recovered by him in any 
court of competent jurisdiction.  
191. Power to enter upon, pos session of houses so repaired .—If the municipality u nder the 
provisions of this Act shall have caused any repairs to be made to any house or other structure and if such 
house or other structure be unoccupied, the municipality may enter into possession of the same, and may 
retain possession thereof until the  sum expended by it on the repairs be paid to it.  
192. Sale of m aterials of houses pulled down .—(1) The materials of anything which shall have been 
pulled down or removed under the provisions of section 183 may be sold by the municipality, and the 
proceeds of such sale shall be adjusted to the payment of the expenses incurred.  
(2) The surplus sale -procee ds, if any, shal l be credited to the Municipal f und, and may be paid on 
demand to any person who establishes his right to the satisfaction of the municipality or in a court of 
competent jurisdiction.  50 
 193. Cognizance .—(1) Unless otherwise expressly provided in this Act a Court shall take cognizance 
of any offence under this  Act or under any rules or bye -laws made thereunder except on the complaint of 
the municipality or some person authorised by the municipality by general or special order in this behalf.  
(2) No Court inferior to that of a Magistrate of the first class shall try any of  the offences specif ied in 
sub-section ( 1). 
194. Offen ces under the Act compoundable .—(1) The offences under this Act shall be  
compoundable:  
Provided that no offence, arising from the failure to comply with a written notice given by or on 
behalf of, the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, as the case may be, shall be compoundable unless the 
notice has been comp lied with.  
(2) Sums paid by way of composition under this section shall be credited to the Municipal Fund.  
195. Power and duties of police in respect of offences .—Every police officer shall give immediate 
information to the municipality of an offence coming to his knowledge which has been committed against 
this A ct or against any rules or bye -laws made thereunder, and shall be bound to assist all members, 
officers an d employees of the municipality in the exercise of their lawful duty.  
196. Appeals  from order refusing licences .—Any person aggrieved by an order of a municipality 
refusing, revoking or suspending licence  or permission required under this Act may, notwithstanding 
anything contained  elsewhere in this Act, within thirty days from the date of refusal, revoking or 
suspension, appea l to the State Government or an officer authorised by the Government in that beh alf 
whose decision shall be final and shall not be questioned in any Court.  
197. Appeals from orders in other cases .—(1) Any person aggrieved ,— 
(a) by the refusal of the Nagar Panchayat or Council under section 12 6 to sanction the erection, 
re-erection or material alteration of any building; or  
(b) by a notice from the Nagar Panchayat or Council under section 112 requiring a road to be 
drained, levelled, paved, flagged, metalled, or provided with proper means of lighting or under 
section 129 requiring the alteration or demolition of a building; or  
(c) by any order of the Nagar Panchayat or Council under the powers conferred upon it by section 
132 or by any order made by the Nagar Panchay at or by the Council under bye -law framed under 
clause ( vii) of sub-section ( 1) of section 209,  
may, within thirty days from the date of such refusal, notice, order, appeal to the Deputy Commissioner.  
(2) No such refusal, notice or order shall be questioned otherwis e than by such an appeal.  
(3) The decision of the Deputy Commissioner shall be final.  
198. Appeal not to be dismissed without giving reasonable oppo rtun ity.—No appeal under 
section 196 or section 197 shall be dismissed or allowed partly or wholly, unless reasonable opportunity 
of showing cause or being heard has been given to the parties.  
199. Dispute as to compen sation payable by municipality .—(1) When a dispute arises regarding 
the amount of compensation which the municipality is required b y this Act to pay, it shall  be settled in 
such manne r as the parties may agree, in default of agreement, by the Deputy Commissioner upon 
application made to him by the municipality or the person claiming compensation.  
(2) If the municipality or the perso n claiming compensation is not s atisfied with the decision of th e 
Deputy C ommissioner, it or he shall have a right to require the Deputy Commissioner to make a reference 
to the District Judge, in accordance wit h the provisions of section 18 of the Land Acqui sition Act, 1894  
(1 of 1894 ).  
200. Indemnity .—No suit shall be maintainable against Nagar Panchayat or Council or any of its 
committees, or any officer or employee, or any person acting under or in accordance with, the direction of 
the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council or any of its committees or any municipal officer or servant, in 
respect of anything in good faith done or intended to be done under thi s Act or under any rule or bye -law 
made thereunder.  51 
 201. Bar of suits in absence of notice .—(1) No suit or other legal proceeding, not being a criminal 
proceeding, shall be instituted against any Nagar Panchayat or Council, or any of its officers in respect of 
any act purporting to be done by such offic er in his official capacity, or any person acti ng under its 
direction , until the expiry of two months next after notice in writing has been delive red to or left at the 
office of — 
(a) in the case of a suit against the Nagar Panchayat or Council, the Executive Officer;  
(b) in the case of an officer, the officer against whom the suit or proceeding is instituted and, in 
the case of any person acting under its direction, delivered to him at his place of residence or business 
stating the cause of action, the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff or the 
petitioner and the relief which he claims; and the plaint or the pet ition shall contain a statement that 
such notice has been so delivere d or left.  
Explanation .—In this section  “Officer ” include s the Chairperson and the Vice -Chairperson.  
(2) Every such action shall be co mmenced within three months next after the arising of the cause of 
action, and not afterwards.  
CHAPTER XIII  
CONTROL  
202. Control by Deputy Commissioner .—The Deputy Commissioner or the Director or any officer 
so empowered by the Government i n this behalf may  at any time — 
(i) enter into and inspect, or cause any other p erson to enter into or inspect — 
(a) any immovable property in the occupation of, or  
(b) any work in progress under, or  
(c) any institution under the control and administration of the Nagar Panchayat, or as the case 
may be, the Council; and  
(ii) call for inspection of any book or document which may be, for the purpose of thi s Act, in the 
possession or under the control of the Nagar Panchayat or, as the case may be, the Council.  
203. Power t o suspend action under the Act .—(1) The Government, or the Deputy Commissioner 
may, by order in writing, suspend the execution of any resolution or order of the municipality or prohibit 
the doing of any act which is about to be done or is being done, in pursuance of, or under this Act, or i n 
pursuance of any sanction or permission granted by the municipality in the exercise of their powers under 
this Act, if in its or his opinion, the resolution, order or act is contrary to the public interest or is in excess 
of the  powers conferred by law, or the execution of the resolution or order, or the doing of the act is likely 
to lead to a serious breach of the peace, or to cause serious injury or annoyance to the public, or to any 
class or body of persons.  
(2) When the Deputy Commissioner makes a ny order under this sec tion, he shall forthwith forward a 
copy thereof, with a statement of his reasons for making it, to the Government.  
(3) The Governmen t may obtain the views of the Director and thereupon either rescind the order or 
direct that it continues in force with such modifica tion and for such period as it may deem fit.  
204. Powers of Deputy Com missioner in case of emergency .—(1) If, in any case of emergency, the 
Deputy Commissioner upon the recommendation of the concerned technical advisor immediately, 
available, is of opinion that the immedia te execution of any work or the immediate doing of any act which 
the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, whether at a meeting or otherwise, are empowered to execute or do, 
is necessary for the health or safety of the public, he may call upon the Nagar Panchaya t or the Council to 
execute the work within such time as he may appoint. If such work is not executed within such period h e 
may appoint some other person  to execute the work or do the act immediately.  
(2) The Deputy Commissioner shall forthwith report to the Government every case in which he uses 
the pow ers conferred on him under sub -section ( 1) whereupon the Government may pass such order as it 
may deem fit.  
(3) Where any person is appointed und er sub -section ( 1), the Deputy Commissioner may direct that 
the expense of performing the duty, executing the work or doing the act, together with reasonable 52 
 remuneration, if any, to the person so appointed, shal l forthwith be paid by the Nagar Panchayat or by the 
Council.  
(4) Where such expense and remuneration are not so paid, the Deputy Commissioner may make an 
order directing the person having the custody of  the balance of the Municipal Fund to pay the expense and 
remuneration, or so much thereof as is possible from the balance, in priority to any or all other charge, 
and such person shall make payment accordingly.  
205. Power to dissolve Nagar Panchaya t or Council in certain cases .—If in the opinion of the 
Government, a Nagar Panchayat or a Council, as the case may be, is not competent to perform or 
persistently make default in the performance of the obligato ry duties imposed upon it by or under this Act 
or exceed or abuse its power the Government may by notification, stating the reasons for so doing declare 
such Nagar Panchayat or Council to be incompetent or in default or to have exceeded or abused its power , 
as the case may be, and dissolve such Na gar Panchayat or Council:  
Provided that a Nagar Panchayat or a Council, as the case may be, shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of bein g heard before its dissolution:  
Provided further that when a Nagar Panchaya t or a Council, as the case may be, is dissolved, the 
Government may appoint any person or persons to exercise and perform the powers and duties of the 
Nagar Panchayat or the Council during the period of dissolution until the new Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council, as t he case may be, is constituted:  
Provided also that the Government shall, before the expiry of a period of six months from the date of 
dissolution of the Nagar Panchayat or the Council, cause fresh elections to be held for the constitution of 
a new Nagar Panchayat or a new Council.  
206. Consequence of dissolution .—An order of dissolution shall have the following consequences, 
namely: — 
(a) all the Councillors of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council shall, as from the date of order, 
vacate their offices as such Councillors;  
(b) all the powers and duties which under the Act may be exercised and pe rformed by the Nagar 
Panchayat or the Council,  whether at a meeting or other wise, shall, during the period of dissolution, 
be exercised and performed by such person or persons as the Government may direct;  
(c) all property vested in such Nagar Panchayat or the Council shall, during the period of 
dissolution, vest in the Government.  
207. Decision of disp utes between local authorities .—(1) When a dispute arises between a Nagar 
Panchayat or a Council or any other local authority on any matter which they are jointly interested, such 
dispute shall be referred to Government, whose decision s hall be final.  
(2) The Government may regulate by rules made under this Act the relation to be observed between a 
Nagar Panchayat or a Council and other local authorities in any matter in whi ch they are j ointly 
interested.  
CHAPTER XIV  
RULE S AND BY E-LAWS  
208. Power s of State Government  to make rules .—(1) The Government may, by notification and 
subject to  the condition of previous publication, make rules for the purpose of carrying into effect the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) manner in which the minutes of the proceedings of a meeting of a Nagar Panchayat or a 
Council or its committees shall be record ed and published;  
(ii) form and manner in which the accounts of receipts and expenditures of a Nagar Panchayat or 
a Council shall be kept;  53 
 (iii) form a nd manner in which the annual budget of a Nagar Panchayat or a Council shall be 
prepared;  
(iv) manner in which returns, statements and reports by a Nagar Panchayat or a Council shall be 
submitted;  
(v) matter not specifically provided for in this Act for the valuation of holdings, for the 
assessment, collection and refund of taxes imposed under this Act;  
(vi) determination of fees payable upon distraint warrant under this Act;  
(vii) regulation, management and inspection o f the working systems of water -supply, lighting, 
drainage or sewerage provided, est ablished or maintained by or under the control and administration 
of a Nagar Panchayat or a Council;  
(viii) form and procedure for taking oath or af firmation by Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and 
Councillo r the authority who shall administer oath or affirmation; and  
(ix) manner in w hich bye -laws shall be published after confirmation by the Government.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before Legislative 
Assembly while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or 
in two or more successive sessions, and if, bef ore the expiry of the session in which it is so laid or the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, Legislative Assembly 
makes any modification in the rule or decides that any such rule should not be made, the rule s hall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
209. Powe r of municipality to frame bye -laws .—(1) A municipality may, frame bye -laws consistent 
with the p rovisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder for carrying out the provisions of this Act, 
for— 
(i) any matter in respect of which po wer to frame bye -laws is conferred expressely on the 
municipalilty under this Act;  
(ii) regulating traffic, and preventing obstruction s and encroachments and unisances on or near 
public roads, or on or near pontoons bridges, ghats, landing places, river ban ks or other places of 
public resort or on places near water works for the supply of drinking water;  
(iii) prescr ibing a minimum width of wheel -tyres or a minimum diameter and the maximum 
wheel -tracks or w heels for different classes of carts and carriage kept or used within the municipality;  
(iv) prescribing the manner in which notice of the intention  to erect, re -erect, materially alter a 
building shall be given to the municipality;  
(v) requiring that with every such notice shall be furnished with a site -plan of the land on which it 
is intended to  erect, re -erect or materially alter such building and plan and specification, and  in the 
case of erection or re -erection of a building, estimate also of the cost of const ruction (excluding cost 
of land and its improvement) of the building, all such characters and with such details as the  
bye-laws may require  in respect of all or any  of the following matters, viz.— 
(a) free passage or way in front of the building;  
(b) space to be left about the building to s ecure free circulation of air and facilitate 
scavenging and for the prevention of fire;  
(c) provision and position of latrines, privies, urinals, cesspools or drains;  
(d) level and width of foundation, level of the lowest floor, and stability of the structure; and  
(e) the line of frontage with neighbouring buildings, it the building abuts on a public r oad; 
  54 
 (vi) regulating in respect of the erection, re -erection or material alteration of any buildings, within 
the municipality or part thereof — 
(a) the materials and method of construction to be used for external and partition walls, roofs 
and floors;  
(b) the materials and method of con struction and position of fire -places, chimneys, latrines, 
privies, urinals, cesspools and drains;  
(c) the height and slope of the roof above the uppermost floor upon which human beings are 
to live or cooking operations are to be carried on;  
(d) the space to be left about the building to secure the free circulation of air and for the 
prevention of fire;  
(e) the line of frontag e where the building abuts on a  public road;  
(f) the number and height of the storeys of which the building may consist;  
(g) the means to be provided for egress from the building in case of fire;  
(h) any other matter affecting the ventilation or sanitation of the building; and  
(i) matter concerning sanitary conditions and water pollution of the area;  
(vii) preventing the erection of buildings without adequate provisions being ma de for the laying 
out and location of roads;  
(viii) regulating the level, means o f drainage, alignment and width  of roads constructed by private 
persons;  
(ix) regulating the use of, and the prevention of nuis ance in regard to public water -supply, bathing 
and washing place, streams, channels, tanks and wells;  
(x) regulating, either by granting licences n ecessary or otherwise, the washing of clothes by 
professional washerman, and fixing the places in which clothes may be so washed or in which they 
may not be so washed;  
(xi) prescribing the measures to be  taken for the prevention of the breeding of mosquitoes in 
wells, tanks, pools, excavations, cisterns or other places or vessels containing or capable of containing 
water;  
(xii) regulating the cutting of trees and b amboos within the municipality;  
(xiii) regulating the disposal of sewage, offensive matter, carcasses of animals and rubbish, and 
the construction and maintenance of latrines, privies, urinals , cesspools, drains and sewers;  
(xiv) providing for the inspection and regulation of markets and for the preparation and exhibition 
of a price list thereat;  
(xv) regulating the hours and manner of transport within the municipality of any specified articles 
of food or drink;  
(xvi) fixing the p laces in which any  specified article of food or drink may be sold or exposed for 
sale or the places in which it may not be sold or exposed for sale and regulating t he sale of foodsta ff 
unfit for human consumption;  
(xvii) regulating  either by granting licences necessary or otherwise, or prohibiting, for the purpose 
of preventing danger to th e public health the stalling or h erding of horses, cattle , swine , donkeys, 
sheep or goats, geese, ducks and fowls;  
(xviii) providing for the inspection of milch cattle and prescribing the measures to be taken on the 
occurrence among them of infections or contagious diseases; and prescribing and regulating the 
construction, dimensions, ven tilation, lighting, cleansing drainage and wat er-supply of dairies and 
cattle -sheds in the occupation of persons carrying on the trade of dairymen or milksellers;  
(xix) providing for the inspection and p roper regulation of encamping grounds , pounds, serai s, or 
dharmsalas; bakeries and s erated water factories, ice factories, flour mills, oil mills, sweet -meat 
shops, factories and other places in which mechanical or electrical p ower is employed, and  
slaughter house ; 55 
 (xx) preventing nuisances affecting the public health, safety, or convenience in places of public 
resort for purposes of recreation or amusement;  
(xxi) preventing nuisances affecting the public health, safety or convenience;  
(xxii) controlling and regulating the use and management of burial and burning grounds and the 
disposal of corpses ; 
(xxiii) providing for the holding of fairs and industrial exhibitions within the municipality or 
under the control of the municipality and for fixing and collecting the fees to be levied thereat;  
(xxiv) fixing the conditions on which licences under this Act are to be granted and may be 
suspended or revoked;  
(xxv) preventing and removing any encroa chments on any municipal land including markets, 
drains, roads, etc .; 
(xxvi) giving effe ct to the objects and purposes of this Act and the Municipality may by such  
bye-laws impose on offenders ag ainst any  provision of the bye -laws, such reasonable  penalties as it 
may think fit, not continuing offence, a further penalty not exceeding two hundred rupees for each 
day after written notice of the offence  to them from the municipality:  
Provided that the above li mits of rupees five thousand and rupees two hundred shall not apply to 
the offences in respect of the bye -laws regulating octroi;  
(xxvii ) distribution of works among the officers and the members of the st aff of the municipality.  
210. Additional power to frame bye -laws in hill areas .—(1) A Nagar Panchayat or Council whose 
municipality is wholly or in part situated in a hilly trac t may, in addition to such bye -laws as it may make 
under t he preceding section frame bye -laws for regulating or prohibiting the cutting or destroying of tree; 
or shrubs or the making of excavations or removal of soil or quarrying, where such regulation or 
prohibition appears to the Nagar Panchayat or the Council to be necessary for an y or all of following 
purposes: — 
(a) the maintenance of water supply;  
(b) the preservation of the soil;  
(c) the prevention of landslips;  
(d) the formation of ravines or torrents;  
(e) the protection of land against erosion or the deposit thereon of sand , gravel or stones;  
(f) the p rotection of the beauty or general appearance of the municipality.  
(2) The Nagar Panchayat or the Council may, by any bye -law framed under this section, declare that 
any person comm iting a breach of any such bye -law, or failing to comply with any notice issued 
thereunder, shall be liable to fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and to a further fine, which 
may extend to two hundred rupees for each day after conviction during which the offence is co ntinued.  
211. Confirmation of bye -laws .—(1) The power to frame bye -laws in the Act shall be subject to the 
condition of previous notification.  
(2) No such bye -laws shall come into force until it has been confirmed by the Government.  
(3) The Government may cancel its confirmation of any such bye law, and thereupon the bye -law 
shall cease to have effect.  
212. Publication of bye -laws .—Every bye -law shall, after confirmation, be published in the 
prescribed manner.  
213. Model bye -laws .—The Government may from time to time frame model bye -laws for any 
matter in respect of which a municipa lity is empowered to frame bye -laws under this Act and publish 
them in the Offici al Gazette fo r the guidance of municipality.  
 
 56 
 CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
214. Validity of acts and proceedings .—(1) No act of the Nagar Panchayat or of the Council or of 
any of its committees shall be deemed to be invalid by reason of any vacancy in the membership thereof.  
(2) Any proceeding of a meeting of the Nagar Panchayat or of Coun cil or of any committee thereof 
shall be valid notwithstanding that it is subsequently discovered that some person who was not entitled to 
do so, sat or voted or otherwise took part in the proceedings.  
215. Petition for challenging election .—(1) The election of a person to the office of a Councillor 
shall not be called in question except by a petition to be filed before the Election Tribunal within such 
time and in such manner as may be  prescribed, on the ground that — 
(a) the election has not been a free election by reason that the corrupt practice of bribery or undue 
influence has extensively prevailed at the election; or  
(b) that the result of the electi on has been mate rially affected — 
(i) by the improper acceptance or rejection of any nomination; or  
(ii) by gross failure to comply with the provisions of this Act or the rules framed thereunder.  
(2) The Election Tribunal constituted under section 103 of the Manipur Panchayati Raj Act, 1994  
(26 of 1994 ), shall also be the Election Tr ibunal for the p urposes of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The decision of the Election Tribunal shall be final.  
216. Power to make rules for ele ction and election petition .—For the purpose of  election of 
Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and Councillor, the Government shall make rules for election and election 
petition under this Act.  
217. Bar of jurisdiction of Ci vil Courts in election matters .—(1) No civil court shall have 
jurisdiction to question the legality of an y action taken or any decision given by an officer or a uthority 
appointed under this Act, in connection with the conduct of elections thereunder.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, — 
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seats to 
such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under this Act shall not be called in question in 
any Court;  
(b) no election to any municipality shall be called in question except by an election petition 
presented to Election Tribunal and in such manner as is provided for by this Act.  
218. Election to the m unicipalities .—(1) The superintendence, direction and control of the 
preparation of e lectoral rolls for, and conduct  of, all elections to the Municipalities shall be vested in the 
State Election Com mission constituted under section 98 of the M anipur Panchayati Raj Act, 1994  
(26 of 1994 ).  
(2) Subject to the provision s of this Act, election to the m unicipality shall be held in accordance with 
the ru les made by the Government in this behalf.  
(3) The Government shall, when so requested by the State Election Commission, make available to 
the State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary for  the discharge of the functions conferred 
on the State Election Commission under this Act.  
219. Elect oral roll for a municipal area .—(1) For every municipal area, there shall be an electoral 
roll showing the names of persons qualifying to vote.  
(2) The electoral roll for every municipal area shall be divided into several parts, one for ea ch ward of 
a municipal area.  
(3) The electoral roll for a municipal area shall be prepared, revised or corrected by the State Election 
Commission in accordance with such rules as may be made by the Govern ment in this behalf:  57 
 Provided that there shall be a preliminary publicatio n of such electoral roll after p reparation or 
revision to be followed by final publication after hearing of objections in the manner prescribed.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the electoral roll for the time being in force for 
the election of Members of the Manipur Legistive Assembly, so far as it relates to the area comprised in 
the municipal area, may be adopted as the electoral roll for that municipal area for the purposes of 
preliminary publication.  
220. Conditio ns for registration as a voter .—(1) Every person who — 
(a) is not less than 18 years of age on the qualifying date, and  
(b) is ordina rily resident in a municipal area,  
shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for that municipal area.  
(2) No person shall be entitled to be registered in the electoral roll for any municip al area in more 
than one place.  
(3) No person shall be entitled to be registered in the el ectoral roll for any municipal area if his name 
has already been registered as a voter in the electoral rol l of any other local authority.  
Explanation  I.—The expression  “qualifying date ” shall mean such date as the Government may by 
notification specif y for the purposes of this Act.  
Explanation II .—The expression  “ordinarily resident ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
in section 20 of the Representation of t he People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950 ). 
221. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Go vernment may, by order do anything not in consistent with the provisions thereof which 
appears to it to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty.  
222. Overriding effect  of the p rovisions of the Act .—The pr ovisions of this Act, rules and  
bye-laws, and orders made and directions issued thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything 
inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or any instrumen t having 
effect by virtue of any such law.  
223. Mode of proof of municipal rec ord and fee for certified copy .—(1) A copy of any receipt, 
application , plan, notice, order, entry in  a register or other document in the po ssession of a Nagar 
Panchayat or  a Council, shall, if duly certified by an y person authorised by any bye -law in this behalf, be 
received as evidence of the existence of any entry or document  and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein recorded in every case, where and to the same extent as, the original entry 
or document would, if produced, have been admissible to prove such matters.  
(2) For the issue of such copies the Nagar Panchayat or as the case may be, the Council may impose 
such f ees as may be fixed by any bye -law in this behalf.  
224. Restriction on the  summoning of municipal servants to produce documents .—No municipal 
officer or servant shall in any legal proceeding to which a Nagar Panchayat or a Council is not a party be 
required to produce any register or document the contents of which can be proved by a certified copy, or 
to appear as a witness to prove the matters and transaction recorded therein unless by order of the court 
made for a special cause.  
225. Penalty for violat ing the provision of this  Act.—If any person violates any of the provisions of 
this Act for which a penalty is not al ready provided under this Act, he shall be liable to a fine not 
exceeding rupees five hundred for each day in the case of continuing violation.  
226. Public servants .—Every Councillor and every officer or servant of the Nagar Panchayat or the 
Council and every contractor or agent appointed by it for the collection of any tax or every person 
employe d by such contractor or agent for collection of such tax shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of section 21 of the  Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ). 
227. District Planning Commit tee.—(1) The District Planning Committee constituted under section 
96 of the Manipur Panchaya ti Raj Act, 1994 (26 of 1994) shall also be the District Planning Committee 
for the purposes of this Act.  58 
 (2) The District Plan ning Committee shall consist — 
(a) members of House of the People who represent the whole or part of the district;  
(b) all the members of the State Legislative Assembly whose constituencies lie within the district;  
(c) Adhyaksha of the Zilla Parishad;  
(d) Mayor or the President of the Municipal Corpoaration or the Municipal Council respectively, 
having jurisdiction over the head quarters of the District; and  
Explanation —For the purposes of this clause,  “Mayor or the President ” shall mean the 
Chairperson of th e Municipal Council or, as the case may be, of the Municipal Corporation;  
(e) such number of persons not less than four-fifth of the total number of members of the 
Commit tee as may be specified by the Govern ment elected in the prescribed manner  from  amongst 
the members of the Zilla Parishad, Nagar Panchayat and Councillors of the Municipal Corporation 
and the Municipa l Councils in the district, in proportion to the ratio b etween the  population of the 
rural areas and of the urban areas in th e district.  
(3) The Chairman of the District Co -operative Banks and of the Development Bank shall be 
permanent invite es of the Committee.  
(4) The Chief Executive Officers shall b e the Secretary of the Committee.  
(5) The Deputy Commissioner for the Districts shal l be the Chairma n District Planning Committee.  
(6) The District Planning Committee shall consolidate the plans prepared by the Zilla Parishad, Gram 
Panchayat, Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council and the Municipal Corpora tion in the district and prepare 
a draft development plan for the district as a whole.  
(7) Every District Planning Committee shall in prepa ring the draft development plan — 
(a) have regard to — 
(i) the matters of common i nterest between the Zilla Pari shad, Gra m Panchayats, Nagar  
Panchayats, Municipal Corpora tion and Municipal Councils in the district including spatial 
planning sharing of water and other physical and natural resource, the integrated development of 
infrastructure and environmental conservation,  
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether financial or otherwise;  
(b) consult such institutions and organis ations as the Government may by order specify.  
(8) The Chairman of every Distric t Planning Committee shall for ward the development plan, as 
recommended by such Committee to the Government.  
228. Commi ttee for Metropolitan P lanning .—(1) The Governor may by notification notify an area 
having a population of ten lakh or more comprised in one or more districts and consisting of two or more 
municipalities or panchayats or other contiguous areas, to be a Metropolit an area for the purposes of this  
Act. 
(2) On such notification the Government shall constitute in every Metropolitan area a Metropolitan 
Planning Committee to prepare a draft development plan for the Metropolitan area as a whole.  
(3) The Govern ment may prescribe by notification with respect to — 
(a) the manner in which the seats in such Committee shall be filled:  
Provided that not less than two -thirds of the members of such Committee shall be el ected by, and 
from amongst, the elected members  of the municipalities and Chairpersons of the Panchayats i n the 
Metro politan area in proportion to the ratio between the population of the municipalities and of the 
Panchayats in that area;  
(b) the representation in such  Committee of the Government of India and the Government and of 
such organisations and institutions as may be deemed necessary for carrying out the funct ions 
assigned to such Committee;  59 
 (c) the functio ns relating to planning and co -ordination for the Metropolitan area which may be 
assigned to such Committee;  
(d) the manner i n which the Chairperson of such Committee shall be chosen.  
(4) Every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall, in prepa ring the draft development plan — 
(a) have regard to — 
(i) the plans prepared by the municipalities and the Panchayats in the Metropolitan area;  
(ii) matters of common interest between the municipalities and the Panchayats, including 
coordinated spatial planning of the area, sharing of water and other physical and natural 
resources, the integrated development of infrastructure and environmental conserv ation;  
(iii) the overall objectives and priorities set by the Government of India and the Government;  
(iv) the extent and nature of investments likely to be made in the Metropolitan area by 
agencies of the Government of India and Government, and other available resources whether 
financial or otherwise;  
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Governor may, by order, specify.  
(5) The Chairperson of every Metropolitan Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, 
as recommended by such Committee, to the Government.  
229. Delegation of powers of State Government .—The State Government may, by notification 
delegate to any officer or authority subordinate to it any of the powers conferred on it or on any officer 
subordinate to it by this Act, other than powers to make rules, to be exercised, subject to su ch restrictions 
and conditions as may be specified in the said notification.  
230. Repeal of Man ipur Act 26 of 1976 and saving .—(1) On the date of the commencement of this 
Act, t he Manipur Municipalities Act, 1976 shall b e deemed to have been repealed:  
Provided that the said repeal shall not affect:  
(a) the validity, effect or consequence of anything done or suffered under the said enactment;  
(b) any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred under t he said 
enactment or any remedy or proceeding in respect thereof;  
(c) any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, liability, claim or demand, or 
any indemnity already granted;  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respe ct of any such right, privilege,  
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid; and any such investigation, legal 
proceeding  or remedy may be instituted or enforced and any such penalty, forfeiture or punishment 
may be imposed as if such enactment or part thereof had not been repealed; and  
(e) the operation of the said enactm ent in relation to areas falling within the Municipal limits of 
Moreh.  
(2) Notwithstan ding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), all municipalities declared, limits defined, 
regulations and div isions mad e, all rules and bye -laws, notifications, orders, appointments and 
assessments made, licences and notices, issued, taxes, tolls, rates and fees imposed or assessed, budgets 
passed, plans approved, permissions or sanctions granted, contracts entered into, s uits instituted and 
proceedings taken under the Manipur Municipal Act, 1976 (Manipur Act 26 of 1976 ) in force 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall continue to be in force and shall be deemed to 
have been respectively made, issued, imposed  or assessed, passed, approved, granted, entered into, 
instituted and taken under this Act until new provisions are made or superseded by anything done or any 
action taken under this Act.  
231. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Manipur Municipal ities Ordinance, 1994 (Ord. 6 of 1994 ) is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  60 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 36)  
1. Urban Planning including Town Planning.  
2. Regulation of land use and construction of buildings.  
3. Planning for economic and social development.  
4. Roads and Bridges.  
5. Water supply for domestic, industrial and commercial purposes.  
6. Public Health, Sanitation, Conservancy and Solid Waste Managem ent. 
7. Fire Services.  
8. Urban Forestry, Protection of the Environment and Promotion of ecological aspects.  
9. Safeguarding the interests of weaker sections of society including the handicapped and mentally 
retarded.  
10. Slum improvement and upgradation.  
11. Urban poverty alleviation.  
12. Provision of urban amenities and facilities, such as parks, gardens and playgrounds.  
13. Promotion of cultural, educational and aesthetic aspects.  
14. Burials and burial -grounds; cremations, cremation -grounds and electric  crematoriums.  
15. Cattle pounds, prevention of cruelty to animals.  
16. Vital statistics including registration of births and deaths.  
17. Public amenities including street lighting, parking lots, bus stops and public convenie nces.  
18. Regulation of slaughter houses and tanneries.  
--------------------------The Manipur Panchayati Raj Act,1994--------------------------
1 
 THE MANIPUR PANCHAYATI RAJ ACT, 1994  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER  II 
GRAM SABHA  
3. Membership of Gram Sabha and disqualification.  
4. Cessation of Membership.  
5. Periodicity of Meetings.  
6. Convening of Meetings.  
7. Quorum.  
8. Gram Sabha Meetings.  
9. Agenda.  
10. Resolution.  
11. Functions of Gram Sabha.  
12. Vigilance Committee.  
 
CHAPTER III  
GRAM PANCHAYATS  
13. Constitution of Gram Panchayat.  
14. Incorporation of Gram Panchayat.  
15. Electoral Roll of Gram Panchayat.  
16. Publication of Electoral Roll of Gram Panchayat.  
17. Composition of Gram Panchayat.  
18. Division of Gram Sabha into territorial constituencies.  
19. Reservation of seats.  
20. Term of the Gram Panchayats.  
21. Election of the Pradhan and members of Gram Panchayat.  
22. Appointment of an Administrative Committee or Administrator on failure to elect members of 
Gram Panchayats and in other cases.  
23. Filling of casual vacancy in the office of Pradhan and of the member.  
24. Election of Up -Pradhan.  
25. Rese rvation of seats for Pradhan and Up -Pradhan.  
 2 
 SECTIONS  
26. Procedure for election of Up -Pradhan on the establishment of Gram Panchayat.  
27. Term of the office of the Pradhan and Up -Pradhan.  
28. Power s, functions and duties of Pradhan and Up -Pradhan.  
29. Resignation of Pradhan and Up -Pradhan.  
30. No confidence motion against the Pradhan and Up -Pradhan.  
31. Resignation of members.  
32. Meeting of Gram Panchayat.  
33. Minutes.  
34. Quorum and procedure.  
35. Functions of Gram Panchayat.  
36. Assignment of functions.  
37. General powers of the Gram Panchayat.  
38. Standing Committees.  
39. Property and funds.  
40. Taxation.  
41. Financial assistance to Gram Panchayats.  
42. Budget of the Gram Panchayat.  
43. Accounts.  
44. Audit.  
45. Staff of Gram Panchayat.  
46. Staffing pattern and category of employees.  
47. Appointment and control of employees.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
ZILLA PARISHAD  
48. Establishment of Zilla Parishad.  
49. Composition of Zilla Parishad.  
50. Elected Members.  
51. Filling of casual vacan cy. 
52. Reservation.  
53. Term of a Zilla Parishad.  
54. Election of Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha.  
55. Salary and allowances to the Adhyaksha and Up-Adhyaksha and other Members.  
56. Powers, funtions and duties of the Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha.  
57. Resignation or removal of the Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha.  
58. Resignation of Member.  
59. Meeting of the Zilla Parishad.  
60. Minutes.  
61. Functions and powers of Zilla P arishad.  
62. General powers of Zilla Parishad.  
63. Assignment of functions.  
64. Delegation of powers.  
65. Standing Committees.  
66. Functions of the Standing Committee.  
67. Procedure of Committees.  3 
 SECTIONS  
68. Power to acquire, hold and dispose of property.  
69. Zilla Parishad Fund.  
70. Taxation.  
71. Financial arrangements of Zilla Parishad.  
72. Budget.  
73. Accounts.  
74. Audit.  
75. Staff of Zilla Parishad.  
76. Functions of the Chief Executive Officer and other officers.  
77. Right to requisition records, recover money, etc.  
 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
78. Powers to revise or modify  decisions of committees.  
79. Powers of Gram Panchayats to make bye -laws.  
80. Powers of Zilla Parishad to make regulations.  
81. Powers of Government to make model regulations and bye -laws.  
82. Powers of Government to dissolve and reconstitute Gram Panchayat and Zilla Pari shad in case of 
alteration of area.  
83. Dissolution of Gram Panchayats and Zilla Parishad in certain other cases.  
84. Inquiry into the afffairs of the Panchayats by the Government.  
85. Inspection of Development Schemes.  
86. Directions from the Government.  
87. Commissioner and  Chief Executive officer’s powers in respect of Gram Panchayat and Zilla 
Parishad.  
88. Power of Government and Chief Executive Officer to provide for  performance of duties in default 
of Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad.  
89. Zilla Prishads, power of suspending the executions of order, etc., of Gram Panchayat.  
90. Government’s power of suspending execution of unlawful orders or resolution s. 
91. Purchase of stores and equipment.  
92. Power to appoint administrator in certain cases.  
93. Removal of members for misconduct, etc.  
94. Restricti ons on withdrawal of powers and functions from the Panchayats.  
95. Preparation of development plans.  
96. District Planning Committee.  
97. Finance Commission for Panchyats.  
98. State Election Commission.  
99. Determination of elected members after census.  
100. Qualification of membership for election to Panchayat or Zilla Parishad.  
101. Disqualification for memberships.  
102. Power of State Government to rescind or suspend resolution of a Gram Panchayat or Zilla 
Parishad.  
103. Constitution of Election Tribunal.  
104. Annual Administration Report.  4 
 SECTIONS  
105. Power to make rules.  
106. Bar to interference by Courts in electoral matters.  
107. Taking of oath.  
108. Repeal and savings.  
109. Removal of difficulties.  
  5 
 THE MANIPUR PANCHAYATI RAJ  ACT , 1994   
NO. 26 OF 1994  
[23rd April , 1994 .]  
An Act to provide for the constitution and organisation of Panchayats as units of  local  
self-Government in the rural areas of Manipur and for matters connected therewith and 
incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to reorganise Panchayats in rural areas of Manipur by comprehensive 
enactment to establish a two -tier Panchayati Raj system in the State with elected bodies at the Gram and 
District levels, in keeping with the Constitutional provisions rel ating to Panchayats for greater 
participation of the people and more effective implementation o f rural development programmes.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Ma nipur Panchayati Raj 
Act, 1994.  
(2) It extends to the whole of the State of Manipur excepting any area to which the Manipur (Hill 
Areas) District Council Ac t, 1971 (Manipur Act 76 of 1971 ) or the Ma nipur (Village Authorities in Hill 
Areas) Act , 1956 (Manipur Act 80 of 1956) extends, or which has been or may hereafter be declared as, 
or included in, a municipality under any law for the time being in force, or which has been or may 
hereafter be declare d as, or included in a cantonment under the Cantonment Act, 1924  (2 of 1924) . 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha”  means an Adhyaksha and a Up -Adhyakhsa of a Zilla 
Parishad elected under section 5 4 of this Act;  
(b) “Chairperson”  means Chairperson of a Standing Committee of a Zilla Parishad or a Gram 
Panchayat, as the case may be, constituted un der the provisions of this Act;  
(c) “Chief Executive Officer”  means the Chief Executive Officer of a Zilla Parishad appointe d 
under sectio n 75 of this Act;  
(d) “Commissioner”  means the Commissioner of the Government in the Development and 
Panchayati Raj or such other person as may be appointed by the State Government to exercise the 
powers of a Commissioner un der this Act;  
(e) “distri ct” means the revenue district;  
(f) “Deputy Commissioner”  means the D eputy Commissioner of District;  
(g) “Government”  means t he State Government of Manipur;  
(h) “Gram Sabha”  means a body consisting of persons registered in the electoral rolls relating to a 
village comprised within the area of the Panchayat at the village level;  
(i) “Gram Panchayat”  means the Gram Panch ayat c onstituted under the Act;  
(j) “Official Gaze tte” means the Manipur Gazette;  
(k) “Panchayat”  means a Gram Panchayat and a Zilla Paris had constituted u nder the provision s of 
this Act;  
(l) “Panchayat area”  means the t erritorial area of a Panchayat;  
                                                           
1. 23rd April, 1994 , vide notification No. S.O. 328(E), dated 23rd April, 1994 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii). 6 
 (m) “population” means the population a s ascertained at the last preceding census of whic h the 
relevant figures have been  published,  
(n) “Pradhan”  means a Pradhan of a Gram Panchayat electe d under section 21 of this Act;  
(o) “prescribed”  means prescrib ed by rules made under the Act;  
(p) “Secretary” means the Secretary of a Gram Panc hayat appointed under this Act;  
(q) “Standing Committee”  means a Sta nding Committee constituted by a Zilla Parishad or a  Gram 
Panchayat under this Act;  
(r) “Up -Pradhan”  means a Up -Pradhan of a Gram Panchayat elected under section 24 of this Act;  
(s) “village”  means a village specified by the Governor by public notification  to be a village for 
the purpose of this Act and includes a gro up of villages so specified ; and 
(t) “Zilla  Parishad”  means a Zilla Parishad of a district constituted under section 48 of this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
GRAM SABHA  
3. Membership of Gr am Sabha and disqualification .—(1) A Gram Sabha shall, subject to  
sub-section ( 2), consist of all persons whose names are included in electoral rolls referred to in section 15 
within t he area of the Gram Sabha:  
Provided that no person shall be a memb er of more than on e Gram Sabha.  
(2) A person shall be disqualified for being a member of the Gram Sabha, if — 
(a) he is not a citizen of India; or  
(b) he is of unsound mind and stands so decl ared by a competent court; or 
(c) he is for the time being disqualified from voting under the provision of any law relating to 
corrupt practices and other offence s in connection with  election to State Legislature.  
4. Cessation of  membership .—(1) A member of Gram Sabha shall cease to be a member, if he has 
ceased to be ordinarily resid ent within the Gram Sabha area.  
(2) Where any person ceases to be a member of Gram Sabha under sub -section ( 1) he shall also cease 
to hold any office to  which he may have been elected or appointed by virtue of being a member thereof.  
5. Periodicity of meetings .—The Gram Sabha shall meet from time to time but six month s shall not 
intervene between any two meetings.  
6. Convening of meetings .—The meeting of the Gram Sabha shall be held in accordance with such 
procedure as may be prescribed.  
7. Quorum .—(1) The quor um for a meeting of the Gram Sabha shall be one -tenth of its total 
membersh ip. 
(2) If at the time appointed for the meeting, a quorum is not present, the person presiding shall wait 
for thirty minutes, and if within such period, there is no quorum, the per son presiding shall adjourn the 
meeting to the same time on the same day in the following week. He shall similarly, after waiting for 
thirty minutes, adjourn the meeting if at any time after it has begun, attention is drawn to the want of a 
quorum. A notic e of the meeting so fixed shall be posted in the office of the Gram Panchayat. The 
business which could not be considered at the meeting so postponed for want of quorum, shall be brought 
before and disposed of at the meeting so fixed or at any subsequent a djourned meet ing at which there is a 
quorum.  
8. Gra m Sabha meetings .—Every meeting of the Gram Sabha shall be presided over by the Pradhan 
of the concerned Gram Panchayat and in his absence, by the Up -Pradhan, and in the absence of both by a 
member of the Gram Panchayat to be chosen from amongst the members of the Panchayat.   7 
 9. Agenda .—The Gram Panchayat shall prepare the agenda for discussion of the Gram Sabha, such 
matters shall re late to the following, namely: — 
(a) the annual statement of  accounts of the Gram Panchayat, the report of administration of the 
preceding financial year and the last audit note an d replies if any, made thereto;  
(b) the budget of the Gram Panchayat f or the next financial year; and  
(c) the report in respect of devel opment programmes of the Gram Panchayat relating to the 
preceding year and development programmes proposed to be undertaken during the current year.  
10. Resolution .—Any resolution relating to the functions entrusted to the Gram Sabha under  
section 11, shall have to be passed by a majority of votes of the members present and voting in  the 
meeting of the Gram Sabha.  
11. Functions of Gram Sabha .—A Gram Sabha shall exercise th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) rendering assistance in the implementation of development schemes pertaining to the village;  
(b) identification of beneficiaries for the implementation of development sch emes pertaining to 
the village:  
Provided that in case the Gram Sabha fails to identify the beneficiaries within a reasonable time 
the Gram Panchayat can identify the beneficiaries;  
(c) mobilising voluntary labour and contributions in kind or cash or both for th e community 
welfare programmes;  
(d) to promote adult education and fam ily welfare within the village;  
(e) promotion of unity and harmony among all sect ions of society in the village;  
(f) such othe r matters as may be prescribed.  
12. Vigilance Committee .—The Gram Sabha may also form one or more Vigilance Committees 
consisting of persons, who are not members of the Gram Panchayat t o supervise the Gram Panchayat 
works, schemes and other activities and to put up reports concerning them in its meeting.  
CHAPTER III  
GRAM PANCHAYATS  
13. C onstitution of Gram Panchayat .—(1) There shall be constituted a Gram Panchayat for every 
Gram Sabha.  
(2) The Gram Panchayat constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall be notified in the Official Gazette and 
shall be deemed to have been constituted from t he date of its first meeting.  
(3) Every person shall be entit led to be included in the list o f electors of Gram Panchayat if he is not 
less than eighteen years of age on the date of its publication under sub -section ( 1) and is ordinarily 
resident within the area of the Gram Panchayat:  
Provided that no person shall be entitled to be included in the list of the e lectors of any Gram 
Pancha yat for more than one Gram Pan chayat and no person shall be entitled to be included in the 
electoral roll of any Gra m Panchayat for more than once:  
Provided further that if the applicant is included in the electoral roll of any ot her Gram Panchayat, the 
officer who includes his name shall inform the officer publishing the electoral roll of that other Gram 
Panchayat and that the other officer shall, on receipt of the inform ation, strike off the applicant’s name 
from that list.  
Expla nation .—For the purpose of th is sub -section, the expression “ordinarily resident” shall have the 
same meaning as has been given in section 20 of the Representa tion of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950).   8 
 (4) The name of any person included in the list of el ectors who becomes disqualified at any time after 
his name was entered in the list, shall forthwith be struck -off from th e list in which it is included:  
Provided that the name of any person struck -off from the electoral roll by reason of disqualification 
under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 shall forthwith be re -instated if such person ceases to 
become disqualified.  
(5) An appeal shall be made within such time and in such manner and to such authority as may b e 
prescribed against any order p assed under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 4). 
14. Incorporat ion of Gram Panchayat .—Every Gram Panchayat shall, by the name notified in the 
Official Gazette under section 13, be a body corporate hav ing perpetual succession and a common seal 
with power to acquire, h old and dispose of property and to e nter into contracts, and shall, by the said 
name sue and be sued.  
15. Ele ctoral roll of Gram Panchayat .—The electoral roll of the Manipur Assembly prepared under 
the provision of the Representation of the People  Act, 1950 (43 of 1950) and as in force on such date as 
the State Government may, by general or special order, notify in this behalf for such part of the 
constituency of the Assembly as  is included in the Gram Sabha, shall be the list of electors for such Gram 
Panchayat.  
16. Publication of Electoral roll of Gram Panchayat .—(1) The list of electors referred to in  
section 15 shall be published in such manner and by such authority as may be prescribed.  
(2) Any person whose name is not included in the list of  electors published under sub -section ( 1) may 
apply within ten days from its publication to the officer publishing the same for inclusion of his name 
therein and officer concerned shall, if he is satisfied that the applicant fulfils the condition mentioned  in 
sub-section ( 3) and is not disqualified from being included in the lis t of electors under section 15 after 
making such inquiry as may be prescribed, direct his name to be included in the list of electors.  
17. Composition of Gram Panchayat .—A Gram Panc hayat shall consist of the Pradhan and such 
number of directly elected members as may be notified from time to time by the State Government and 
one member for every 350 population or part thereof of the Panchayat area shall be elected  as a member 
of such P anchayat.  
18. Division of Gram Sabha in to territorial constituencies .—(1) The Deputy Commissioner shall, 
for the conduct of the election, — 
(i) divide the area of the Gram Sabha into territorial constituencies in such manner that the ratio 
between the population of each constituency and the number of seats allotted to it shall, as far as 
practicable, be the same throughout the Gram Sabha area;  
(ii) determine the number of seats  allotted to each constituency.  
(2) One member from each territorial constituency shall be elected by direct election to the Gram 
Panchayat.  
19. Reservation of seats .—(1) Seats shall be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Sch eduled Tribes in 
every Gram Panchayat, and the number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same 
proportion to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Panchayat as the population of 
Scheduled Castes or of the S cheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the total population of that 
area and such seats shall be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in such Gram Panchayat, in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Not less than one -third of the total  number of seats reserved under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
reserved for women belonging to Scheduled Castes, or as the cas e may be, the Scheduled Tribes.  
(3) Not less than one -third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the 
Scheduled  Castes and the Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in 
every Gram Panchayat shall be reserved for women and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different 
constituencies in a Gram Panchayat in su ch manner as may be prescribed.   9 
 20. Term of the Gram Panchayats .—(1) Every Gram Panchayat shall continue for a term of five 
years from the date appointed for its  first meeting and no longer:  
Provided that a Gram Panchayat which is functioning immediately before the co mmencement of this 
Act shall continue till the expiration of its duration.  
(2) The election to constitute a Gram  Panchayat shall be completed — 
(a) before the expiration of its duration spe cified in sub -section ( 1); and  
(b) in case of dissolution, before the expiration of a period of six month s from the date of 
dissolution:  
Provided that where the remainder o f the period for which the dis solved Gram Panchayat would 
have continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election unde r this clause 
for con stituting the Gram Panchayat for such period.  
(3) A Gram Panchayat constituted upon the dissolution of a Gram Panchayat before the expiration of 
its duration, shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Gram Panchayat 
would have continued under sub -section ( 1) had it not been so dissolved.  
21. Election of the Pradhan and members of Gram Panchayat .—The Pradhan and members of the 
Gram Panchayat shall be elected by direct election under secret ballot by the  members of the Gram Sabha 
from amongst themselves in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
22. Appointment of an Administrative Committee or Administrator on failure to elect members 
of Gram  Panchayat and in other cases .—(1) (a) If the Deputy Commissioner is satisfied that a Gram 
Panchayat for a village or group of villages immediately after the establishment of such Gram Panchayat 
cann ot be constituted by reason of — 
(i) any difficulty in holding an election of the me mbers of the Gram Panchayat; or  
(ii) failur e to elect such members at two successive elections held under sec tion 17; or  
(iii) any othe r sufficient reason whatsoever; or  
(b) If at any general election to a Gram Panchayat, no member is elected or less than two -third of the 
total number of members ar e elected, the Deputy Commissioner shall, by notification either, — 
(i) appoint an Administrative Committee consisting of persons qualified to be elected, the number 
of such persons being equal to the number of members determined under section 17; or  
(ii) appoint an Administrator.  
(2) The members of the Administrative Committee or the Administrator shall hold office for such 
period not exceeding six months as the Deputy Commissioner may specify in the noti fication under  
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) On the appointm ent of an Administrative Committee or an Administrator under sub -section ( 1), 
the persons, if  any, chosen as members of the Gram Panchayat before such appointment shall cease to be 
members of the Gram Panchayat and all the powers and duties of the Gram Pan chayat shall be exercised 
and performed by such Administrative Committee or Adm inistrator, as the case may be.  
(4) The Administrative Committee or Administrator shall be deemed to be a duly constituted Gram 
Panchayat for the purpose of this Act, notwithsta nding anything contained in the foregoing provisions:  
Provided that if at any time after the appointment of the Administrative Committee or the 
Administrator under sub -section ( 1), the Deputy Commissioner is satisfied that there is no difficulty in 
duly co nstituting the Gram Panchayat by election of members, the Deputy Commissioner, may, 
notwithstanding that the term of office for which the members of the Administrative Committee or the 
Administrator had been appointed has not expired, direct by notificatio n that the members of the 
Administrative Committee or the Administrator, as the case may be, shall cease to hold office with effect 
from such date as may be specified in such notification.   10 
 23. Filling of casual vacancy in the office of Pradhan and of  the member .—(1) In the event of 
occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation, removal or otherwise in the office of Pradhan 
or of a member of a Gram Panchayat, the vacancy shall be filled by ele ction in the manner prescribed.  
(2) Every Pradhan and  every Member el ected to fill a casual vacancy, shall hold office for the 
remaining term of office of the person i n whose place he is so elected:  
Provide d that no election for filling the casua l vacancy shall be held if the vacancy is for a period of 
less than six months.  
24. Election of Up -Pradhan .—(1) Every Gram Panchayat shall, as soon as may be, elect one o f its 
members to be Up -Pradhan.  
(2) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy by reason of death, resignation, removal or otherwise in 
the office of Up-Pradhan, the Gram Panchayat shall elect anoth er member to be the Up -Pradhan:  
Provided that no election shall b e held if the vacancy is for a period of less than six months.  
25. Reservation of sea ts for Pradhan and Up -Pradhan .—Subject to the general or special order of 
the Government, the Depu ty Commissioner shall reserve — 
(i) such number of offices of Pradhan and Up -Pradhan of G ram Panchayat in the district for the 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes as nearly as may be, in the same proportion as the total 
number of offices in the district bears to the populat ion of the Scheduled Castes or of the Scheduled 
Tribes in the district bears to the total population  of that district;  
(ii) not less than one -third of the total number of offices of Pradhan and Up -Pradhan, as the case 
may be, of the Gram Panchayat in the distri ct shall be reserved for women:  
Provided that the offices reserved under this section shall be allotted by rotation to different Gram 
Panchayats in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
26. Proce dure for election of Up -Pradhan on the es tablishment of Gram Panchayat .—On the 
establishment of Gram Panchayat for the first time under this Act, or on its reconstitution or establishment 
under section 20, a meeting of the Gram Panchayat shall be called immediately by the prescribed officer 
who shall himself preside over the m eeting, but shall have no right to vote, and in such meeting, the     
Up-Pradhan shall be elected.  
27. Term of the office of the Pradhan and Up -Pradhan .—(1) The term of office of every Pradhan 
and Up -Pradhan of the Gram Panchayat shall, save as otherwise provided in this Act, cease on the expiry 
of the term of the Gram Panchayat.  
(2) Pradhan and Up -Pradhan shall be entitled to such honoraria and other al lowances, as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) Every member of the Gram Panchayat shall be entitled to receive such  honoraria and allowances 
as may be fixed by th e Government from time to time.  
28. Power s, functions and dut ies of Pradhan and U p-Pradhan .—(1) The Pradha n shall — 
(a) be responsible for convening the meeting of Gram Sabh a and preside over its meeting;  
(b) be responsible for convening the meeting of Gram Panchayat and s hall preside over its 
meetings;  
(c) be responsible for the maintenance of the records of t he Gram Panchayat;  
(d) have the general responsibility for the financial and executive admini stration of the Gram 
Panchayat;  
(e) exercise administrative supervision and control over the work of the staff of the Gram 
Panchayat and the officers and employees whose serv ices may be plac ed at the disposal of the Gram 
Panchayat by any other authority;   11 
 (f) for the transaction of business connected with this Act, or for the purpose of making any order 
authorised thereby, exercise such powers, perform such functions and discharge such duties as may 
be exercised, performed or discharged by the Gram Panchayat under this Ac t or the rules made 
thereunder:  
Provided that the Pradhan shall not exercise such powers, perform such functions or discharge 
such duties as may be required by the rules made under this Act to be exercised, performed or 
discharged by the G ram Pancha yat at a meeting; and  
(g) exercise such other powers, perform such other functions and discharge such other duties as 
the Gram Panchayat may, by general or special resolution direct or as the Government may by rules 
made in this behalf, prescribe.  
(2) The Up-Pradhan shall — 
(a) exercise such of the powers, perform such of the functions and discharge such of the duties of 
Pradhan as the Pradhan may from time to time, subject to rules made in this behalf by the 
Government, deleg ate to him by order in writing:  
Provided that the Pradhan may at any time withdraw all or any of the powers, functions and 
duties so delegated to the Up -Pradhan;  
(b) during the absence of the Pradhan, exercise all the powers, perform all the functions and 
discharge  all the duties of the Pradhan;  
(c) exercise such other powers, perform such other functions and discharge such other duties as 
the Gram Panchayat may, by general or special resolution, direct or as the Government may, by rules 
made in this behalf, prescribe.  
29. Resignat ion of Pradhan and Up -Pradhan .—(1) The Pradhan and the Up -Pradhan, as the case 
may be, may resign his office by writing under his hand address ed to the prescribed authority.  
(2) Every resignation under sub -section ( 1) shall take effect on the expiry of fifteen days from the 
date of its receipt by the prescribed authority, unless within this period of fifteen days he withdraws such 
resignation by writing under his hand address ed to the prescribed authority.  
(3) Every Up -Pradhan shall vacate the office if he cease s to b e a member of a Gram Panchayat.  
30. No confidence motion again st the Pradhan and Up -Pradhan .—(1) Every Pradhan and every 
Up-Pradhan shall be deemed to have vacated his office forthwith if a resolution expressing want of 
confidence in him is passed by  a majority of not less than two -third of the members of the Gram 
Panchayat present and voting, at a meeting specially convened for the purpose. The requisition for such a 
special meeting shall be signed by not less than half of the total number of members  of the Gram 
Panchayat and shall be delivered to the prescribed authority. The prescribed authority shall within seven 
days from the date of the receipt of the requisition, convene a special meeting of the Gram Panchayat. The 
meeting shall be held on a day  not later than fifteen days from the date of issue of the notice of the 
meeting. The meeting shall be presided over by the prescribed authority. In the initial two years of their 
term as Pradhan and Up -Pradhan of a Gram Panchayat on such motion of no confidence shall be moved 
against them. If the motion of no confidence is once rejected, no fresh motion of no confidence shall be 
brought before the Gram Panchayat within a period of one year from the date o f such rejection of the 
motion.  
(2) Without prej udice to the provisions under this Act, a Pradhan and Up -Pradhan may be removed 
from office by the Government for misconduct in the discharge of his duties or neglect or, incapacity to 
perform his duties or for being persistently remiss in the discharge th ereof, or gui lty of any disgraceful 
conduct:  
Provided that, no such Pradhan, or Up -Pradhan be removed from office unless he has been given a 
reasonable  opportunity to defend himself.  
(3) The Pradhan or Up -Pradhan removed under sub -section ( 2) shall not be eligible for re -election as 
Pradhan or Up -Pradhan durin g the remaining term of office.  12 
 (4) A Pradhan or Up -Pradhan rem oved from his office under sub -section ( 2) shall cease to be a 
member of the Gram Panchayat.  
31. Resignation of members .—A member of a Gra m Panchayat may resign his membership in 
writing under his hand addressed to the Pradhan of the Gram Panchayat and his seat shall become vacant 
on the expiry of fifteen clear days from the date of such resignation unless within the said period of 
fifteen d ays, he withdraws such resignation by writing under his  hand addressed to the Pradhan.  
32. Meeting of Gram Panchayat .—(1) A Gram Panchayat shall meet for the transaction of business 
at least once in two months at the office of the Gram Panchayat and at such tim e as the Pradhan may 
determine.  
(2) The Pradhan  may, whenever he thinks fit, and shall, upon the written request of not less than  
one-third of the total number of members and on a date within fifteen days from the receipt of such 
request, c all a s pecial meeting.  
(3) Seven clear days’ notice of an ordina ry meeting and three clear days notice of a special meeting 
specifying the place, date and time of such meeting and business to be transacted thereat, shall be given 
by the Secretary to the members a nd such officers as the Government may prescr ibe, and affixed on the 
notice board of the Gram Panchayat.  
(4) The officers to whom notice is given under sub -section ( 3) and other Government officers having 
jurisdiction over the Gram Panchayat area or any pa rt thereof shall be entitled to attend every meeting of 
Gram Panchayat and take part in the proceedings but  shall not be entitled to vote.  
(5) If the Pradhan fails to call a special meeting as provided in sub -section ( 2), the Up -Pradhan or, in 
his absence,  one-third of the total number of members may call such a meeting for a day not more than 
fifteen days thereafter and require the Secretary to give notice to the members and to take such action as 
may be ne cessary to convene the meeting.  
33. Minutes .—(1) Minutes shall be kept of the names of the members and of the officers, if any, 
present, and of the proceedings at each meeting of the Gram Panchayat and if any member present at the 
meeting so desires, of the names of the member voting respectively for o r against any resolution, in a 
book to be provided for the purpose and after they are read over and agreed to, shall be signed by the 
Pradhan and Up -Pradhan or person presiding at such meeting, and shall at all reasonable times be open to 
inspection by any  member of the Gram Panchayat. Any person may inspect the copy of minutes of the 
meeting. The minutes books shall always be kept in th e office of the Gram Panchayat and shall be in the 
custody of the Secretary of the Gram Panchayat . 
(2) A copy of every res olution passed by the Gram Panchayat shall within ten days from the date of 
meeting, be forwarded by the Secretary to the Chief Executive Officer.  
34. Quorum and procedure .—(1) The quorum for a meeting of the Gram Panchayat shall be one -
half of the total number of members. If, at the time appointed for the meeting, a quorum is not present, the 
presiding authority shall wait for thirty minutes, and if within such period there is no quorum, the 
presiding authority shall adjourn the meeting to such time on th e following day or such future day as he 
may fix. He shall, similarly, after waiting for thirty minutes adjourn the meeting if, at any time, after it has 
begun, attention is drawn to the want of a quorum. A notice of the meeting so fixed shall be pasted in  the 
office of the Gram Panchayat. The business which could not be considered at the meeting so postponed 
for want of quorum, shall be brought before and disposed of at the meeting so fixed or at any subsequent 
adjourned meet ing at which there is a quorum.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act, at every meeting of Gram Panchayat, the 
Pradhan or in his absence the Up -Pradhan shall preside, and in the absen ce of both, the members present  
shall elect one from amongst themselv es to preside for the  occasion.  
(3) All questions shall, unless otherwise specifically provided, be decided by a majority of votes of 
the members present and voting. The Pradhan or Up -Pradh an or person presiding, as the case may be, 
unless he refrains from voting shall give hi s vote before declaring the number of votes for and against a 
question and in the case of equality of votes , he may give his casting vote.  13 
 (4) No member of a Gram Panchayat shall vote on, or take part in the discussion of, any question 
coming up for consideration at a meeting of a Gram Panchayat, if the question is one in which, apart from 
its general application to the public, he has any pecuniary interest, and if the person presiding has such an 
interest, he shall not preside over the meeting when s uch quest ion comes up for consideration.  
(5) If the person presiding is believed by any member present at the meeting to have any such 
pecuniary interest in any matter under discussion, and if a motion to that effect be carried, he shall not 
preside at the  meeting during such discussion or vote on or take part in it. Any member of the Gram 
Panchayat may be chosen to preside at the meeting during the continuance of such discussion.  
35. Functions of Gram Panchayat .—Subject to such conditions as may be specifi ed by the 
Governme nt from time to time, the Gram Panchayat shall perform the functions specified below: — 
(1) General Functions: — 
(a) preparation of annual plans for the dev elopment of the Panchayat area;  
(b) preparation of annual budget;  
(c) power for mobilising  reliefs in natural calamities;  
(d) removal of encr oachments on public properties;  
(e) organising voluntary labour and contri bution for community works; and  
(f) maintenance of esse ntial statistics of village( s). 
(2) Agriculture, in cluding Agricul ture Extension: — 
(a) promotion and development o f agriculture and horticulture;  
(b) development of waste lands;  
(c) development and maintenance of grazing lands and preventing  their unauthorised 
alienation;  
(d) promote land improvement and so il conservation measures; and  
(e) promote measures for implementation of land reforms and land consolidation.  
(3) Animal hus bandry, Dairying and Poultry: — 
(a) improvement of breed of cattle,  poultry and other live -stock;  
(b) promotion of dairy fa rming, poultry and piggery; and  
(c) grassland development.  
(4) Fisheries: — 
developme nt of fisheries in the village( s) 
(5) Social and Farm Forestry, Minor Fo rest produce Fuel and Fodder: — 
(a) planting and preservation of trees on the sides of roads and other public lands under its 
control;  
(b) fuel plan tations and fodder development;  
(c) promotion of farm forestry; and  
(d) development of social forestry.  
(6) Khadi, Village and Cottage Industries: — 
(a) promotion of rural and cottage industries ; 
(b) organisation  of awareness camps, seminars and training programmes, agricultural and 
industrial exhibitions for the b enefit of the rural areas; and  14 
 (c) identification of traditional skills in the area to develop small scale industries and 
popu larising food processing u nits. 
(7) Rural Housing: — 
(a) implementation o f house building programme; and  
(b) maintenance of records relating to the houses, sites and other  private and public 
properties.  
(8) Drinking water :— 
(a) construction, repair and maintenance of drinkin g water wells, tanks and ponds;  
(b) prevention and control of water pollution; and  
(c) maintenance  of rural water supply schemes.  
(9) Roads, buildings, culverts, bridges, ferries, waterways and other me ans of communication: — 
(a) construction and maintenance of village roads, drains and culverts;  
(b) maintenance of buildings under its control or transferred to it by the Governme nt or any 
public authority; and  
(c) maintenance of boats, ferries and waterway s. 
(10) Non-Conventional Energy Source: — 
(a) promotion and development of no n-conventional, energy schemes;  
(b) maintenance of community, non -conventional, energy devices,  including bio-gas plants; 
and 
(c) propagation  of improved chulhas and other efficien t energy devices.  
(11) Poverty Alleviation Programme: — 
(a) promotion of public awareness and participation in poverty alleviation programmes for 
fuller employment and  creation of productive assets;  
(b) selection of beneficiaries under various programmes th rough Gram Sabha; and  
(c) participation in effective implem entation and monitoring.  
(12) Education including primary schools and secondary schools: — 
(a) promotion of public awar eness and participation in pri mary and secondary educ ation with 
special emphasis on technical trainin g and vocational education; and  
(b) ensuring full enrolment  and attendance in primary and second ary schools and its 
management.  
(13) Adult and non -formal Educatio n:— 
promotion of Adult literacy.  
(14) Libraries: — 
village librari es and reading rooms.  
(15) Cultural activities: — 
promotion of social and cultural activities.  
(16) Markets and fairs: — 
regulation of fairs (includi ng cattle fairs) and festivals.  
 15 
 (17) Rural sanitation: — 
(a) mai ntenance of general sanitation;  
(b) cleaning of public roads, drains, tanks,  wells and other public places;  
(c) maintenance and regulation  of burning and burial grounds;  
(d) construction and main tenance of public latrines; and  
(e) management and contro l of washing and bathing ghats.  
(18) Public heal th and family welfare: — 
(a) implementatio n of family welfare programmes;  
(b) prevention and remed ial measures against epidemics;  
(c) regulation of sale of meat, fish and other perishable food articles;  
(d) participation in programmes of human and animal va ccination;  
(e) regulation of eating an d entertainment establi shments;  
(f) destruction of stray dogs;  
(g) regulation of  curing, tanning and  dyeing of skins and hides; and  
(h) regulation of offensive and dangerous trades.  
(19) Woman and child development: — 
(a) participation in the implementation of woman an d child wel fare programmes; and  
(b) promotion of school h ealth and nutrition programmes.  
(20) Social welfare including welfare of the handic apped and men tally retarded: — 
(a) participation in the implementation of the social programmes, including welfare of the 
handicapped, menta lly retarded and destitute; and  
(b) monitoring of the  old-age and widows pension schemes;  
(21) Welfare of the weaker section and in particular the Schedul ed Castes and Scheduled 
Tribe s:— 
(a) promotion of public awareness with regard to welfare of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled 
Tribes  and other Weaker Sections; and  
(b) participation in the implementation of the specific programmes for the welfare of the 
weaker sections.  
(22) Public distribution system: — 
(a) promotion of the public awareness with regard to the distribution o f essential 
commodities ; and 
(b) monitoring the public distribution system.  
(23) Ma intenance of community assets: — 
(a) maint enance of community assets; and  
(b) preservation and mainten ance of other community assets.  
(24) Construction and maintenance of Dharmashalas, Ch atras and similar institutions.  
(25) Construction and maintenance of cattle  sheds, pounds and cart stands.  
(26) Construction and m aintenance of slaughter houses.  
(27) Maintenanc e of public parks, playgrounds.  
(28) Regulation o f manure pits in public places.  16 
 (29) Establi shment and control of shandies.  
(30) Irrigation, water managem ent and watershed development: — 
(a) promote measures for construction and maintenance of minor irrigation works and 
watershed development programmes ; 
(b) develop ground water resources;  
(c) providing for timely and equitable di stribution of irrigation water.  
(31) Rural electrification includin g distribution of electricity: — 
(a) promote extension of elec tricity to unelectrified ar eas; 
(b) help in prevention of ille gal tapping of electricity; and  
(c) help in the recovery and  collection of electricity due.  
(32) Such other  functions as may be entrusted.  
36. Assignment of fun ctions .—The Government may, by notification and subject to such conditio ns 
as may be specified therein — 
(a) transfer to any Gram Pan chayat the management and main tenance of a forest situated in the 
panchayat area;  
(b) make over to the Gram Panchayat the man agement of waste lands, pasture lands or vacant 
lands belonging to the Government situ ated within the panchayat area;  
(c) entrust the Gram Panchayat with the collection of land revenue on behalf of the Government 
and the maintenance of such records as  are connected therewith; and  
(d) entrust such other functi ons as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no entrustment under clause ( c) shall be made without the concurrence o f the Gram 
Panchay at concerned:  
Provided further that when any transfer of the management and maintenance of a forest is made under 
clause ( a) the Government shall direct that any amount required for such management and maintenance or 
an adequate portion of the income from such forest be placed at the disposal of the Gram Panchayat.  
37. General  powers of the Gram Panchayat .—A Gram Panchayat sha ll have powers to do all acts 
necessary for or incidental to the carryi ng out the functions entrusted assigned or delegated to it and, in 
particular, an d without prejudice to the foregoing powers, to exercise all powers specified under this Act.  
38. Standi ng Committees .—(1) Every G ram Panchayat shall constitute the fo llowing committees by 
election — 
(i) Production Committee for performing functions relating to agricultural productions, animal 
husbandry and rural industries and poverty alleviation programmes;  
(ii) Social Justice Committee for pe rforming functions relating to — 
(a) promotion of education, economic, social, cultural and other interests of the Scheduled 
Castes and Schedul ed Tribes and Backward Classes;  
(b) protection of such c astes and classes fro m social injustice an d any form of exploitation; 
and 
(c) welfare of women and children.  
(iii) Amenities Committee to perform functions in respect of education, public health, public 
works and other f unctions of the Gram Panchayat.  
(2) (a) Each Committee sh all consist of not less than three and not more than five members including 
the Pradhan and Up -Pradhan as the case may be. The Pradhan shall be the ex officio  member and 
Chairman of Production Committee and Amenities Committee. The Pradhan shall be the ex officio  
member and Chairman o f the Social Justice Committee:   17 
 Provided that the Social Justice Committee shall consist of at least one member who is a woman and 
one member belonging to the Schedu led Castes or Scheduled Tribes.  
(b) Each Committee shall be competent to co -opt in such manner as may be prescribed, members of 
farmers ’ club, mahila mandals, yuvak mandals and other similar bodies reco gnised by the Government. A 
representative of Co -operative societies i n the panchayat areas shall be co-opted to t he Production 
Committee. The rights and liabilities of the co -opted members shall  be such, as may be prescribed.  
  (3) The Standing Committee shall perform the functions referred to above, to the extent the powers 
are delegated to them by the Gram Panchaya t  
39. Property and funds .—(1) For every Gram Panchayat there shall be constituted a Gram 
Panchayat Fund bearing the name of the Gram Panchayat and there shall b e placed to the credit thereof — 
(a) contributions and grants, if any, made by the Central or St ate Government;  
(b) contributions and grants, if any, made by the Zilla Parishad or any other local aut hority;  
(c) loans, if any, granted by the C entral or the State Government;  
(d) all receipts on accounts of taxes, r ates and fees levied by it; and  
(e) all other sums received by or on behalf of other Gram Panchayat.  
(2) Every Gram Panchayat shall set apart and apply annually such  sum as may be required to meet — 
(a) The cost of its own administration including the payment of salary, allowances, provide nt 
fund and gratuity to the officers and employees and to the Secretary:  
Provided that the total expenditure on establishment shall not exceed one -third of the total 
expenditure, of the Gram Panchayat in any year.  
(b) Every Gram Panchayat shall have the pow er to spend such sums as it thinks fit for carryi ng 
out the purpose of this Act;  
(c) The Gram Panchayat Fund shall be vested in the Gram Panchayat and the balance to the credit 
of the Fund shall be kept in suc h custody as may be prescribed.  
40. Taxation .—(1) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, a Gram Panchayat shall 
impose yearly tax on lands and buildings within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat.  
(2) Subject to such maximum rates as the Government may prescribe, a Gram Panchayat may levy the 
following fees and rates, namely: — 
(a) a fee for providing sanitary arrangements at such places of worship or pilgrimage, fairs and  
melas within its jurisdiction as may be specified by the Government by notification;  
(b) a lighting rate, where arrangement for lighting of public streets and places is made by the 
Gram Panchay at within its jurisdiction; and  
(c) a conservancy rate, where arrangement for clearing private latrines, urinals and cesspools is 
made by the Gram Pan chay at within its jurisdiction.  
41. Financial assist ance to Gram Panchayat s.—Subject to the provisions of this section, every 
Gram Panchayat shall, after a re -appropriation made by law in this behalf, be entitled to receive        
grants -in-aid from the Consolidated Fund of the State as recommended by the State Finance Commission, 
const ituted under section 97 of this Act. 
42. Budget of the Gram Panchayat .—(1) Every Gram Panchayat shall, at such time and in such 
manner as may be prescribed, prepare during each year a budget of its estimated receipts and 
disbursements for the following year and shall submit the budget to the Zilla Parishad having jurisdiction 
over the area of the Gram Panchayat.  
(2) The Zilla Parishad may, within such time as may be prescrib ed, either approve the budget or 
return it to the Gram Panchayat for such modifications as it may dire ct. On such modifications being  18 
 made the budget shall be resubmitted within such time as may be prescribed for approval of the Zilla 
Parishad.  
(3) No expenditure shall be incurred unless the budget is approved by the Zilla Parishad. If the Zilla 
Parishad does not co nvey its approval within the time prescribed for the purpose, the budget will be 
deemed to have been approved by the Zilla Parishad.  
43. Acc ounts .—Accounts of the income and expenditure of every Gram Panchayat shall be kept in 
such form and manner as may be prescribed.  
 44. Audit .—(1) The accounts of a Gram Panchayat shall be audited by the Director, Local Fund 
Audit and Accounts of the Govern ment of Manipur in such manner as may be prescribed and a copy of 
the audit report shall be forwarded to the Gram Panchayat within one month o f the complet ion o f the 
audit.  
(2) On receipt of the audit report referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Gram Panchay at shall either 
remedy the defects or irregularities which have been pointed out in the audit report and send to the Zilla 
Parishad within three months an intimation of its having done so, or shall, within the said period, supply 
any further explanation to  the prescribed authority in regard to such defects or irregularities  as it is 
required to furnish.  
45. Staff of Gram Panchayat .—(1) There shall be a Secretary for every Gram Panchayat who shall 
be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed and shall draw his salary and allowance s from the 
Gram Panchayat Fund.  
(2) The Secretary shall be in charge of the office of the Gram Panchayat and shall perform all the 
duties and exercise all the powers imposed or conferred upon him by or under this Act or any ru les or 
bye-law made thereunder.  
(3) The Government shall mak e rules relating to the method  of recruitment and the terms and 
conditions of service including the pay and allowances, superannuation, provident fund and gratuity of the 
Secretary.  
(4) Subject to rules as may be prescribed by Government regarding discipline and control, the 
Secretary shall act in all matters under the control of Gram Panchayat.  
46. Staffing patt ern and category of employees .—(1) The Government may, by order, specify the 
staffing p attern, the scales of pay and mode of recruitme nt of staff of Gram Panchayats.  
(2) The Gram Panchayat shall, subject to sub -section ( 1), determine and submit for approval of the 
Chief E xecutive Officer a category of employ ees specifying the designation and grades and the salaries 
and allowances payable to its officers other than the Secretary required for carrying out the duties 
imposed upon the Gram Panchayat by or under this Act.  
47. Appoint ment and control of employees .—Subject to the provisions of sections 45 and 46 the 
Gram Panchayat may, with the prior approval of the Chief Executive Officer appoint other employees of 
the Gram Panchayat and pay their salarie s from the Gram Panchayat fund:  
Provided that in making appointme nts, posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and 
other socially and educationally backward classes of citizens shall be reserved in the same manner and to 
the same extent as is applicable for the recruitment to posts in  the State Civil Service s.  
CHAPTER IV  
ZILLA PARISHAD  
48. Es tablishment of Zilla Parishad .—(1) The Governor shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette establish a Zilla Parishad for a district and having jurisdiction over it, with effect from  such date 
as may be specified.  
(2) Every Zilla Parishad shall be a corporate body by the name of its district, having perpetual 
succession and common seal and subject to such restrictions as are imposed by or und er this or any, other 
enactment, shall be ve sted with the capacity of su eing or being sued in its corporate name, of acquiring, 19 
 holding and transferring property movable or immovable, whether without or within the limits of the area 
over which it has authority, of entering into contracts and of doing all things, necessary, proper o r 
expedie nt for  the purpose for which it is constituted.  
49. Composition of Zilla Parishad .—The Z illa Parishad shall consist of —  
(a) the members directly elected from the territorial constituencies in the district under section 50;  
(b) the members of the House of the People and the members of the State Legislative Assembly 
representing a part or whole of the district whose constituencies lie within the district; and  
(c) ten per cent. of the Pradhans of the G ram Panchayats in the district:  
Provided that whe n the total number of members under clauses ( b) and ( c) exceed the total number of 
memb ers under clause ( a), only one -third of the members under clause ( c) shall be selected on rotation for 
a period of one year by lot as the Government may decide from time  to time and district to district, 
subject to the condition that a Pradhan who was a member under this clause for one year shall not be 
eligible to become member for a second term during the remainder of his term of office as Pradhan:  
Provided further that  all members of the Zilla Parishad whether elected or not from territorial 
constituencies in the Zilla Parishad area shall have the right to vote in the meeting of the Zilla Parishad 
except in the election  of Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha.  
50. Elected Members .—(1) The Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, determine 
the number of directly elected members from territorial constituencies keeping in view the overall 
population of the district at a rate of the one member for every 15, 000 populati on or part thereof.  
(2) For the conduct of the election, the prescribed authority shall, in accordance with such rules as 
may be prescribed in this behalf by the Government, — 
(a) divide the ar ea of Zilla Parishad into territorial constituencies in such manner so that the ratio 
between the population of each constituency and the numbers of seats allotted to it shall, so far as 
may be practicable, be the same throughout the panchayat area and deter mine the number of seats  
allotted to each constituency;  
(b) in relation to each territorial constituency shall elect one or more members through direct 
election in the manner prescribed.  
51. Filling of casual vacancy .—If vacancy of a member in Zilla Paris had occurs because of 
resignation, death, removal or otherwise, it shall be filled by ele ction in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that no election for filling the casual vacancy shall be held if the vacancy is for a period of 
less than six months.  
52. Rese rvation .—(1) Seats shall be reserved  for— 
(a) the Scheduled Castes;  
(b) the Scheduled Tribes;  
in every Zilla Parishad and the number of seats shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the 
total number of seats to be filled by direct election in that Zilla Parishad as the population of the 
Scheduled Castes in that Zilla Parishad area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that Zilla Parishad area bears to 
the total po pulation of that area and such seats may be allotted by rotation to different constitue ncies in a 
Zilla Parishad in such m anner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Not less than one -third of the total number of seats reserved under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes or, as the cas e may be, the Scheduled Tribes.  
(3) Not less than one -third (including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to Scheduled 
Castes and Scheduled Tribes) of the total number of seats filled by direct election in every Zilla Parishad 
shall be reserved for women and such se ats may be allotted by rotation to different constituencies in a 
Zilla Parishad, in su ch manner as may be prescribed.   20 
 53. Term of a Zilla Parishad .—(1) Every Zilla Parishad shall continue for five years from  the date 
of its first meeting:  
Provided that a Zilla Parishad which is functioning immediately before the commencement of this 
Act shall continue till the expiration of its duration.  
(2) An election to constitute a Zill a Parishad shall be completed: — 
(a) before the expiry of  its duration specified in s ub-section ( 1); and  
(b) in case of its dissolution, before the expiration of a period of six months fro m the date of such 
dissolution:  
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Zilla Parishad would have 
continued, is less  than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election und er this clause for such 
period.  
(3) A Zilla Parishad constituted upon the dissolution of a Zilla Parishad before the expiration of its 
duration shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Zilla Parishad would 
have continued under sub -section ( 1) had it not been so dissolved.  
54. Election of Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha .—(1) The elected members of the Zilla Pari shad 
referred to in section 50 shall, as soon as ma y be, elec t two members from amongst them selves to be 
respectively Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha  thereof and so often as there is a casual vacancy in the Office 
of the Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha, they shall elect another member from amongst themselves to be 
Adhyaksha or Up -Adhyaksha, as the case may be:  
Provided that no election shall be held if the vacancy is for  period of less than one month.  
(2) The State Government, shall in  the prescribed manner reserve — 
(a) such number of offices of the Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha of  Zilla Parishad in the State for 
persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes shall as nearly as may be, the same 
proportion to the total number of offices in the Zilla Parisha d as the population of the Scheduled 
Castes or of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bear to the  total population of the State;  
(b) not less than one -third of the total number of offices of Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha i n the 
State from each category w hich ar e reserved for persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes, the 
Scheduled Tribes and those w hich are unreserved, for women:  
Provided that the offices reserved under this section shall be allotted by rotatio n to different Zilla 
Parishads.  
(3) Save as otherwis e provided in  this Act, the Adhyaksha or Up -Adhyaksha shall hold office for the 
term of office of the  members of the Zilla Parishad.  
55. Salary and allowances to the Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha and other members .—(1) The 
salary and allo wances of the Adhyaks ha and Up -Adhyaksha shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every member of the Zilla Parishad other than the Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha shall be entitled 
to receive, such sitting fee and a llowances as may be prescribed.  
56. Powers, functions and duties of  the Adhyaksha and Up -Adhayaksha .—(1) The Adhyaksha 
shall — 
(a) perform all the duties imposed and exercise all the powers conferred on the Adhyaksha under 
this Act and rules made thereunder;  
(b) convene, preside over, and conduct meetings of the Zilla Pari shad;  
(c) exercise administrative supervision and control over the Chief Executive Officer and  through 
him, all officers and other employees of the Zilla Parishad and the officers and e mployees whose 
services may be placed at the disposal of the Zilla Par ishad by the State Government;   21 
 (d) exercise such other powers, perform such other functions and discharge such other duties as 
the Zilla Parishad may , by general resolution direct or as the Government may, by rules made in this 
behalf, prescribe;  
(e) exer cise overall supervision over the financial and executive administration of the Zilla 
Parishad and place before the Zilla Parishad all questions connected therewith which shall appear to 
him to require its orders and for this purpose may call for rec ords o f the Zilla Parishad; and  
(f) have power to accord sanction up to a total sum of rupees one lakh in a year for the purpose of 
providing immediate relief to those who are affected by natu ral calamities in the district:  
Provided that the Adhyaksha shall plac e at the next meeting of the Zilla Parishad for its ratification, 
the de tails of such sanctions.  
(2) The Up-Adhyaksha shall — 
(a) in the absence of the Adhyaksha, preside over the me etings of the Zilla Parishad;  
(b) exercise such powers and perform such duties of the Adhyaksha as the Adhyaksha from time 
to time may, subject to the rules as may be prescribed delega te to him by order in writing; and  
(c) pending the election of the Adhyaksha or during the absence of the Adhyaksha fro m the 
district, or by rea son of leave for a period exceeding thirty days, exercise the powers and perform the 
duties of the Adhyaks ha. 
57. Resignation or removal of t he Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha .—(1) The A dhyaksha may 
resign his office by writing u nder his hand addressed to the Commissioner, and the Up -Adhyaksha may 
resign his office by writing under his h and addressed to the Adhyaksha.  
(2) Every resignation under sub -section ( 1) shall take effect on the expiry of fifteen days from the 
date of its receipt by the prescribed author ity, unless within this period of fifteen days he withdraws such 
resignation by writing under his hand address ed to the prescribed authority.  
(3) Every Adhyaksha or Up -Adhyak sha shall vacate the office if he ceases to be a member of the 
Zilla Parishad.  
(4) Every Adhyaksha or Up -Adhyaksha shall be deemed to have vacated his office forthwith if a 
resolution expressin g want of confidence in him is p assed by a majority of the total number of elected 
members of the territorial constituencies of the Zilla Parisha d at a meeting specially convened for the 
purpose. The requisition for such a special meeting shall be signed by not less than one -fifth of the total 
membership of the Zilla Parishad and shall be delivered to the Adhyaksha. The Adhyaksha shall, within 
seven days from the date of receipt of the requisition, convene a special meeting of the Zilla Parishad . The 
meeting shall be held on a day not later than fifteen days from the date of issue of the notice of the 
meeting. The meeting shall be presided over by t he Adhyaksha, if the motion is against the  
Up-Adhyaksha and in the case of Adhya ksha, the Up -Adhyaksha shall preside over the meeting, if it is 
against both, a member nominated from amongst themselves by the members present in such meeting 
shall preside o ver such meeting. In the initial two years of their term as Adhyaksha or Up -Adhyaksha, as 
the case may be, of Z illa Parishad, no motion of no -confidence  shall be brought against them.  
(5) If the motion of no -confidence against the Adhyaksha or Up-Adhyaksha  or both is once r ejected, 
no fresh motion of no -confidence against the Adhyaksha or Up -Adhyaksha or both, as the case may be, 
shall be brought before the Zilla Parishad within a period of one year from the date o f such rejection of 
the motion.  
58. Resigna tion of Member .—A member of a Zilla Parishad may resign his membership in writing 
under his hand addressed to the Adhyaksha of the Zilla Parishad and his seat shall become vacant on the 
expiry of fifteen clear days from the date of such resignation, unless  within the said period of fifteen days, 
he withdraws such resignation by writing under his h and addressed to the Adhyaksha.  
59. Meeting of the Zilla Parishad .—(1) Every Zill a Parishad shall hold meetings at least once in 
every three months, at such time a nd at such place within the local limits of the district concerned as the 
Zilla Parishad may fix at the  immediately preceding meeting:   22 
 Provided that the first meeting of a newly constituted Zilla Parishad shall be held at such time and at 
such place withi n the local limits of the district concerned, as th e prescribed authority may fix:  
Provided further that the Adhyaksha when required in writing by one fifth of the members of the Zilla 
Parishad to call a meeting he shall do so within ten days, failing whic h the aforesaid members may call a 
meeting after giving intimation to the prescribed  authority and seven clear days notice to the Adhyaksha 
and the other  members of the Zilla Parishad.  
(2) One -third of the total number of members of the Zilla Parishad shal l form a quorum for 
transacting the business at the  meeting of the Zilla Parishad.  
(3) All questions coming before the Zilla Parishad shall be decided, by a majority of votes and in case 
of equality of votes, the Adhyaksha or the member presi ding shall hav e a casting vote.  
(4) Every meeting shall be presided over by the Adhyaksha or if he is absent by the Up -Adhyaksha 
and if  both the Adhyaksha and the Up -Adhyaksha are absent or if the Adhyaksha is absent and there is no 
Up-Adhyaksha the members present shal l elect one from among themselves to preside over the meeting.  
60. Minutes .—(1) Minutes shall be kept of the names of the members and of the officers, if any, 
present, and of the proceedings at each meeting of the Zilla Parishad and if any member present a t the 
meeting so desires, of the names of the m embers voting respectively for o r against any resolution, in a 
book to be provided for purpose and after they are read over and agreed to, shall be signed by the 
Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha or person presiding at such meeting, and shall at all reasonable ti mes be 
open to inspection by any member of the Zilla Parishad. Any person may inspect the copy of the minutes 
of the meeting. The minutes books shall always be kept in the office of the Zilla Parishad and shal l be in 
the custody of the Chief Executive  Officer of the Zilla Parishad.  
(2) A copy of every resolution passed by the Zilla Parishad shall within ten days f rom the date of its 
passing in the meeting, be forwarded by the Chief Execu tive Officer to the Gove rnment.  
61. Functions  and powers of Zilla Parishad .—(1) Any transfer of a subje ct to the Zilla Parishad 
shall be with the approval of the Government from ti me to time.  
(2) Subject to the condition and exceptions as the Government may, from time to time, impose, it 
shall be the function of the Zilla Parishad to prepare plans for economic development and social justice of 
the District, and to ensure the coordinated implement ation of such plans in respect of matters including 
those mentioned below, namely: — 
1. AGRICULT URE AND AGRICULTURAL EXTENSION:  
(i) promotion of measures to increase agricultural production and to popularise the use of 
improved agricultural implements and t he adoption of i mproved agricultural practices;  
(ii) establishm ent and maintenance of godowns;  
(iii) conducting agri cultural fairs and exhibitions;  
(iv) training of farmers;  
(v) land improve ment and soil conservation; and  
(vi) promotion of ag ricultural extension works.  
2. IRRIGATION GROUND WATER RESOUR CES AND WATERSHED DEVELOPMENT:  
(i) construction, renovation and maintenance of minor irriga tion works and lift irrigation;  
(ii) providing for the timely and equitable distribution, and full use of water und er irrigation 
schemes under the  control of the Zilla Parishad;  
(iii) develop ment of ground water resources;  
(iv) installat ion of community pump sets; and  
(v) watershed development programme.   23 
 3. HORTICULTURE:  
(i) promotion of rural parks and gar dens;  
(ii) promotion of cultivatio n of fruits and vegetables; and  
(iii) promotion of farms.  
4. STATISTICS:  
(i) publication of statistical and other information relating to activities of Gram Panchayats 
and Zilla Parishads;  
(ii) co-ordination and use of statistics and  other information required for the activities of the 
Gram Panchay ats and Zilla Parishads; and  
(iii) periodical supervision and evaluation of project and programmes entrusted to the Gram 
Panchayats and Zilla Parishads.  
5. DISTRIBUTION OF ESSE NTIAL COMMODITIES.  
6. SOIL  CONSERVATION AND LAND REFORMS:  
(i) soil conservation measures;  
(ii) land reclamation and land  development works; and  
(iii) promote implementation of land reforms and land consolidation.  
7. MARKETING:  
(i) development of regulated m arkets and marketing yards; and  
(ii) grading and quality c ontrol of agriculture products.  
8. SOCIAL FORESTRY:  
(i) organise campaign for tree planting; and  
(ii) planting and maintenance of trees.  
9. ANIMAL HUSBANDRY AND DAIRYING:  
(i) improvement of breed o f cows and pigs;  
(ii) promotion of poultry fa rms, duck farms and goat farms;  
(iii) promotion of  fodder development programmes;  
(iv) promotion of dairy f arming, poultry and piggery;  and 
(v) prevention of epi demics and contagious diseases.  
10. MINOR FOREST PR ODUCE, FUEL AND FODDER:  
(i) promotion of social and farm forestry, fuel pla ntation and fodder development;  
(ii) management of minor forest produce  of the  forests raised  in community lands; and  
(iii) development of wasteland.  
11. FISHERIES:  
(i) promotion of  fish seed prod uction and distribution;  
(ii) development of pisiculture in private and community tanks ; 
(iii) development of inland fisheries;  
(iv) promo tion of fish curing and drying;  
(v) assistance to traditional fishing;  24 
 (vi) organising fish marketing c o-operatives; a nd 
(vii) welfare schemes for the uplif t and development of fisherman.  
12. HOUSEHOLD INDUSTRIES:  
(including food processing ): 
(i) identification of traditional skills in the locality and promotion of household industries;  
(ii) organisation of  training progr amme for craftsmen and artisan;  
(iii) liaison to tap bank c redit for household industries;  
(iv) popularising and marketing of finished products; and  
(v) organising khadi, handloom, handicraft and village and cottage industries.  
13. RURAL ROA DS AND INLA ND WATERWAYS:  
(i) construction and maintenance of roads other than National, State Hi ghways and other 
District road;  
(ii) bridges and culverts coming u nder roads falling in item ( i); 
(iii) construction and maintenance of office buildings of the Zilla Paris had; 
(iv) identification of major link roads connecting markets, educational in stitutions, health 
centres; and  
(v) organising voluntary surrender of lands for new roads and for widening of existing roads.  
14. HEALTH AND HYGIENE:  
(i) implementation of immuniza tion and vaccination programme;  
(ii) health  education activities in hospitals, primary h ealth centres and dispensaries;  
(iii) maternity and c hild health service activities;  
(iv) family welfare activities;  
(v) organising health camps with Gram Panchaya ts; and  
(vi) measures  against environment pollution.  
15. RURAL HOUSING:  
(i) identi fication of houseless families;  
(ii) implementation of house building programmes in the district; and  
(iii) popularising low cost housing.  
16. EDUCATI ON: 
(i) promotion of educational activities including the establishment and maintenance of  
primary and secondary schools;  
(ii) planning of programmes for Adult Edu cation and Library facilities;  
(iii) propagation of technical trai ning and vocational education;  and 
(iv) extension work for propagation of Science  and Technology to rural areas.  
17. SOCIAL WELFARE AND WELFARE OF WEAKER SE CTIONS AND HANDICAPPED 
PERSONS:  
(i) promotion of social welfare programme and social welfare activities with emphasis on 
handicapped and mentally retarded persons;  25 
 (ii) organising nursery schools, balwadies, night schools and libraries to eradicate illiteracy 
and impart general education; and 
(iii) organising co -operative societies of Schedul ed Castes and Scheduled Tribes.  
18. POVERTY ALLEVIATION PR OGRAMMES:  
planning, supervision  monitoring and implementation of poverty alleviation programmes.  
19. DRINKING WATER:  
(i) construction, repair and maintenance of drinkin g water wells, tanks and ponds;  
(ii) prevention and control of water pollution.  
20. RURA L ELECTRIFICATION:  
(i) promote extension of elec tricity to unelectrified areas;  
(ii) help in the prevention of ille gal tapping of electricity;  and 
(iii) help in the recovery and collection of electricity dues.  
21. N ON-CONVENTIONAL ENERGY SOURCES:  
(i) promotion and development of non -conventional energy scheme; and  
(ii) propagati on of efficient energy devices.  
22. SOCIAL REFORM ACTIVITIES:  
(i) promotion of wo men’s organisation and welfare;  
(ii) promotion of child ren’s organi sation and welfare;  
(iii) organise cult ural and recreation activities;  
(iv) encouragement of sports and games an d construction of rural stadia;  
(v) promotion of thrift and sa vings through: — 
(a) promotion of saving habits;  
(b) small savings campaign;  
(c) fight against spurious money lending pr actices and rural indebtedness.  
(4) In ad dition, the Zilla Parishad may — 
(a) manage or maintain any work of public utility or any institution vested in it or un der its 
control and management;  
(b) acquire and mai ntain village hats and markets;  
(c) make  grants to Gram Panchayats;  
(d) adopt measures for th e relief of people in distress;  
(e) co-ordinate and integrate the development plan s and schemes prepared by G ram Panchayats in 
the district;  
(f) examine and sanction the budget estimates of Gram Panchaya t in the district;  
(g) undertake or execute any scheme extending to the who le or part of the district; and  
(h) take over the maintenance and control of any rural bridge, tank, ghat, well, channel or drain, 
belonging to a private owner or any other authority on su ch terms as may be agreed upon.  
(5) The Zilla Parishads of two or more adjacent districts may jointly undertake and ex ecute any 
development scheme on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed upon:   26 
 Provided that the Government may , by notification and subject to such conditions as it may impose, 
transfer additional f unctions to the Zilla Parishad.  
62. Gen eral p owers of Zilla Parishad .—(1) Subject to the general or special orders of the 
Government, the Zil la Parishad may — 
(a) incur expenditure on education or medical r elief outside its jurisdiction;  
(b) provide for carrying out any work or measure likely to promote health, safety, education, 
comfort, convenience or social or economic or cultural well -being of t he inhabitants of the district;  
(c) contribute to association of All India, State or Inter -State level concerned with the promotion 
of local government  and for holding exhibition, seminar and conferences within the district related to 
the activities of Gram Pa nchayat and Zilla Parishad; and  
(d) render financial or  other assistance to any person for carrying in the district any activity which 
is related t o any of its functions.  
(2) The Zilla Parishad shall have powers to do all acts necessary for or incidental to the carrying out 
of the functions entrusted or delegated to it and, in particular, and without prejudice to the foregoing 
powers to exercise all powers specified under this Act.  
63. Assignment of functions .—(1) The Government may assign to Zilla Parishad, functions in 
relation to any matters to which the executive authority of the Government extends or in respect of 
functions which have been assigned to the State Govern ment by the Central Government.  
(2) The Government may, by notification, withdraw or modify the functions assigned under  
sub-section ( 1). 
64. Delegation of powers .—The Zill a Parishad may, by notification, delegate to the Chief Executive 
Officer or other Officer any of the powers conferred by or under this Act on the Zilla Parishad.  
65. Standing Committees .—(1) The Zi lla Parishad shall have the following Standing Committees, 
namely: — 
(a) General Standing Committee;  
(b) Finance, Audit and Planning Commi ttee; 
(c) Social Justice Committee;  
(d) Education and Health Committee;  
(e) Agricultur e and Industries Committee; and  
(f) Works Committee.  
(2) Each Standing Committee shall consist of such number of members not exceeding five includ ing 
the Chairman elected by the members of Zilla Parishad fr om amongst the elected members.  
(3) The Adhyaksha shall be the ex officio  member and Chairman of the General Standing Committee 
and the Finance, Audit and Planning Committee. The Up -Adhyaksha shall be the ex officio  memb er and 
Chair man of the Social Justice Committee. The other Standing Committee shall elect the Cha irman from 
among their members.  
(4) No member of the Zilla Parishad shall be eligible to serve not mor e than two Standing 
Committees.  
(5) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the ex officio  Secretary of the General Standing Committee 
and the Finance, Audit and Plannin g Committee and he shall nominate one of the Deputy Secretaries as 
ex officio  Secretary for each of the remaining Standing Committees. The Chief Executive Officer shall be 
entitled to attend the meetings of all the Standing Committees.  
66. Functi ons of the  Standing Committee .—(1) The General Standing Committee shall perform 
functions relating to the establi shment matters and functions relating to communication, buildings, rural 
housing, village extensions, relief aga inst the natural calamities and allied matters and all other matters.  27 
 (2) The Finance , Audit and Planning Committee shall perform the functions r elating to: — 
(a) the finances of the Zilla Parishad, framing of B udgets, scrutinising proposals for increase of 
revenue,  examination of receipts and expenditure sta tements, consideration  of all proposals affecting 
the finances of the Zilla Parishad and general supervision, of the revenue and exp enditure of the Zilla 
Parishad;  
(b) the plan priorities, allocation of outlays to developments, horizontal an d vertical linkages, 
implementation of guidelines issued by the Government, regular review of planning programmes, 
evaluation of important progra mmes and small savings schemes.  
(3) The Social Justice Committee shall  perform functions relating to: — 
(a) promotion of education, economic, social, cultural and other interests of the Scheduled Castes, 
Scheduled Tr ibes and Backward Classes;  
(b) protecting them from social injustice and a ll other forms of exploitation;  
(c) amelioration, of the Scheduled Castes,  the Schedul ed Tribes and Backward Classes;  
(d) securing social justice to the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes, women and other 
weaker sections of the society.  
(4) The Educati on and Health Committee shall: — 
(a) be incharge of all educational act ivities of the Zilla. Parishad;  
(b) undertake the planning of education in the district within the framework of the national policy 
and the national and state plans;  
(c) survey and evaluate the educational ac tivities of the Zilla Parishad;  
(d) perform such oth er duties pertaining to education, adult literacy and cultural activities as the 
Zilla Parishad may assign to it; 
(e) health services, hospitals, water supply, family wel fare and other related matters.  
(5) The Agriculture and I ndustry Committee shall  perfo rm functions relating to: — 
(a) agricultural production, animal husbandry, co -operation, contour bunding and reclamation;  
(b) vill age and cottage industries; and 
(c) promotion of industri al development of the district.  
(6) The Works Committee shall perform functio ns relating to maintenance of: — 
(a) roads including dis trict roads, bridges, culverts;  
(b) maintenance of buildings under its control or transferred by the Governme nt or any public 
authority; and  
(c) maintenanc e of boats, ferries, waterways.  
(7) The  Standing Committee referred to in sub -sections ( 1) to ( 6) shall perform the functions referred 
to above to the extent the powers are delegated  to them by the Zilla Parishad.  
(8) The Standing Committees shall perform in respect of matters assigned to them such addition al 
duties as may be prescribed.  
67. Procedure of Committees .—(1) The Zilla Parishad may frame regulations relating to election of 
members of committees, conduct of business therein, and all other matt ers relating to the committees.  
(2) The Chairman of every Standing Committee shall in respect of the work of that committee be 
entitled to call for any information, return statement or report from the officer of the Zilla  Parishad and to 
enter on and inspect any immovable property of the Zilla P arishad or any work in pro gress concerning the 
committee.   28 
 (3) Each Standing Committee shall be entitled to require attendance at its meetings of any officer of 
the Zilla Parishad who is connected with the work of the Committee. The Chief Executive Officer  shall 
under instruction of the committee, issue notices and secure the attend ance of the officer.  
68. Power to acquire , hold and dispose of property .—(1) A Zilla Parishad shall have the power to 
acquire, hold and dispose of propert y and to enter into contracts:  
Provided that in all cases of acquisition or disposal of immovable property the Zilla Parishad shall 
obtain the previ ous approval of the Government.  
(2) All roads , buildings or other works constructed by a Zilla Parishad with its own funds shall  vest in 
it. 
(3) The Government may allocate to a Zilla Parishad any public property situated within its 
jurisdiction, and th ereupon such property sh all vest in the Zilla Parishad.  
(4) Where a Zilla Parishad requires land to carry out any of the purposes o f this Act, it may negotiate 
with the person or persons having in the said land, and if it fails to reach an agreement, it may make an 
application to the Deputy Commissioner for the acquisition of the land and the Deputy Commissioner 
may, if he is satisfie d that the land is required for a public purpose, take steps to acquire the land under 
the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894  (1 of 1894) and such land shall on acquisition, vest in 
the Zilla Parishad.  
69. Zilla Parishad Fund .—(1) For every Zilla Parishad there shall be constituted a Zilla Parishad 
Fund bearing the name of the Zilla Parishad and there shall be  placed to the credit thereof: — 
(a) contributions and grants, if any, made by the Central or the State Government including such 
part of land revenue collected in the State as may b e determined by the Government;  
(b) contributions and grants, if any, made by a Gram Panchaya t or any other local authority;  
(c) loans, if any, granted by the Central or State Government or raised by the Zilla  Parishad on 
security of its assets;  
(d) the proceeds of road -cess and public works -cess levied in the district;  
(e) all receipts on account of tolls, rates and fee s levied by the Zilla Parishad;  
(f) all receipts in respect of any schools, hospitals, dispe nsaries, buildings, institutions or works, 
vested in, constructed by or p laced  under the control and ma nagement of the Zilla Parishad;  
(g) all sums received as gift or contri bution and all income from any trust or endowment ma de in 
favour of Zilla Parishad;  
(h) such fines or penalties imposed and realised under the provisions of this Act or of the  
bye-laws made there under, as may be,  prescribe d; and 
(i) all other sums received by or on behalf of the Zilla Parishad . 
(2) Every Zilla Parishad shall se t apart and apply annually such sum as may be required to meet the 
cost of it s own administration including the payment of salary, allowances , provident fund and gratuity to  
the officers and employees. The overall expenditure on establishment shall not exc eed one -third of  the 
total expenditure.  
(3) Every Zilla Parishad shall have the power to spend such sums as it thinks fit for carrying  out the 
purpose  of this Act.  
(4) The Zilla Parishad Fund shall be vested in the Zilla Parishad and the amount standing to  the credit 
of the fund shall be kept in such custody or invested in s uch manner as the Government may, from time to 
time, direct.  
  29 
 70. Taxation .—(1) Subject to such maximum rates as the Government p rescribe, a Zilla Parishad 
may— 
(a) levy tolls on persons, vehicles or  animals or any class o f them at any toll -bar established by it 
on any road other than kutcha road or any bridge vested  in it or under its management;  
(b) levy tol ls in respect for any ferry established  by it or under its management;  
(c) levy road cess and  public works cess;  
(d) levy the fol lowing fees and rates, namely: — 
(i) fees on the reg istration of boats or vehicles;  
(ii) a fee for providing sanitary facilities at such places or pilgrimage, fairs and melas within 
its jurisdiction as  may be specified by the Government by not ification;  
(iii) a fe e for licence for fair or mela;  
(iv) a lighting rate where arrangement for lighting of public streets and places is made by the 
Zilla Parish ad within its jurisdiction; and  
(v) water rate, where  arrangement for the supply of water for drinking, irrigation or any other 
purpose is made by the Zilla Pa rishad within its jurisdiction.  
(2) The Zilla Parishad shall  not undertake registration of any vehicle or levy fee thereof and shall not 
provide sanit ary ar rangements at places of worship or pilgrimage, fairs and melas within its jurisdiction or 
levy fee thereof if such vehicle has already been registered by any other authority under any law for the, 
time being in force or if such provision for sanitary  arrangement has already been made by an y other local 
authority.  
(3) The scales of tolls, fees or rates and the terms and conditions for the imposition thereof shall be 
such as may be provided by regulation. Such regulation may provide for exemption from a ll or any of the 
tolls, fees or rates in any class of cases.  
71. Financial a rrangements of Zilla Parishad .—(1) A Zilla Parishad may, subject to the provisions 
of any law relating to the raising of loans by local authorities for the time being in force, raise from time 
to time, with the approval of the Government, loans for the purpose of the Act and create a sinking fund 
for the repayment of such loans.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) a Zilla Parishad may borrow money from 
the G overnment or, with the previous sanction, of the Government, from banks or other financial 
instit utions, for furtherance of its objective on the basis of specific scheme as may be drawn up by the 
Zilla Parishad for the purpose.  
72. Budget .—(1) Every Zilla Parishad shall, at such time and in such manner as may be prescribed, 
prepare in each year a budget of its estimated receipts and disbursements for the following year a nd 
submit it to the Government.  
(2) The Governmen t may, within such time as may be presc ribed either approve the budget or return 
it to the Zilla Parishad for such modifications as it may direct. On such modifications being made the 
budget shall be resubmitted within such  time as may be prescribed for approval of the Government. I f the 
approv al of the Government is not received by the Zilla Parishad by the last date of the financial year, the 
budget shall be deemed to  be approved by the Government.  
(3) No expenditure shall be incurred unless the budget is approved by the Gov ernment.  
(4) The Zilla Parishad may prepare in each year a supplementary estimate providing for any 
modification of its budget and may submit it to the Government for approval within such time and in su ch 
manner as may be prescribed.  
  30 
 73. Acco unts.—A Zilla Parishad shall keep accounts in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
74. Audit .—(1) The audit of the accounts of the Zilla Parishad shall be carried out by the authority as 
may be prescribed by the Government and a copy of the audit note shall be forwarded to the Zilla 
Parishad within one month of the completion of the audit.  
(2) on receipt of the audit report referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Zilla Parishad shall either remedy 
any defects or irregularities which have been pointed out in the audi t and send to the Government within 
three months an intimation of its having done so or  shall, within the said period , supply any further 
explanation to the prescribed authority in regard to such defects or irregularities as it is required  to 
furnish.  
75. Staff of Zilla Parishad .—(1) An officer of the rank of the Deputy Commissioner shall be the 
Chief Executive Officer of the Zilla Parishad who shall be appointed by the Government. The 
Government may, also appoint  an Additional Chief Executive O fficer for a  Zilla Parishad on such terms 
and c onditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Government shall also a ppoint a Chief Accounts Officer and a Chief P lanning Officer f or 
each Zilla Parishad on such terms and condit ions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Government shall post from time to time in every Zilla Parishad such number of officers of 
Group A, B and C services of the State (including any officers appointed to such service from amongst 
person employed by the existing local authority) and offi cers of an All India Service allocated to serve 
under the Government, as the Government considers necessary.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force the 
Government or any other officer or other author ity authorised by it in this behalf shall have the power to 
effect transfer of the officers and officials so posted from on e district to another district.  
(5) The Government may constitute, from such date as is specified, such services for each Zilla  
Paris had as may be prescribed.  
76. Functions of the Chief Executi ve officer and other officers .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly 
provided by or under this Act, the Chief Executive Officer shal l,— 
(a) carry out the policies and directions of the Zilla Parishad and take necessary measures for the 
speedy execution of all works and developme ntal schemes of Zilla Parishad;  
(b) discharge the duties imposed upon him, by or under this Act or the rules a nd regulations made 
thereunder;  
(c) control the officers and servan ts of the Zilla Parishad subject to the general superintendence 
and control of the Zilla Adhyaksha and under s uch rules as may be prescribed;  
(d) have custody of all papers and documents relating to Zilla Parishad; and  
(e) draw and disburse money out of th e Zilla Parishad Funds and exercise such other powers and 
perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall attend every meeting of the Zilla Parishad and may take part in 
the discussion but shall not have the right t o move any resolution or to vote. If in the opinion of the Chief 
Executive Officer any proposal before the Zilla Parishad is violative of or is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act or any other law or the rules made thereunder, it shall be his duty  to bring the same 
to the notice of the Zilla Parishad.  
(3) The Chief Accounts Officer shall advise the Zilla Parishad in matters of financial policy and shall 
be responsible for all matters relating to the accounts of the Zilla Parishad including preparat ion of 
accounts and the budget.  
(4) The Chief Accounts Officer shall ensure that no expenditure is incurred except under proper 
sanction and in accordance with this Act and the rules and regulations made thereunder and shall disallow 
any expenditure not wa rranted by the Act or rules and regulations or for which no p rovision is made in 
the budget.  31 
 (5) The Additional Chief Executive Officer shall assist the Chief Executive Officer in  the 
performance of his duties.  
(6) The Chief Planning Officer shall advise t he Zilla Parishad in matters of plan formulation and shall 
be responsible for all matters relating to planning of the Zilla Parishad including the preparation of plans 
of economic development and social justice a nd annual plan of the district.  
77. Right to  requ isition records, recover money, etc .—(1) Every person in possession of money, 
accounts, records or other property pertaining to a Gram Panchayat or a Zilla Parishad shall on the 
requisition in writing of the Chief Executive Officer for this purpose, forthwith hand over such money or 
deliver up such accounts, records or other property to the Chief Executive Officer or the person 
authorised in the  requisition to receive the same.  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer may also take steps to recov er any money due by such person in the 
same manner and subject to the same provisions as in the relevent Land Revenue Act, for the recovery of 
the arrears of land revenue from defaulters and for the purpose of requisitioning the accounts, records or 
for recovering any o ther property apertaining to th e Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad may issue a search 
warrant and exercise all such powers with respect thereto as may lawfully be exercised by a Magistrate 
under the provisions of Chapter VII of the Code of Cri mina l Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) Every person knowing where any money, accounts, records or other property apertaining to a 
Gram Panchayat or a Zilla Parishad are concealed shall be bound to give information of the same to the 
Chief Executive Officer.  
(4) An appeal shall lie from an order of the Chief Executive Officer under this section to the 
Government.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
78. Powers to revise or m odify decisions of committees .—Every Gram Panchayat and every Zilla 
Parishad shall have power to revise or modify any decision taken by any of its committees.  
79. Powers of Gra m Panchayats to make bye -laws .—(1) A Gram Panchayat may, subject to the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder and with the previous sanction of the Zilla Parishad 
make bye -laws to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In making any bye -laws under sub -section ( 1) the Gram Pan chayat may provide that a 
contravention thereof shall be punishable with such fine as may be prescribed.  
(3) Any such bye -law may also provide that a person contravening the same shall be required to 
remedy so far as it lies in his power, the mischief, if any , caused by such contravention.  
(4) All bye -laws made under this secti on shall be subject to the condition of previous publication and 
such publication shall be in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
80. Powers of Zill a Parishad to make Regulation s.—(1) A Zilla Parishad may subject to the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder and with the previous sanct ion of the Government, 
by noti fication, make regulations to carry out the purposes of this Act in so far as it re lates to its powers 
and duties.  
(2) The regulations made under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to t he condition of previous 
publication and such publication shall be in such manner as may be prescribed.  
81. Powers of Government to make mo del regulations and bye -laws .—(1) The Government may, 
subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made there under and after previous publication of the 
draft for not less than one month, make model regulations and bye -laws for Zilla Parishads and Gr am 
Panchayats respectively.  
(2) A Gram Panchayat or a Zilla Parishad may by resolution adopt the model bye -laws or regulations, 
as the case may be, made under sub -section ( 1), and such bye -laws and regulations shall come into force 32 
 within the jurisdiction of the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad from such date as the Gram Panchayat or 
Zilla Parishad as the case may be, may specify in a notice publ ished in the prescribed manner.  
82. Power s of Government to dissolve and reconstitute Gram Panch ayat and Zilla Parishad in 
case of alteration of area .—(1) When on account of the reason that the limits of an area of Gram 
Panchaya t or Zilla Parishad, are altered, the Government may by order published in the Official Gazette 
dissolve such Panchayat or Parishad, from a date, specified in the order and direct that Gram Panchaya t or 
Zilla Parishad concerned :— 
(i) be reconstituted for the Panchayat area of which the Gram Panchayat or the district of which 
Zilla Parishad has been dissolved; or  
(ii) be established for a P anchayat area, or district wh ich has been newly constituted.  
(2) The members of the Gram Panchay at or Zilla Parishad which has been dissolved under  
sub-section ( 1) shall vacate their office from the date specified in the order of the Go vernment.  
(3) The Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad reconstituted or established under the provisions of  
sub-sectio n (1) shall consi st of members nominated by the Government and such members shall as far as 
practicable be persons who are membe rs of the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad which has been 
dissolved under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) The Chairpersons of Gram Panchaya t or Zilla Parishad shall be elected in t he manner provided in 
this Act.  
(5) The term of the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad so reconstituted or established shall be for such 
period not exceeding six months as the Gov ernment shall by order specify.  
(6) Before the expiry of the term of the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad constituted in accorda nce 
with the provisions of sub -section ( 5), a Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad shall be constituted in the  
manner provided under this Act:  
Provided that where the r emainder of the period for which the dissolved Gram Panchayat or Zilla 
Parishad would have contin ued is less than six months it shall not be necessary to hold an election under 
this section for constituting a Gram Panchayat or a Zilla Parishad for such per iod. 
(7) A Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad constituted under sub -section ( 1) shall continue only for the 
remainder of the period for which the dissolved Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad would have continue d 
had it not been so dissolved.  
(8) When a Gram Pa nchayat or a Zilla Parishad has been dissolved and reconstituted or established 
under this section so much of the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad fund and other property vesting in the 
Gram Panchayat or  Zilla Parishad which has been dissolved shall vest i n and such portion of the debts, 
and oblig ations shall be transferred to , the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad  reconstituted or established 
under this section as the Government may dire ct by an order made in writing.  
(9) The rights and liabilities of the d issolved Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad in respect of civil and 
criminal proceedings, contracts, agreements and other matters or things arising in and relating to any part 
of the area subject to the authority of the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad recon stituted or established 
shall vest in such Gr am Panchayat or Zilla Parishad.  
(10) Any appointment, notification, notice, tax, order, scheme, licence, permission, rule, regulation or 
form made, issued, imposed or granted by the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Paris had which has been   
dissolved in respect of any part of the area subject to the authority of the Gram Panchayat or Zilla 
Parishad which has been reconstituted or established, shall be deemed to have been made, issued, 
imposed or granted by such Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad unless and until it i s suspended by any 
appointment , notification, notice, form, order, scheme, licence, permission, rule and regulation made, 
issued, imposed or granted by such Gr am Panchayat or Zilla Parishad.  
83. Dissolution of Gram Panchayats and Zil la Pa rishad in certain other cases .—(1) If, in the 
opinion of the Zilla Parishad, a Gram Panchayat exce ed or abuses its powers or is not competent to 
perform or makes persistent default  in the performance of the duties imposed on it under this Act or any 33 
 other law for the time being in force, the Zilla Parishad may by order published in the Official Gazette , 
dissolve such Gram Panchayat.  
(2) If in the opinion of the Government, a Zilla Parishad exceeds or abuses its powers or is not 
competent to perform or makes persistent default in the performance of the duties imposed on it under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the Government may, by an order published in the 
Official Gazette , dissolve such Zilla Parishad . 
(3) Before publishing an order under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) the Zilla Parishad or the 
Government shall communicate to the Gram Panchayat or to the Zilla Parishad, as the case may be, the 
grounds on which it proposes to do so, and fix a reason able period for the Panchayat concerned to show 
cause against the proposal and consider its expl anation and objections, if any.  
(4) When a Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad is dissolved all the members of Gram Panchayat or 
Zilla Parishad shall, from the dat e specified in the order, vacat e their office as such members.  
(5) If a Gram Panchayat o r Zilla Parishad is dissolved: — 
(a) all the powers and duties of the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad shall, during the period of 
its dissolution be exercised and perfo rmed by such person or persons as the Zilla Parishad or the 
Government, as the case may be, may from time t o time, appoint in t his behalf;  
(b) all property vested in the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad shall during the period of 
dissolution vest in the Zi lla Parishad or the Gover nment, as the case may be ; and  
(c) the person is vacating office on dissolution shall be eligible for re -election.  
84. Inquiry into the affairs of the  panchayats by the Government .—(1) The Government may, at 
any time for reasons to be recorded in writing, cause any inquiry to be made by any of its officers in 
regard to any Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad on matters concerning it, or any matters with respect to 
which the sanction, appr oval, consent or orders of the Government is required under this Act.  
(2) The Officer holding such inquiry shall have the powers of the Civil Court under the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) to take evidence and to compel attendance of witnesses a nd production of 
documents for the purposes of the inq uiry. 
(3) The Government may make orders as to costs of inquiries made under sub -section ( 1) and as to 
the parties by whom and the funds out of which they shall be paid and such order may, on the applic ation 
of the Commissioner or of any person named therein be executed as if it were a decree of a Civil Court.  
85. Insp ection of Development Schemes .—(1) For the purpose of efficient and economical 
execution of any works  or development schemes undertaken by a Gram Panc hayat or Zilla Parishad an 
officer  or person authorised by general or special order of the Governm ent, if he considers it necessary to 
give te chnical guidance or assistance to any officer of or under the Gram P anchayat or Zilla Parishad who 
is charged with the execution or maintenance of any such work or development scheme, th en the officer 
or person so authorised may periodically inspect such works or development schemes to give such 
guidance, assistance or adv ise as he thinks necessary in relation to such works or development schemes 
and shall forward to the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad a report on the inspection made pointing out 
therein any irregularities noticed, a nd suggestions for improvement.  
(2) In implementation of the plans or schemes all the rules applicable to Government Departments 
such as for purchase, tender, quality control, technical sanctions, accounts and audit and supe rvision shall 
mutatis mutandis  be app licable in case of a Panchayat.  
86. Directions from  the Government .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act it shall 
be lawful for the Government to issue directions to any Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad in matters 
relating to State and National Policies and such directions shall be binding on the Gr am Panchayat or 
Zilla Parishad.  
(2) The Government may: — 
(a) call for any record , register or any other document in possession under the control of any 
Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parish ad; 34 
 (b) require any Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad to furnish in return, plan, estimate, statem ent, 
account or statistics; and  
(c) require any Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad to furnish any information or report on any 
matter connected with such Gr am Panchayat or Zilla Parishad.  
87. Commissio ner and Chief Executive Officer’ s powers in respect of Gra m Panchayat and 
Zilla Parishad .—(1) The Chief Executive Officer may in respect of Gram Panchayat exercise the 
following  powers, namely: — 
(a) call for proceedings of any Gram Panchayat or any extract of any book or document in the 
possession of or under the control of the Gram Panchayat or any return or statement of account or 
report;  
(b) require a Gram Panchayat, to take into consideration any objection which appears to him to 
exist to the doing of anyth ing which is about to be done or is being done by such Gram Panchayat or 
any information which appears to him to necessitate the doing of anything by such Gram Panchayat 
or wi thin such period as he may fix;  
(c) order a duty to be performed within a specifi ed period if a Gram Panchayat has made default 
in the performance of any duty and if such duty is not performed within the specified period, to 
appoint a person to perform such duty and direct that the expenses thereof shall be paid by the   
defaulting Gram Panchayat wi thin such period as he may fix;  
(d) direct a Gram Panchayat to levy any tax if it has failed to do so in accordance with the 
provision of this Act;  
(e) call for meetings of the Gram Panchayat, or any of its committees if no meeting of the Gram 
Panchayat or its committees has been held in accordance with the provisions of thi s Act or rules made 
thereunder.  
(2) The Gram Panchayat may appeal to the Commissioner, against any order made under clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) by the Chief Executive Officer within thirty da ys from the date of such order.  
(3) The Commissioner may in respect of Zilla Parishad exercise  the following p owers, namely: — 
(a) call for proceedings of any Zilla Parishad or any extract of any book or document in the 
possession of  or under the control of the Zilla Parishad or any return or statement of account or 
report;  
(b) require a Zilla Parishad, to take into consideration any objection which appears to him to exist 
to the doing of anything which is about to be done or is being  done by such Zilla Parishad or any 
information which appears to him to necessitate the doing of anything by such Zilla Parishad or 
withi n such period as he may fix;  
(c) order a duty to be performed within a specified period if a Zilla Parishad has made de fault in 
the performance of any duty and if such duty is not performed within the specified period, to appoint 
a person to perform such duty and direct that the expenses thereof shall be paid by the defaulting Zilla 
Parishad wi thin such period as he may fi x; 
(d) call for meetings of the Zilla Parishad or any of its committees if no meeting of the Zilla 
Parishad or its committees has been held in accordance with the provisions of th is Act  or rules made 
thereunder.  
(4) The Zilla Parishad may appeal to the Government, against any order made under clause ( c) of  
sub-section ( 3) by the Commissioner, within thirty da ys from the date of such order.  
88. Power of Government and Chief Executive Officer to provide for performance of duties in 
default of Gra m Panchay at or Zilla Parishad .—When the Government in case of a Zilla Parishad and 
the Chief Executive Officer in case of a Gram Panchayat is informed on complaint made or otherwise, 
that any Zilla Parishad or Gram Panchayat has made default in performing any duty impos ed on it, by or 
under this Act, or by or under any law for the time being in force and if the Government or Chief 
Executive Officer, as the case may be, is satisf ied after due enquiry that any Z illa Parishad or Gram 35 
 Panchayat, has failed in the perfor mance of such duty, the Government or the Chief Executive Officer, as 
the case may be, may fix a period fo r the performance of that duty:  
Provided that no such period shall be fixed unless the Zilla Parishad or Gram Panchayat concerned 
has been given an op portunity to show cause why such an order shall not be made.  
89. Zilla Parishad's power of suspending the executions  of order , etc., of Gram Panchayat .—(1) 
If in the opinion of the Zilla Parishad the execution of any order or resolution of a Gram Panchayat or any 
order of any authority or Officer of a Gram Panchayat or the doing anything which is about to be done, or 
is being done, by or on behalf of a Gram  Panchayat is unjust, unlawful, improper or is causing or is likely 
to cause injury or annoyance to the public or to lead to a breach of the peace, it may by order suspend the 
execution of or prohibit the doing thereof.  
(2) When the Zilla Parishad makes an  order under sub -section ( 1) it shall forthwith forward to the 
Government and to the Gram Panchayat affected thereby a copy of the order with a statement of the 
reasons for making it and it shall be in the discretion of the Government to confirm or resind the order or 
to direct that it shall continue to be in force with or without modification permanently or fo r such period 
as it thinks fit:  
Provided that no order of the Zilla Parishad made under this section shall be confirmed, revised or 
modified by the G overnment without giving the Gram Panchayat reasonable opportunity of showing 
cause against the said order.  
90. Government ’s power of suspending execution of unlawful  order s or resolution s.—(1) If on 
the receipt of a report from the Chief Executive Officer in this behalf or otherwise the Government is of 
the opinion that execution of any order or resolution of Zilla Parishad or the doing of anything which is 
about to be done or is being done by on behalf of a Zilla Parishad is unjust, unlawful, or im proper or is 
causing or is likely to c ause injury or annoyance to the public or to lead to a breach of the peace, it may, 
by an order suspend the execution  or prohibit the doing thereof.  
(2) When the Government makes an order under sub -section ( 1), it shall forthwith forward to the Zilla 
Parishad affected thereby a copy of the order with a statement of reasons for making it and the 
Government may confirm or rescind the order or direct that it shall continue to be in force with or without 
modification perman ently or fo r such period as it thinks fit:  
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made by the Government without giving the 
Zilla Parishad concerned a reasonable opportunity of showin g cause against the said order.  
91. Pur chase of store  and equipment .—(1) The Government may by general or special order 
provide for all any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which p urchase of stores, equipments, machineries and other articles required 
by the Zilla Parishad or Gram P anchaya t shall be made by them;  
(b) the manner in which tender for works, contracts and supplies shall be invited and examined 
and accepted by the Gr am Panchayat or Zilla Parishad;  
(c) the manner in which works, a nd development schemes may be ex ecuted and inspect ed and 
payment may be made in respec t of such works an schemes; and  
(d) constitution of committe e for the purposes of this sub -section.  
(2) Save as otherwise expressly provided in sub -section ( 1), in respect of all other matters relating to 
withdrawal of funds, form of bills , incurring of expenditure maintenance of accounts, rendering of 
accounts and such other matters, the rules, of implementation as applicable to Departments of the 
Government shall mutatis mutandis  apply in case of a Gra m Panchayat and Z illa Parishad.  
92. Power to appoint A dministrator in certain cases .—(1) Whenever, — 
(a) any general election to a Zilla Parishad under this Act or any proceedings consequent thereon 
has been stayed by an order of a co mpetent court, or authority; or  
  36 
 (b) all the members or more than two -thirds of the members of a Zilla Parishad  have resigned,  
the Government shall by notification in the Official Gazette appoint an Administrator for such period as 
may be specified in the notification and may, by like notific ation, curtail or extend the period of such 
appointment, so however, that the total period of such appointme nt shall not exceed six months.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act,  on the appointment of an Administrator under 
sub-section  (1) the  Zilla Parishad and the Committees th ereof and the Adhyaksha, or Up -Adhyaksha of 
such Zilla Parishad charged with carrying out the provisions of this Act, or any other law, shall cease to 
exercise any powers and perform and discharge any duties or function s conferred or imposed on them by 
or under this Act or any other law and all such powers shall be exercised and all such duties and functions 
shall be performed and discharged by the Administrator during the period of such appointment.  
93. Removal o f membe rs for misconduct, etc .—The Government if it thinks fit on the 
recommendation of the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad or otherwise, may remove any member after 
giving him an opportunity of being heard and after such enquiry as it deems necessary if such members 
has been guilty of misconduct in the discharge of his duties or of any disgraceful conduct or has become 
incapable of per forming his duties as a member.  
94. Restrictions on withdrawal of powers and functions from the Panchayats .—(1) 
Notwithstanding  the transfer of any power, functions and duties in respect of any matter to a Panchayat 
under this Act the Government on a proposal from Panchayat in that behalf or where it is satisfied that by 
reason of a change in th e nature of the matter such as the c onversion of a primary health centre into a 
secondary health centre or hospital or the conversion of a seed multiplication farm into an agricultural 
research farm or a road becoming a part of a highway, the matter would cease to be a matter in relevant 
Panchayat functions list and it is necessary to withdraw from the Panchayat powers, functions or duties in 
respect of such matter, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, withdraw such powers, functions and 
duties with effect from the date specified in the notification and make such incidental and consequential 
orders as may be necessary to provide for matters including the taking over of the property, right and 
liabilities, if any vesting in the Panchayat and of the staff, if any, which may have been tr ansferred to the 
Panchayat as the case may be.  
95. Pre paration of development plans .—(1) Every Gram Panchayat shall prepare every year a 
development plan and submit it to the Zilla Parishad before such date and in such form as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) Every Zilla Parishad shall prepare every year a development plan of the District after including 
the development plans of the Gram Panchayat and submit it to the District Planning Committee 
constituted under section 96 of this Act.  
96. District Planning  Committee .—(1) The Government shall constitute in every district a District 
Planning Committee to consolidate the plans prepared by the Zilla Parishad, Gram Panchayats, Nagar 
Panchayat, Municipal Council and Municipal Corporation in the district and to pr epare a draft 
development pl an for the district as a whole.  
(2) The District Plann ing Committee shall consist of — 
(a) members of the House of the People who represent the  whole or part of the district;  
(b) all the members or the State Legislative Assembly whose constituencies lie within the district;  
(c) Adhyaksha of the Zilla Parishad;  
(d) Mayor or the President of the Municipal Corporation or the Municipal Council respectively, 
having jurisdiction over the headquarters of the  district; and  
(e) such number  of persons not less than four -fifth of the total number of members of the 
Committee as may be specified by the Government elected in the prescribed manner from amongst the 
members of the Zilla Parishad, Nagar Panchayat and Councillors of the Municipal Cor poration and the 
Municipal Councils in the district, in proportion to the ratio between the population of the rural areas and 
of the urban areas in the district.  
(3) The Chairman of the District Co -operative Banks and of the Land Development Bank shall be 
perma nent invitees of the Committee.  37 
 (4) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the Secretary of the Committee.  
(5) The Deputy Commissioner of the districts shall be the Chairman of t he District Planning 
Committee.  
(6) The District Planning Committee shall c onsolidate the plans prepared by the Zilla Parishad, Gram 
Panchayat, Nagar Panchaya t, Municipal Council and the Municipal Corporations in the district and 
prepare a draft development pl an for the district as a whole.  
(7) Every District Planning Committee s hall in preparin g the draft development plan: — 
(a) have regard to — 
(i) the matters of common interest between the Zilla Parishad, Gram Panchayats, Nagar 
Panchayats, Municipal Corporation and Municipal Councils in the district including spatial 
planning sharing of water and other physical and natural resource, the integrated  development of 
infrastructure and environmental conservation,  
(ii) the extent and type of available resources whether financial or otherwise;  
(b) consult such institutions and organisations as the Gove rnment may by order specify.  
(8) The Chairman of ever y District Planning Committee shall forward the development plan, as 
recommended by su ch Committee to the Government.  
97. Fina nce Commission for Panchayats .—(1) The Governor shall constitute every five years a 
Finance Commission to review the financial pos ition of the Zilla Parishads and Gram Panchayats and to 
make recommen dations to the Government as to — 
(a) the pr inciples w hich should govern — 
(i) the distribution between the State and the Zilla Parishads and the Gram Panchayats and the 
net proceeds of the  taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the Government which may be divided 
between them and allocation between the Zil la Parishad and Gram Panchayat o f their resp ective 
shares of such proceeds;  
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fee s which may be assigned to or 
appropriated by the Zill a Parishad and Gram Panchayat;  
(iii) the grants -in-aid to the Zilla Parishads and Gram Panchayats from the C onsolidated Fund 
of the Sta te; 
(b) the measures needed to improve the financial position of th e Zilla Par ishads and Gram 
Panchayats; and  
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Governor in the interest of sound 
finance of the Zilla  Parishads and Gram Panchayats.  
(2) The Finance Commis sion shall consist of a member.  
(3) The me mber of Finance Commission shall be appointed in such manner as may be pre scribed 
from among persons who — 
(a) have e xperience in public affairs; or  
(b) are or have been, or are qualified to be appointed  as a Judge of a High Court; or  
(c) have special knowledge of the finances and accounts of Governments; or  
(d) have had wide experience in financial matters and in ad ministration; or  
(e) have special knowledge of economics.  
(4) The Finance Commissio n shall determine i ts procedure.  38 
 (5) The member of the Finance Commission may resign his office by writing under his hand and 
addressed to the Governor but he shall continue in office until his resignati on is accepted by the 
Governor.  
(6) The casual vacancy occurring due to the resignation of the  member under sub -section ( 5) or for 
any other reason may be filled by  fresh appointment and a member so appointed shall hold office for the 
remaining period for which the member in whose place as he was appointed would have held office.  
(7) In the perfor mance of its functions, the Commission shall have the following powers, namely :—  
(a) to call for any record  from any officer or authority;  
(b) to summon any person to give e vidence or produce records; and  
(c) such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
(8) The Governor shall cause every reco mmendation made by the Finance Commission under this 
section together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be lai d before the 
State Legislature.  
98. State Election Commission .—(1) There shall b e a S tate Election Commission constitut ed by the 
Government for superintendence, direction and control of the preparation o f electoral rolls for, and the 
conduct of all elections to the Panchayat bodies in the State under this Act and th e rules made thereu nder.  
(2) The Commission shall consist of a State Election Commissioner to be appointed by the Governor.  
(3) The conditions of services and tenure of office of the State Election Commissioner shall be such 
as the  Governor may  by rule determine:  
Provided that the State Election Commissioner shall not be removed from his office except in like 
manner and on the like grounds as a Judge of the High Court and the conditions of service of the State 
Election Commissioner shall not be varied to his disa dvantage af ter his appointment.  
(4) The Government shall , when so requested by the State Election Commission, make available to 
the State Election Commission such staff as may be necessary for the discharge of the functions conferred 
on the State Elect ion Commission under this Act .  
99. Determination of elected members after Ce nsus .—Upon the publication of the figures of each 
Census, the  number of elected members of a Panchayat shall be determined by the Sta te Government on 
the basis of th e population of the Panchayat  area as ascertained at that Census:  
Provided that the determination of the number as aforesaid shall no t affect the then composition of the 
Panchayats existing at the time of the publication of Census under this section until the expiry of its term.  
100. Qualification of membership for election t o Panchayat or Zilla Parishad .—Every person 
whose name is in the  list of voters within the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad constituency and is 
ordinarily resident within the Gram  Panchayat or Zilla Parishad area s hall, unle ss disqualified under this 
Act or under any other law for the time being in force , be qualified to be elected as a member of the Gram 
Panchayat:  
Provided that in the case of seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Back -
ward  Classes and women, no person who is not a member of any of the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled 
Tribes or Backward Classes or is not a women, as the case may be, shall be qualif ied to be elected to such 
seat. 
101. Dis qualification for Memberships .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen and 
for being a member of a Gra m Panchayat or Zilla Parishad, — 
(a) if he has not attain ed the age of twenty -one years;  
(b) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purpos es of 
elect ions to the State Legislatures;  39 
 (c) if an order has been passed against him under section 117 of the Code of Crimi nal Procedure, 
1973 (2 of 1974 ), in proceedings instituted under section 110 of the Code, such order not having been 
subsequently r evised or quashed; or  
(d) if h e has been dismissed from the service  under any local authority; or  
(e) if, having been a legal or medical practitioner or a chartered accountant, his name has been 
removed from the rolls or he is suspended by order of a competent authority, the disqualification in 
the latter case being operative during th e period of such suspension; or  
(f) if he has been removed from membe rship of any local authority; or 
(g) if he holds any office of profit under any local or other author ity subject to the control of the 
Central Government, the State Government or th e Government of any other State, other than such 
offices as are declared by rules made under this Act not to disqualify the  holder.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause,  a person shall not be deemed to hold any office of 
profit under the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad by reason only that he is a Pradhan or Up -Pradhan 
of the Gram Panchayat or an Adhyaksha or Up -Adhyaks ha of Zilla Parishad;  
(h) if, save as hereinafter provided he has directly or indirectly any share or interest in any work 
done by order of the Gram Panachayat or the Zilla Parishad or in any contract or employment with, or 
under, or by, or on behalf of the Gram Panac hayat or the Zill a Parishad; or  
(i) if he is employed as a paid legal practitioner on behalf of the Gram Panchayat or the Zilla 
Parishad or accepts employments as legal practitioner against the Gram Panchayat or Zilla Parishad; 
or  
(j) if arrears of any kind are due by him  to the Gram Panchayat or the  Zilla Parishad under this 
Act: 
Provided that, — 
(a) the disqualification in clause ( b) shall cease to operate after the expiry of the period during 
which a person is ordered to furnish security;  
(b) the disqualification in clause ( d) or clause ( e) shall cease to operate after the expiry of five 
years from the date of such sentence or dismissal, or disenrolment or earlier  by an order of the 
Government;  
(c) the disqualification in clause ( f) shall cease to operate after the ex piry of five years  from the 
date of such removal;  
(d) a person shall not be deemed to ha ve incurred disqualification under clause ( h) by reason of 
his,— 
(i) having a share in any join t stock company or a share or interest in any association 
registered unde r the Manipur Societies Re gistration Act, 1989 (1 of 1990 ) in any co -operative 
society, which shall contract with or be employed by or on behalf of the Gram Panc hayat or the 
Zilla Parishad; or  
(ii) having a share or interest in any newspaper in which any a dvertisement relating to the 
affairs of the Gram Panchayat or the  Zilla Parishad is inserted; or  
(iii) holding a debenture or being otherwise concerned in any loan raised by or on behalf of 
the Gram Panchayat or the Zilla Parish ad. 
(2) If any question arises as to whether a member of a Panchayat at any level has become subject to 
any of disqualification mentioned in sub -sectio n (1), the question referred for the  decision of Election 
Tribunal.  
(3) If a person who is chosen as a member of a Panchayat is o r become s Member of the House of the 
People, the Council of States, the State Legislative Assembly or the State Legislative Council, or is or 
becomes a Municipal Councillor  or a Councillor of Municipal Corporation or a Member of a Sanitary 40 
 Board, and other  Panchayat, then within fifteen days from the date of commencement of the term of 
office of a Member of the House of the People, the Council of States, the State Legislative Assembly or 
State Legislative Council or of a Municipal Councillor or a Councillor  of a Municipal Corporation or a 
Member of such other Panchayat his seat in the Panchayat shall become vacant unless he has previously 
resigned his seat in the House of the People, the Council of States, the State Legislative Assembly or the 
State Legislat ive Council or the Municipal Corporation of the Board or such other  Panchayat , as the case 
may be.  
102. Power of State Government to rescind or suspend resolution of a Gra m Panchayat or  Zilla 
Parishad .—(1) The State Government may, within a period of six months, by  order in writing, rescind 
any resolution passed by a Gram Panchayat or a Zilla Parishad, if in its opinion such resolution, — 
(a) has not been legally passed; or  
(b) is in excess, or abuse of the powers conferred by, or under this A ct or in rules  made 
thereunder.  
(2) The State Government shall, before taking any such action under sub -section ( 1) give the Gram 
Panchayat or the Zilla Parishad concerned an opportunity for making representat ion against the proposed 
order.  
103. Cons titution of Election  Tribunal .—(1) The Government shall constitute Election Tribunal 
consisting of one member to be appointed by that Government to dispose of: —  
(i) all election petitions challengin g elections to a Panchayat;  
(ii) matters relating to disqualificatio n of a member of the Panchayat;  and 
(iii) any other election matter,  
in such manner as m ay be prescribed.  
(2) The Headquarter of the Tribunal shall be at  such place as may be notified.  
(3) The decision of the Election Tribunal made under sub-section ( 1) shall be  final.  
104. Annual Administration r eport .—(1) As soon as may be after the first day of April in every 
year and not later than such date as may be fixed by the Government, the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Zilla Parishad shall prepare a report on the administration of the Zilla Parishad during the preceding year 
in such form and with such details as the Government may direct and submit the report to the  Zilla 
Parishad. After approval by the Zilla Parishad the report shall be submitted to the Government . 
(2) The report submitted to the Government under sub -section ( 1) shall together with a memorandum 
by the Governmen t reviewing the working of the Zilla Parishad be laid before the House of the State 
Legislature.  
105. Power to make Rules.—(1) The State Government may, by notification In the Official Ga zette , 
make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure for convening and holding the meetings  of Gram Sabha under section 6;  
(b) the manner for publication of Electoral Rolls of Gram Panchayat and the authority competent 
to publish the same as referred to in su b-section ( 1) of section 16;  
(c) the man ner for filing an appeal against the order of the authority publishing the Electoral Rolls 
as referred to in  sub-section ( 5) of section 13;  
(d) the rotation of the reserved seats in constituencies of a Gram Panchayat under sub -sections ( 1) 
and ( 3) of section 19;  
(e) the procedure for election of Pradhan and members of G ram Panchayat under section 21;  
(f) the manner for filling up the casual vacancies in Gram Panchayat referred to in  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 23;  41 
 (g) the payment of honorarium and other  allowances to Pradhan and Up -Pradhan under   
sub-section ( 2) of section 27;  
(h) powers, functions and duties of Pradhan and Up -Pradhan as referred to in clause ( g) of  
sub-section ( 1) and clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2) of section 28;  
(i) the authority compe tent to receive and accept the resigna tion of Pradhan and Up -Pradhan;  
(j) the officers to whom the notice of meeting of the Gram Panchayat is to be forwarded by the 
Secretary under  sub-section ( 3) of section 32;  
(k) the manner for co -opting the members by Standing Committee under clause ( b) of  
sub-section ( 2) of section 38;  
(l) the custody in which Gra m Panchayat fund shall be kept as referred to in clause ( c) of         
sub-section ( 2) of section 39;  
(m) the procedure for preparation and approval of the budget of Gram Panchayat under section 42 
and maintenance of accounts and its audit under sections 43 and 44;  
(n) appointment, terms and conditions of service, pay and allowances and other service conditi ons 
of the Secretar y as referred to in section 45;  
(o) the manner of election of members to Z illa Parishad under section 50;  
(p) the manner for filling up the casual vacancy in Zilla Pari shad referred to in section 51;  
(q) the rotation of reserved seats in  constituencies of Zilla Parishad under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) 
of section 52;  
(r) the manner for reservation of seats of Adhyaksha and Up -Adhyaksha of Zilla Parishad 
referred to in  sub-section ( 2) of section 54;  
(s) salary and allowances of Adhyaksha and  Up-Adhyaksha and sitting fee and other allowances 
to the members of Zilla Parishad und er section 55;  
(t) powers, functions and duties of Adhyaksha and Up -Adhya ksha referred to in section 56;  
(u) the authority competent to receive and accept the resignatio n of Adhyaksha and                  
Up-Adhyaksha under su b-section ( 2) of section 57;  
(v) the additional duties to be performed by the Committees under sub -section ( 8) of section 66;  
(w) the maximum rate of taxes to  be levied by a Zilla Parishad;  
(x) preparation and approval of budget for Z illa Parishad under section 72;  
(y) maintenance of accounts of Zilla Parishad and their audit ref erred to in sections 73 and 74;  
(z) the terms and conditions for appointment of Additional Chief Executive Officer, Chi ef 
Accounts Officer, Chief Planning Officer and other staff members under section 75;  
(aa) the superintendence and control of the affairs of Zilla Parishad by the Chief Executive 
Officer referred to in clauses ( c) and ( e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 76;  
(ab) the limits of fine to be imposed by Gram Panchayat under sub -section ( 2) of section 79 and 
the manner of publication of bye -laws of Gram Panchayat under sub -section ( 4) of the said section;  
(ac) the manner for appointment of member of Finance Commiss ion referred to in  sub-section ( 3) 
of section 97.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after it is made, before the 
Legislative Assembly while it is in session, for a total period of twenty days which may be comprised 
in one  session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the  successive sessions aforesaid, the House agrees in making modification in 
the rule or that the rule should not be made, the rule shall therea fter have effect only in such modified 42 
 form or be of no effect, as the case may be, so, however, that any such modification or annulment 
shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously done under that rule.  
106. Bar to interference b y Cou rts in electoral matters .—Notwithstanding anythi ng in this Act — 
(a) the validity of any law relating to the delimitation of constituencies or the allotment of seat to 
such constituencies, made or purporting to be made under the relevant provision of the Constitution 
of India shall not be called in quest ion in any Court;  
(b) no election to any Panchayat shall be c alled in question in any Court.  
107. Taking of oath .—Every member, Adhyaksha or Up -Adhyaksha of the Zilla Parishad and every 
Member, Pradhan o r Up-Pradhan of a Gram Panchayat shall before taking his seat, make at a meeting of 
the Zilla  Parishad or Gram Panchayat as the case may be, an oath or affirmation of his allegiance to the 
Constitution of India in the following form, namely: — 
I,.............. .................................. ............... being a Member/ Adhyaksha/Up -Adhyaksha/Pradhan/        
Up-Pradhan of the.................................... do swear in the name of God (or solemnly affirm) that I will 
bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established and that I will faithfully 
discharge the duty upon which I am about to enter.  
108. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Manipur Panchayati Raj Act, 1975 (Manipur Act 1 2 of 1975 ) is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the  repeal of the Manipur Panchayati Raj Act, 1975 (hereinafter referred to as th e 
repealed Act ) the repeal shall not affect: — 
(a) the previous operations of the repealed Act or anything duly done or suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any righ t, privilege, obligatio n or liability acquired , accrued or incu rred under the repealed 
Act; or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence commi tted under the 
repealed Act; or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceedings or remedy in respect of such right, privilege, obligation, 
liability, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid, and any such investigation, legal proceedings or 
remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such penalty, foreiture or punishment may 
be imposed as if this Act ha d not been passed.  
109. Removal of difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Government, may by order, published in the Official Gazette as the occasion may require, do anything 
which appears to it to be necessary to remove the difficulty.  
--------------------------The New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
 THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL ACT, 1994  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
THE COUNCIL  
Constitution of the Council  
3. Establishment of the Council.  
4. Composition of the Council.  
5. Duration of the Council.  
6. Disqualification for membership of the Council.  
Members  
7. Oath or affirmation.  
8. Vacation of seat.  
Committees of the Council  
9. Setting -up of committees.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  
10. General powers  of the Council.  
11. Obligatory functions of the Council.  
12. Discretionary functions of the Council.  
CHAPTER IV  
THE CHAIRPERSON  
13. Appointment, etc., of the Chairperson.  
14. Leave of absence of Chairperson.  
15. Appointment of officiating Chairperson in case of death, resign ation or removal of Chairperson.  
16. Salary and allowances of the Chairperson and members.  
17. Service regulations of members.  
18. Functions of the Chairperson.  
19. Chairperson not to be interested in any contract, etc., with the Council.  
20. Exercise of powers to be subject to sanction.  
CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE  
Transaction of business by the Council  
21. Meetings.  
22. First meeting of the Council.  
23. Notice of meetings and business.  
24. Quorum.  
25. Presiding Officer.  
26. Method of deciding questions.  2 
 SECTIONS  
27. Members not to vote on matter in which they are interested.  
28. Right to attend meetings of Council  and its committees, etc., and right of members to ask 
questions in relation to the municipal government of New Delhi.  
29. Keeping of minutes and proceedings.  
30. Circulation of minutes and inspection of minutes a nd reports of proceedings.  
31. Forwarding minutes and reports of proceedings to the Administrator.  
Validation  
32. Validation of proceedings, etc.  
CHAPTER VI  
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND OTHER MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES  
33. Appointment of certain officers.  
34. Schedule of permanent pos ts and creation of temporary posts.  
35. Restriction on employment of permanent officers and other employees.  
36. Power to make appointments.  
37. Officers and other employees not to undertake any extraneous work.  
38. Officers and other employees not to be interested in any  contract, etc. , with the Council.  
39. Punishment for municipal officers and other employees.  
40. Consultation with the Union Public Service Commission.  
41. Power of Commission to make regulations and reference to the Central Government in case of 
difference between t he Commission and the Council.  
42. Recruitment to category B and category C posts.  
43. Power of Council to make regulations.  
CHAPTER VII  
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE  
The New Delhi Municipal Fund  
44. Constitution of the New Delhi Municipal Fund.  
45. New Delhi Municipal Fund to be kept in the State Bank of India.  
46. Operation of the Accounts.  
47. Payments not to be made unless covered by a budget -grant.  
48. Duty of persons signing cheques.  
49. Procedure when money not covered by a budget -grant is expended.  
50. Application of New Delhi Municipal Fun d. 
51. Temporary payments from the New Delhi Municipal Fund for works urgently required for the 
public service.  
52. Investment of surplus moneys.  
53. Constitution of Finance Commission.  
Special Funds 
54. Constitution of special funds.  
Budget estimates  
55. Adoption of budget estimates.  
56. Power of Council to alter budget estimates.  
57. Power of Council to re -adjust income and expenditure during the year.  
ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT 
Scrutiny and audit of accounts  
58. Accounts to be kept.  
59. Audit.  
 3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
TAXATION  
Levy of taxes  
SECTIONS  
60. Taxes to be imposed by the Council under this Act.  
Property tax  
61. Rates of property tax.  
62. Premises in respect of which property tax is to be levied.  
63. Determination of rateable value of lands and buildings assessable to property tax.  
64. Charge for supply of water.  
65. Taxat ion of Union properties.  
66. Incidence of property tax.  
67. Apportionment of liability for property tax when the premises are let or sub -let. 
68. Recovery of property tax from occupiers.  
69. Property tax a first charge on premises on which it is assessed.  
70. Assessment list. 
71. Evidential value of assessment list.  
72. Amendment of assessment list.  
73. Preparation of new assessment list.  
74. Notice of transfers.  
75. Notice of erection of building, etc.  
76. Notice of demolition or removal of buildin gs. 
77. Power of Chairperson to call for information and  returns and to enter and inspect premises.  
78. Premises owned by , or let to two or more persons in severalty to be ordinarily assessed as one 
property.  
79. Assessment in case of amalgamation of premises.  
80. Power of Chairperson to assess separately outhouses and por tions of buildings.  
81. Power of Chairperson to employ valuers.  
Tax on vehicles and animals  
82. Tax on certain vehicles and animals and rates thereof.  
83. The tax on whom leviable.  
84. Tax when payable.  
85. Power of Chairperson to compound with livery stable keeper, etc., for  tax. 
Theatre -tax 
86. Theatre -tax. 
87. Liability to pay theatre -tax. 
Tax on advertisements other than advertisements published in the newspapers  
88. Tax on advertisements.  
89. Prohibition of advertisements without written permission of the Chairperson.  
90. Permission of the Chairperson to become void in certain cases.  
91. Presumption in case of contravention.  
92. Power of Chairperson in case of contravention.  
Duty on transfer of property  
93. Duty on transfer of property and method of assessment thereto.  
94. Provisions applicable on the intro duction of transfer duty.  
Tax on buildings payab le along with the application for  sanction of building plans  
95. Tax on building applications.  
Other taxes  
96. Imposition of other taxes.  4 
 Supplementary taxation  
SECTIONS  
97. Supplementary taxation.  
Payment and recovery of taxes  
98. Time and manner of payment of taxes.  
99. Presentation of bill.  
100. Notice of demand and notice fee.  
101. Penalty in case of default of payment of taxes.  
102. Recovery of tax.  
103. Distress.  
104. Disposal of distrained property and attachment and sale of immovable property.  
105. Recovery from a person about to leave New Delhi or Delhi.  
106. Power to institute suit for recovery.  
107. Power of seizure of vehicles and animals in case of non -payment of tax thereon.  
108. Occupiers may be required to pay rent towards satisfaction of property tax.  
Remi ssion and refund  
109. Demolition, etc., of buildings.  
110. Remission or refund of tax.  
111. Power to require entry in assessment list of details of buildings.  
112. Notice to be given of the circumstances in which remission or refund is claimed.  
113. What buildings are to be deemed  vacant.  
114. Notice to be given of every occupa tion of vacant land or building . 
Appeals  
115. Appeal against assessment, etc.  
116. Conditions of right to appeal.  
117. Condonation of delay in preferring the appeal.  
118. Finality of ap pellate orders.  
Miscellaneous provisions relating to taxation  
119. Power to inspect for purposes of determining r ateable value or tax.  
120. Composition.  
121. Irrecoverable debts.  
122. Obligation to disclose liability.  
123. Immaterial error not to affect liability.  
124. General power of exemption.  
Taxes on entertainment and betting  
125. Payment of proceeds of entertainment and betting taxes to Council.  
CHAPTER IX  
BORROWING  
126. Power of Council to borrow.  
127. Time for repayment of money borrowed under section 126.  
128. Form and effect of debenture.  
129. Payment to survivors of joint payees.  
130. Receipt by joint holders for interest or dividend.  
131. Maintenance and investment of sinking funds.  
132. Application of sinking funds.  
133. Annual statement by Chairperson.  
134. Power of Council to consolidate loans.  
135. Priority of payment for interest and repayment of loans over other  payments.  
136. Power to make regulations.  5 
 CHAPTER X  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
Property  
SECTIONS  
137. Acquisition of property.  
138. Acquisition of immovable property by agreement.  
139. Procedure when immovable property cannot be acquired by agreement.  
140. Disposal of mov able property.  
141. Disposal of immovable property.  
Contracts  
142. Contracts by the Council.  
143. Procedure for making contracts.  
144. Mode of executing contracts.  
CHAPTER XI  
WATER SUPPLY, DRAIN AGE AND SEWAGE COLLECTION  
General  
145. Definitions.  
146. Council may carry out surveys and formulate proposals.  
Water supply  
147. Functions in relation to water supplies.  
148. Water supplied for domestic purposes not to be used for non -domestic purposes.  
149. Supply of water for domestic purposes not to include any supply for certain specified purposes.  
150. Power to supply water for non -domestic purposes.  
151. Use of water for extinguishing fire. 
152. Power to require water supply to be taken.  
153. New premises not to be occupied without arrangement for water supply.  
154. Public gratuitous water supply.  
155. Power to lay mains.  
156. Power to lay service pipes, etc.  
157. Provision of fire hydrants.  
158. Supply of water.  
159. Laying of supply pipes, etc.  
160. Power to require separate service pipes.  
161. Stopcocks.  
162.  Power of Chairperson to provide meters.  
163. Presumption as to correctness of meters.  
164. Prohibition of waste or misuse of water.  
165. Power to enter premise s to detect waste or misuse of water.  
166. Power to test water fittings.  
167. Power to close or restrict use of water from polluted source of supply.  
168. Water pipes, etc., not to be placed where water will be polluted.  
169. Power to cu t off private water supply or to turn off water.  
170. Joint and several liability of owners and occupiers for offence in relation to water supply.  
Drainage and sew erage 
171. Public drains, etc., to vest in the Council.  
172. Control of drains and sewage collection works.  
173. Certain matters not to be passed into municipal drains.  
174. Application by owners and occupiers to drain into municipal drains.  
175. Drainage of and drained premises.  
176. New premises not to be erected without drains.  6 
 SECTIONS  
177. Power to drain group or block of premises by combined operations.  
178. Power of Chairperson to close or limit the use of private drains in certain cases.  
179. Use of drain by a person other than the owner.  
180. Sewage and rain water drains to be distinct.  
181. Power of Chairperson to require owner to carry out certai n works for satisfactory drainage.  
Collection of sewage  
182. Appointment of places for the emptying of drains and collection of sewage.  
Miscellaneous  
183. Connection with water works and drains not to be made without permission.  
184. Building, railways and private street s not to be erected or constru cted over drains or water works 
without permission.  
185. Rights of user of property for aqueducts, lines, etc.  
186. Power of owner of premises to place pipes and drains through land belonging to other persons.  
187. Power to require railway l evel, etc., to be raised or lowered.  
188. Power of Chairperson to execute work after giving notice to the person liable.  
189. Power of Chairperson to affix shafts, etc., for ventilation of drain or cesspool.  
190. Power of Chairperson to examine and test drains, etc., bel ieved to be defective.  
191. Bulk receipt of water and delivery of sewage by the Council.  
192. Employment of Government agencies for repairs, etc.  
193. Work to be done by licensed plumber.  
194. Prohibition of certain acts.  
CHAPTER XII  
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY  
195. Functions in relation to electricity supply.  
196. Additional functions in relation to electricity supply.  
197. Council to have powers and obligations of licensee under Act 9 of 1910.  
198. Restriction on building and other acts interfering with the works of electric supply.  
199. Power of Council to  make arrangements with licensees.  
200. Charges for supply of electricity.  
201. Bulk receipt of electricity by the Council.  
CHAPTER XIII  
STREETS  
Construction, maintenance and improvement of streets  
202. Vesting of public streets in the Council.  
203. Functions of Chairperson in respect of public streets.  
204. Disposal of land forming site of public streets permanently closed.  
205. Power to make new public streets.  
206. Minimum width of new public streets.  
207. Power to prohibit or regulate use of public streets for certain kind of traffic.  
208. Power to acquire lands and buildings for public streets and for public parking places.  
209. Defining the regular line of streets.  
210. Setting back building to regular line of street.  
211. Compulsory setting back of building to regular line of street.  
212. Acquisition of open land and land occupied by platform, etc., within the regular line of street.  
213. Acquisition of the remaining part of a building and land after their portions within a regular line 
of street have been acquired.  
214. Setting forward of building s to the regular line of street . 
215. Compensation to be paid in certain cases of setting back or setting forward of buildings, etc.  
 7 
 Private streets  
SECTIONS  
216. Owner‟s obligation when dealing with land as building sites.  
217. Lay-out plans.  
218. Alteration or demolition of street made in breach o f section 217.  
219. Power of Chairperson to order work to be carried out or to carry it out himself in default.  
220. Right of owner to require streets to be declared public.  
Encroachments on streets  
221. Prohibition of projections upon streets, etc.  
222. Projections over stre ets may be permitted in certain cases.  
223. Ground floor doors, etc., not to open outwards on st reets.  
224. Prohibition of structures or fixtures which cause obstruction in street.  
225. Prohibition of deposit, etc., of things in streets.  
226. Power to remove anything deposite d or exposed for sale in contravention of this Act.  
227. Prohibition of the tethering of animals and milking of cattle.  
Provision concerning execution of works in or near to streets  
228. Precautions during repair of streets.  
229. Streets not to be opened or broken up and  building materials not to be deposited thereon without 
permission.  
230. Disposal of things removed under this Chapter.  
Naming and numbering of streets and numbering of buildings  
231. Naming and numbering of streets.  
Repair or enclosure of dangerous places  
232. Chairperson to take steps for repairing or enclosing dangerous places.  
Lighting of streets  
233. Measures for lighting.  
234. Prohibition of removal, etc., of lamps.  
CHAPTER XIV  
BUILDING REGULATIONS  
235. General superintendence, etc., of the Central Government.  
236. Definition . 
237. Prohibition of building without sanction.  
238. Erection of building.  
239. Applications for additions to, or repairs of, buildings.  
240. Conditions of valid notice.  
241. Sanction or refusal of building or work.  
242. When building or work may be proceeded with.  
243. Sanction accorded un der misrepresentation.  
244. Buildings at corners of streets.  
245. Provisions as to buildings and works on either side of new streets.  
246. Period for completion of building or work.  
247. Order of demolition and stoppage of buildings or works in certain cases and appeal.  
248. Order  of stoppage of buildings or works in certain cases.  
249. Power of Chairperson to require alteration of work.  
250. Power to seal unauthori sed constructions.  
251. Completion certificates.  
252. Restrictions on uses of buildings.  
253. Appellate Tribunal.  
254. Appeals against certain orders or notices issued under the Act.  8 
 SECTIONS  
255. Procedure of the Appellate Tribunal.  
256. Appeal against orders of Appellate Tribunal . 
257. Bar of jurisdiction of courts.  
258. Removal of dangerous buildings.  
259. Power to order building  to be vacated in certain circumstances.  
260. Power of the Central Government to make bye -laws.  
CHAPTER XV  
SANITATION AND PUBLIC H EALTH  
Conservancy and sanitation  
261. Provision for daily cleansing of streets and removal of rubbish and filth.  
262.  Rubbish, etc., to be t he property of the Council.  
263. Provision or appointment of receptacles, depots and places for rubbish, etc.  
264. Duty of owners and occupiers to collect and deposit rubbish, etc.  
265. Collection and removal of filth and polluted matter.  
266. Removal of rubbish, etc., accumu lated on premises used as factories, workshop, etc.  
267. Prohibition against accumulation of rubbish, etc.  
268. Prohibition in respect of air pollutant.  
269. Chairperson‟s power to get premises scavenged and cleansed.  
270. Public latrines, urinals, etc.  
Latrines and urinals  
271. Construction of latrines and urinals.  
272. Latrines and urinals, etc., in new buildings.  
273. Latrines and urinals for labourers, etc.  
274. Provision of latrines and urinals for markets, etc.  
275. Other provisions as to private latrines.  
Removal of congested buildings and bui ldings unfit for human habitation  
276. Removal of congested buildings.  
277. Power of Chairperson to require improvement of building unfit for human habitation.  
278. Enforcement of notice requiring execution of works of improvement.  
279. Power of Chairperson to order demolitio n of buildings unfit for human habitation.  
280. Insanitary huts and sheds.  
Regulation of washing by washermen  
281. Prohibition against washing by washerman.  
Prevention of Dangerous Diseases  
282. Obligation to give information of dangerous disease.  
283. Removal to hospital of patients, suffering from dangerous disease.  
284. Disinfection of buildings and articles.  
285. Destruction of infectious huts or sheds.  
286. Means of disinfection.  
287. Special measures in case of outbreak of dangerous or epidemic diseases.  
288. Infected clothes not to be sent to washerman or to laundry.  
289. Contamination and disinfection of public conveyance.  
290. Driver of conveyance not bound to carry persons suffering from dangerous disease.  
291. Disinfection of buildings before letting the same.  
292. Disposal of infected articles without disinfe ction.  
293. Prohibition of making or selling of food, etc., or washing of clothes by infected persons.  
294. Power to restrict or prohibit sale of food or drink.  
295. Control over wells and tanks, etc.  
296. Duty of persons suffering from dangerous disease.  9 
 SECTIONS  
297. Disposal of  infecti ous corpses where any person has  died from any dangerous disease.  
Special conditions regarding essential services  
298. Conditions of service of sweepers and certain other class of persons employed in municipal 
service.  
299. Conditions of service of sweepers employed for doing house scavenging.  
Burning and burial grounds  
300. Power to call for information regarding burning and burial grounds.  
301. Permission for use of new burning or burial ground.  
302. Power to require closing of burning and burial grounds.  
303. Removal of corpses.  
Disposal of dead animals  
304. Disposal of dead animals.  
CHAPTER XVI  
VITAL STATISTICS  
305. Appointment of Chief Registrar, etc.  
306. Duties of registrar.  
307. Information of births and deaths.  
CHAPTER XVII  
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES  
Nuisances  
308. Prohibition of nuisance s. 
309. Power of Chairperson to require removal or abatement of nuisance.  
Dogs 
310. Registration and control of dogs.  
Prevention of fire, etc.  
311. Stacking or collecting inflammable materials.  
312. Care of naked lights.  
313. Discharging fire works, fire-arms, etc.  
314. Power to require buildings, wells, etc., to be rendered safe.  
315. Enclosure of waste land used for improper purpose.  
CHAPTER XVIII  
MARKETS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS  
Maintenance and regulation of markets  
316. Provision of municipal market.  
317. Use of munic ipal markets and slaughter house.  
318. Private markets.  
319. Conditions of grant of licence for private market.  
320. Prohibition of keeping market open without licence, etc.  
321. Prohibition of use of unlicensed markets.  
322. Prohibition of business and trade near a market.  
323. Levy o f stallages, rents and fees.  
324. Power to expel disturbers, etc., from markets.  
325. Butcher‟s fish -monger‟s and poulte r‟s licence.  
Trades and occupations  
326. Factory, etc., not to be established without permission of the Chairperson.  10 
 SECTIONS  
327. Premises not to be used for certain purposes without licence.  
328. Seizure of certain animals.  
329. Power of Chairperson to prevent use of premises in particular areas for purposes referred to in 
section 327.  
330. Licences for hawking articles, etc.  
331. Eating houses, etc., not to be used without licence from the Chairperson.  
332. Licensing and control of theatres, circuses and places of public amusement.  
333. Power of Chairperson to stop use of premises used in contravention of licences.  
CHAPTER XIX  
IMPROVEMENT  
334. Improvement scheme.  
335. Matters to be provided for in an improvement scheme.  
336. Submission of improvement scheme to the Council for approval and to the Central Government 
for sanction.  
337. Rehousing scheme.  
338. Improvement scheme and rehousing scheme to comply with the master plan and zonal 
development plan.  
CHAPTER XX  
POWERS, PROCEDURE, OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
Licences and written permissions  
339. Signature, conditions, duration, suspension, revocation, etc., of licences and written permissions.  
Entry and inspection  
340. Powers of entry and inspection.  
341. Power to enter land adjoining land in relation to any work.  
342. Breaking into building.  
343. Time of making entry.  
344. Consent ordinarily to be obtained.  
345. Regard to be had to social or religious usages.  
346. Prohibition of obstruction or molestation in execution of work.  
Public notices and advertisements  
347. Public notices how to be made known.  
348. Newspapers in which advertisements o r notices to be published.  
Evidence  
349. Proof of consent, etc., of Chairperson.  
Notices, etc.  
350. Notices, etc., to fix reasonable time.  
351. Signature on notices, etc., may be stamped.  
352. Notices, etc., by whom to be served or issued.  
353. Services of notices, etc.  
354. Service  of bills for tax or notice of demand by ordinary post.  
355. Powers in case of non -compliance with notice, etc.  
Recovery of expenses  
356. Liability of occupier to pay in default of owner.  
357. Execution of work by occupier in default of owner and deduction of expenses from rent.  
358. Relief to agents and trustees.  
 11 
 Payment of compensation  
SECTIONS  
359. General power  to compensation.  
360. Compensation to be paid by offenders for damage caused by them.  
Recovery of expenses or compensation in case of dispute  
361. Reference  to the court of the district judge in certain cases.  
362. Application to the court of the district judge in other cases.  
Recovery of certain dues  
363. Mode of recovery of certain dues.  
Obstruction of owner by occupier  
364. Right of owner to apply to the court of the district judge in case of obstruction by occupier.  
Proceedings before the court of the district judge  
365. General powers and procedure of the court of the district judge.  
366. Fees in pro ceedings before the court of the district judge.  
367. Repayment of half fees on settlement before hearing.  
368. Power of the court of the district judge to delegate certain powers and to make rules.  
Offences and penalties  
369. Punishment for certain offences.  
370. General penalty.  
371. Offences by companies.  
372. Certain offences to be cognizable.  
373. Prosecutions.  
374. Composition of offences.  
Magistrates and proceedings before magistrates  
375. Municipal magistrate s. 
376. Cognizance of offences.  
377. Limitation of time for prosecution.  
378. Power of magistrate to hear cases in absence of accused when summoned to appear.  
379. Complaints concerning nuisance s. 
380. Procedure to be followed by magistrate regarding complaints concerning nuisance s. 
Powers and duties of police officers  
381. Arrest of offenders.  
382. Duties of police offic ers. 
Legal proceedings  
383. Power to institute, etc., legal proceedings and obtain legal advice.  
384. Protection of action of the Council, etc.  
385. Notice to be given of suits.  
CHAPTER XXI  
RULES, REGULATIONS AND BYE-LAWS  
386. Supplemental provisions respecting rules.  
387. Supplemental provisions respecting regulations.  
388. Power to make bye -laws.  
389. Regulations and bye -laws to be laid before Parliament.  
390. Penalty for breaches of bye -laws.  
391. Supplemental provisions respecting bye -laws.  
392. Bye-laws to be available for inspection and purcha se. 12 
 CHAPTER XXII  
CONTROL  
SECTIONS  
393. Government to require production of documents.  
394. Inspection.  
395. Directions by Central Government.  
396. Power to provide for enforcement of direction under section 395.  
397. Power of Central Government to give directions in relation to pr imary schools, etc.  
398. Dissolution of the Council.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
399. Delegation of power by the Central Government.  
400. Power to delegate functions of Chairperson.  
401. Validity of notices and other documents.  
402. Admissibility of document or entry as evidence.  
403. Evidence of Municipal officer or employee.  
404. Prohibition against obstructi on of any municipal authority.  
405. Prohibition against removal of mark.  
406. Prohibition against removal or obliteration of notice.  
407. Prohibition against unauthori sed dealings with public place or materials.  
408. Liability of Chairperson, etc., for loss, waste or misapplication of New Delhi Municipal Fund or 
property.  
409. Members and municipal officers and employees to be public servants.  
410. Annual administration report . 
411. Other law s not to be disregarded.  
412. Exemption of diplomatic or consular missions from payment of tax, etc.  
413. Construction  of references.  
414. Council to undertake work on agency basis.  
415. Power to remove difficulties.  
416. Repeal and savings.  
417. Expenditure in connection with the Coun cil from the commencement of this Act to the adoption 
of the budget by the Council.  
418. Transitory provision . 
419. Repeal of Ordinance 8 of 1994.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE. —BOUNDARIES OF NEW DELHI. 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE .—RATES OF TAXES LEVIABLE ON VEHICLES AND ANIMALS . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE .—THEATRE -TAX. 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE .—TAX ON ADVERTISEMENTS OTHER THAN ADVERTISEMENTS 
PUBLISHED IN THE NEWSPAPERS . 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE .—TAX ON BUILDING APPLICATI ONS. 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE .—NOTICE OF DEMAND.  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE .—FORM OF WARRANT.  
THE EIGHTH SCEHDULE .—FORM OF INVENTORY OF PROPERTY DISTRAINED AND NOTICE OF 
SALE.  
THE NINTH SCHEDULE .—PURPOSES FOR WHICH PREMISES MAY NOT BE USED WITHOUT A 
LICENCE.  
THE TENTH SCHEDULE .—PENALTIES . 
 
  13 
 THE NEW DELHI MUNICIPAL COUNCIL ACT , 1994  
ACT NO. 44 OF 1994  
[14th July , 1994 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of the New Delhi Municipal Council and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the New Delhi Municipal  
Council Act, 1994 . 
(2) It extends to New Delhi.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into for ce on the 25th day of May, 1994 . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the  context otherwise requires, — 
(1) “Administrator ” means the Administrator of the National Capital Territory of Delhi;  
(2) “Appellate Tribunal ” means an Appellate Tribunal constituted under section 253;  
(3) “budget -grant ” means the total sum entered on the expenditure side of a budget estimate under 
a major head and adopted by the Council and includes any sum by which such budget -grant may be 
increased or reduced by transfer from or to other heads in accordance with the pr ovisions of this Act 
and the regulations made thereunder;  
(4) “building ” means a house, out -house, stable, latrine, urinal, shed, hut, wall (other than a 
boundary wall) or any other structure, whether of m asonry, bricks, wood, mud, metal or other 
material but does not include any portable shelter;  
(5) “bye-law” means a bye-law made under this Act, by notification in the Official Gazette;  
(6) “casual vacancy ” means a vacancy occurring otherwise than by efflux of time in the office of 
a member of the Council;  
(7) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the  Council;  
(8) “Corporation ” means the Municipal Corporation of Delhi established under the Delhi 
Municipal Co rporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957 ); 
(9) “Council ” means the New Delhi Municipal Council established under this Act;  
(10) “dangerous disease ” means— 
(a) cholera, plague, chicken -pox, small -pox, tuberculosis, leprosy, enteric fever, 
cerebrospinal meningitis and diptheria; and  
(b) any other epidemic, endemic or infectious disease which the Chairperson may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette,  declare to be a dangerous disease for the purposes of this Act;  
(11) “Delhi ” means the entire area of the National Capital Territory of Delhi except New Delhi 
and Delhi Cantonment as defined in clause ( 11) of section 2 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 
1957 (66 of 1957);  
(12) “drain ” includes a sewer, a house drain, a drain of any other description, a tunnel, a culvert, a 
ditch, a channel and any other device for carrying off sewage, offensive matter, polluted water, waste 
water, rain water or sub -soil water;  
(13) “entertainment ” includes any exhibition, performance, amusement, game or sport to which 
persons are ordinarily admitted on payment;  
(14) “factory ” means a factory as define d in the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948);  14 
 (15) “filth” includes offensive matter and sewage;  
(16) “goods ” includes animals;  
(17) “Government ” means the Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi;  
(18) “house -gully ” means a passage or strip of land constructed, set apart or utilised for th e 
purpose of serving as or carrying a drain or affording access to a latrine, urinal, cesspool or other 
receptacle for filth or other polluted matter, by municipal employee or other person employed in the 
cleansing thereof or in the removal of such matter therefrom;  
(19) “hut” means any building which is constructed principally of wood, bamboo, mud, leaves, 
grass, cloth or thatch and includes any structure of whatever material made which the Council may 
declare to be a hut for the purposes of this Act;  
(20) “inhabitant ”, in relation to the municipal area of New Delhi includes any person ordinarily 
residing or carrying on business or owning or occupying immovable property therein and in case of a 
dispute, means any person or pe rsons declared by the Chairperson to be an inhabitant;  
(21) “land” includes benefits to arise out of land, things att ached to the earth or permanently 
fastened to anything attached to the earth and rights  created by law over any street;  
(22) “licensed engineer ” and “licensed plumber ” mean respectively a person licensed under the 
provisions of this Act as an engineer and a plumber;  
(23) “market ” includes any place where persons assemble for the sale of, or for the purpose of 
exposing for sale, meat, fish, fruits, vegetables, animals intended for human consumption or any other 
articles of human food whatso ever, with or without the consent of the owner of such place 
notwithstanding that there may be no common regulation for the concourse of buyers and sellers and 
whether or not any control is exercised over the business of, or the person frequenting, the mar ket by 
the owner of the place or by any other person;  
(24) “member ”, in relation to the Council, means a member of the Council and includes the 
Chairperson;  
(25) “municipal market ” means a market vested in or managed by the Council;  
(26) “municipal water works ” means water works vested in the Council;  
(27) “New Delhi ” means the area within the boundaries described in the First Schedule;  
(28) “nuisance ” includes any act, omission, place, animal or thing which causes or is likely to 
cause injury, danger,  annoyance or offence to the sense of sight, smell or hearing or disturbance to 
rest or sleep, or which is or may be dangerous to life or injurious to health or property;  
(29) “occupier ” includes— 
(a) any person who for the time being is paying or is liable to pay to the owner the rent or any 
portion of the rent of the land or building in respect of which such rent is paid or is payable;  
(b) an owner in occupation of or otherwise using his land or building;  
(c) a rent -free tenant of any land or building;  
(d) a licensee in occupation of any land or building; and  
(e) any person who is liable to pay to the owner damages for the use and occupation of any 
land or building;  
(30) “offensive matter ” includes animal carcasses, kitchen or stable refuse, dung, dirt and putrid 
or putrefying substances other than sewage;  
(31) “Official Gazette ” means the Official Gazette of the National Capital Territory of Delhi;  
(32) “owner ” includes a person who for the time being is receiving or is entitled to receive, the 
rent of any land or building whether on his own account or on account of himself and others or as an 
agent, trustee, guardian or receiver for any other person or who should so receive the rent or be 
entitled to receive it if the land or building or part thereof  were let  to a tenant and also includes — 
(a) the custodian of evacuee property in respect of evacuee property vested in him under the 
Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 (31 of 1950); and  15 
 (b) the estate officer to the Government of India, the Secretary of the Delhi Development 
Authority, constituted under the Delhi De velopment Act, 1957 ( 61 of 1957 ), the General Manager 
of a railway and the head of a Government department, in respect of properties under their 
respective control;  
(33) “premises ” means any land or building or p art of a building and includes — 
(a) the garden, ground and out -houses, if any, appertaining to a  building or part of a building;  
and 
(b) any fittings affixed to a building or part of a building for the more beneficial  enjoyment 
thereof;  
(34) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(35) “private market ” means a market which is not a municipal market;  
(36) “private street ” means any street, which is not a public street and includes any passage 
securing access to two or more places belonging to the same or different owners;  
(37) “public place ” means any place which is open to the use and enjoyment of the public, 
whether it is actually used or enjoyed by the public or not;  
(38) “public securities ” means any securities of the Central Government or a State Government or 
any securities guaranteed by the Central Government or a State Government or any securities issued 
under this Act or any debentures issued  by the Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi or Madras Municipal 
Corporation;  
(39) “public street ” means any street which vests in the Council as a public street or the soil 
below the surface of which vests in the Council or which under the provisions of this Act becomes, or 
is declared to be, a public street;  
(40) “railway administration ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Railways Act, 1989             
(24 of 1989 ); 
(41) “rate payer ” means a person liable to pay any rate, tax, cess or licence  fee under this Act;  
(42) “rateable value ” means the value of any land or building fixed in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act and the bye -laws made thereunder for the purpose of assessment to pro perty 
taxes;  
(43) “regulation ” means a regulation made by the Council under this Act by notification in the 
Official Gazette;  
(44) “reside ”,— 
(a) a person shall be deemed to “reside ” in any dwelling -house which or some portion of 
which he sometimes, although not uninterruptedly, uses as a sleeping apartment, and  
(b) a person shall not be deemed to cease to “reside ” in any such dwelling -house merely 
becau se he is absent from it or has elsewhere another dwelling -house in which he resides, if there 
is the liberty of returning to it at any time and n o abandonment of the intention of returning to it;  
(45) “rubbish ” includes ashes, broken bricks, broken glass, dust, malba, mortar and refuse of any 
kind which is not filth;  
(46) “rule” means a rule made by the Central Government under this Act by notification in the 
Official Gazette;  
(47) “Scheduled Castes ” means such castes, races or tribes or parts of or groups within such 
castes, races or tribes as are deemed to be Scheduled Castes under article 341 of the Constitution;  
(48) “service passage ” or “lane” or “bye-lane” means a passage or strip of land constructed, set 
apart or utilised for the purpose of serving as or carrying a drain or electricity cable (underground or 
over-head) and any electrical and other allied installations or any other civic services by municipa l 
employees or other person employed in the service thereof;  16 
 (49) “sewage ” means night -soil and other contents of latrines, urinals, cesspools or drains, and 
polluted water from sinks, bath -rooms, stables , cattle sheds and other like places and includes trade 
effluents and discharges from factories of all kinds;  
(50) “shed” means a slight or temporary structure for shade or shelter;  
(51) “street ” includes any way, road, lane, square, court, alley, gully, passage, whether a 
thoroughfare or not and whether built upon or not, over which the public have a right of way and also 
the roadway or footway over any  bridge or causeway;  
(52) “trade effluent ” means any liquid either with or without particles of matter in suspension 
therein, which is wholly or in part produced in the course of any trade or industry car ried on at trade 
premises, and in relation to any trade premises means any such liquid as aforesaid which is so 
produced in the course of any trade or industry carried on at those premises, but does not include 
domestic sewage;  
(53) “trade premises ” means any premises used or intended to be used for carrying on any trade 
or industry;  
(54) “trade refuse ” means the refuse of any trade or industry;  
(55) “vehicle ” includes a carriage, cart, van, dray, truck, hand -cart, bicycle, tricycle,               
cycle -rickshaw, auto -ricks haw, motor vehicle and every wheeled conveyance which is used or is 
capable of being used on a street;  
(56) “water course ” includes any river, stream or channel whether natural or artificial;  
(57) “water works ” includes all la kes, tanks, streams, any river, cisterns, springs, pumps, wells, 
reservoirs, aqueducts, water trucks, sluices, mains, pi pes, culverts, hydrants, stand -pipes and conduits 
and all lands, buildings, machinery bridges and things, used for, or intended for the purpose of, 
supplying water;  
(58) “workshop ” means any premises (including the precincts thereof) other than a factory, 
wherein any industrial process is carried on;  
(59) “year” means a year commencing on the 1st day of April.  
CHAPTER II  
THE COUNCIL  
Constitution of the Council  
3. Establishment of the Council .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be a Council charged with the municipal 
government of New Delhi, to be known as th e New Delhi Municipal Council.  
(2) The Council shall be a body corporate with the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire , hold and dispose of property 
and may by the said name sue and be sued.  
4. Composition of the Council .—(1) The Council shall consist of the following m embers, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson, from amongst the officers, of the Central Government or the Government, of 
or above the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to be appointed by the Centr al 
Government in consultation with the Chief Minister of Delhi;  
(b) 1[two members ] of Legislative Assembly of Delhi representing constituencies which comprise 
wholly or partly the New Delhi area;  
(c) five members from amongst the officers of the Central Government or the Government or 
their undertakings, to be nominated by the Centr al Government;  and 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 201 2, s. 2, for “three members” (w.e.f. 1 -3-2012).  17 
 (d) 1[four  members ] to be nominated by the Central Government in consultation with the Chief 
Minister of Delhi to represent from amongst lawyers, doctors, chartered accountants, engineers, 
business and financial consultants, intellectuals, traders, lab ourers, social workers including social 
scientists, artists, media persons, sports persons and any other class of persons as may be specified by 
the Ce ntral Government in this behalf;  
2[(e) the Member of Parliament, representing constituency which compris es wholly or partly the 
New Delhi area.]  
3*   *   *   *   * 
4[(3) Out of the thirteen members referred to in sub -section ( 1), there shall be, at least, — 
(a) three members who are women;  
(b) two members belonging to the Scheduled Castes, out of which one member shall be from 
the members nominated under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1).] 
(4) The Central Government shall nominate, in consultation with the C hief Minister of Delhi, a   
Vice -Chairperson from amongst the members specified in clauses ( b) and ( d) of sub -section ( 1). 
5. Duration of the Council .—(1) The Council, unless sooner dissolved under sec tion 398 or any 
other law for the time being in force, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first 
meeting and no longer.  
(2) The Council, — 
(a) where it is dissolved before the expiry of its duration under sub -section ( 1), shall be 
reconstituted within a period of six months of such dissolution; and  
(b) where  it is dissolved after the expiry of its duration, shall be reconstituted before such expiry.  
6. Disqualification for membership of the Council .—(1) No person, other than a member of the 
Legislative Assembly of the National Capital Territory of Delhi, shall be disqualified for being nominated 
as a member of the Council on the ground that he holds an office of profit for purposes of election to the 
legisl ature of the National Capital Territory of Delhi under any law for the time being in force.  
(2) If a person sits or votes as a member of the Council when he knows that he is not qualified or that 
he is di squalified for such membership, he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he so sits or 
votes to a penalty of three hundred rupees to be recovered as an arrea r of tax under this Act.  
Members  
7. Oath or affirmation .—(1) Every member before taking his seat shall make and subscribe at a 
meeting of the Council an oath or affirmation according to the following form, namely: — 
“I, A. B. , having been nominated as a member of Coun cil do swear in the name of God/ solemnly 
affirm that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I 
will faithfully discharge the duty upon which I am about to ente r.” 
(2) If a person sits or votes as a member before he has complie d with the requirements of               
sub-section ( 1), he shall be liable in respect of each day on which he sits or votes as the case  may be, to a 
penalty of three hundred rupees to be recovered as arrears of tax under this Act.  
8. Vacation of seat .—(1) If a member resigns his seat by  writing under his hand addressed to the 
Chairperson and delivered to him, his seat shall thereupon become vacant.  
(2) If during three successive months, a member is without permission of the Council, abs ent from all 
the meetings thereof, the Council may recommend to the Central Government that the seat of such  
member may be declared vacant.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 201 2, s. 2, for “t wo members” (w.e.f. 1 -3-2012) . 
2. Ins. by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -3-2012).  
3. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -3-2012).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -3-2012) . 18 
 Committees of the Council  
9. Setting -up of committees .—(1) The Council may constitute as many committees as it thinks fit for 
the exercise of any power or discharge of any function which the Council may by resolution delegate to 
them or for inquiring into, rep orting or advising upon any matter which the Council may refer to them.  
(2) Any such committee shall consist of members of the Council only:  
Provided that a committee may, with the sanction of the Council , co-opt not more than two persons 
who are not members of the Council, but who in the opinion of the Council possesses special 
qualifications for serving on such committee.  
(3) Each committee constituted  under this section shall be presided by the Chairperson of the Council.  
(4) Any matter relating to a committee constituted under this section, not expressly provided in this 
Act may be provided by regul ations made in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS OF THE COUNCIL  
10. General powers of the Council .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the r ules, 
regulations and bye -laws made thereunder the municipal government of New Delhi shall vest in the 
Council.  
(2) Without prejudice to the gener ality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), it shall be the duty of the 
Council to consider all periodical statements of the receipts and disbursements and all progress reports 
and pass such resolutions thereon as it thinks fit.  
(3) The Council may at an y time  require the Chairperson — 
(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or other document which is in his possession or 
under his control as Chairperson or which is recorded or filed in his office or i n the office of any 
municipal officer or other municipal employee subordinate to him;  
(b) to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics concerning or connected 
with any matter p ertaining to the administration of this Act or the mu nicipal government of New 
Delhi;  
(c) to furnish a report by himself or to obtain from the head of any department subordinate to him 
and furnish with h is own remarks thereon, a report, upon any subject concerning or connected with 
the administration of this Act or the municipal government of New Delhi.  
(4) Every such requisition shall be complied with by the Chairperson without any unreasonable delay; 
and it shall be incumbent on every municipal officer and other municipal employee to obey any order 
made by the Chairperson in pursuance of any such requisition:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall not be bound to comply with any such requisition if with the 
previous approval of the Administrator he makes a statement that such compliance would be prejudicial 
to public interest or to the interests of the Council.  
11. Obligatory functions of the Council .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law 
for the time being in force, it shall be incumbent on the Council to make adequate provisions by any 
means or measures which it may lawfully use or take, for each of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the construction, maintenance and cleansing of drains and drainage works and of public 
latrines, urinals and similar conveniences;  
(b) the construct ion and maintenance of works and means for providing supply of water for 
public and private purposes;  
(c) the scavenging, removal and disposal of filth, rubbish and other obnoxious or polluted 
matters;  
(d) the construction or purchase, maintena nce, extension, management for — 
(i) supply and distribution of electricity to the public;  19 
 (ii) providing a sufficient supply of pure and wholesome water;  
(e) the reclamation of unhealthy localities, the removal of noxious vegetation and generally the 
abatement of all nuisances;  
(f) the regulation of places for the disposal of the dead and the provision and maint enance of 
places for the said purpose;  
(g) the registration of births and deaths;  
(h) public vaccination and inoculation;  
(i) measures for preventing and checking the spread of dangerous diseases;  
(j) the establishment and maintenance of hospitals, dispensaries and  maternity and child welfare 
centres  and the carrying out of other measures necessary for public medical relief;  
(k) the construction and maintenance of municipal markets and regulation of all markets;  
(l) the regulation and abatement of offensive or dangerous trade or practices;  
(m) the securing or removal of dangerous buildings and places;  
(n) the construction, maintenance, alteration and improvements of public streets, bridges, 
culverts, causeways and the like;  
(o) the lighting, watering and cleansing of public streets and other publi c places;  
(p) the removal of obstructions and projections in or upon streets, bridges and other public places;  
(q) the naming and numbering of streets and premises;  
(r) the establishment, maintenance of, and aid to, schools for primary educations subject to such 
grants as may be determined by the Central Government from  time to time;  
(s) the maintenance of municipal offices;  
(t) the laying out or the maintenance of public parks, gardens or recreation grounds;  
(u) the maintenance of monuments and memorials vested in any local authority in New Delhi 
immediately before the commencement of this Act or which may be vested in the Council after such 
commencement;  
(v) the maintenance and development of the value of all properties vested in or entrusted to the 
management of the Council;  
(w) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice;  
(x) the maintenance including the expansion and upgradation of facilities of the hospitals existing 
on the date of the commencement of t his Act;  
(y) sanction or refuse erection or re -erection of buildings; and  
(z) the fulfilment of any other obligation imposed by or under this Act or any  other law for the 
time being in force.  
12. Discretionary functions of the Council .—Subject to any general or special order of the 
Government, or the Central Government from time to time, the Council may provide either wholly or in 
part for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the furtherance of education including cultural and physical education, by measures other than 
the establishment and maintenance of, and aid to, schools for primary education;  
(b) the establishment and  maintenance of, and aid to, libraries, museums, art galleries, botanical 
or zoological collections;  
(c) the establishment and maintenance of, and aid to, stadia, gymnasia, akharas and places for 
sports a nd games;  
(d) the planting and care of trees on roadsides and elsewhere;  20 
 (e) the surveys of buildings and lands;  
(f) the registration of marriages;  
(g) the taking of a census of population;  
(h) the provision of housing accommodation for the inhabitants of any area or for any class of 
inhabitants;  
(i) the providing of music or other entertainments in public places or places of public resort and 
the establishment of theatres and cinemas;  
(j) the organisation and management of fairs and exhibitions;  
(k) the acquisition of movable or immovable proper ty for any of the purpose before mentioned, 
including payment of the cost of investigations, surveys or examinations in relation thereto for the 
construction or adaptation of building necessary for such purposes;  
(l) the c onstruction and maintenance of — 
(i) rest-houses,  
(ii) poor-houses,  
(iii) infirm aries,  
(iv) children‟ s homes,  
(v) houses for the deaf and dumb and for disabled and handicapped children,  
(vi) shelters for destitute and disabled persons,  
(vii) asylums for persons of unsound mind;  
(m) the c onstruction and maintenance of cattle pounds;  
(n) the building or purchase and maintenance of dwelling -houses for municipal officers and other 
municipal employees;  
(o) any measures for the welfare of the municipal officers and other municipal employees or any 
class of them including the sanctioning of loans to such officers and employees or any class of them 
for construction of houses and purchase of vehi cles; 
(p) the organisation or management of chemical or bacteriological laboratories for the 
examination or analysis of water, food and drugs for the detection of diseases or research connected 
with the public health or medical relief;  
(q) the provision for relief to destitute and disabled person s; 
(r) the establishment and maintenance of veterinary hosp itals;  
(s) the organisation, construction, maintenance and management of swimming pools, public wash 
houses, bathing places and other institutions designed for the improvement of public health;  
(t) the organisation and management of farms and dairies within or without New Delhi for the 
supply, distribution and processing of milk and milk products for the benefit of the residents of New 
Delhi;  
(u) the organisation and management of cottage industries, handicraft centres and sales emporia;  
(v) the construction and maintenance of warehouses and go downs;  
(w) the construction and maintenance of garrages, sheds and stands for vehicles and cattle biers;  
(x) the provision for unfiltered water supply ; 
(y) the improvement of New Delhi in accordance with improvement schemes approved by the 
Council;  
(z) any measure not hereinbefore specifically mentio ned, likely to promote public safety, health, 
convenience or general welfare.  21 
 CHAPTER IV  
THE CHAIRPERSON  
13. Appointment, etc., of the Chairperson .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint a suitable person as the Chairperson of the Council in accordance with 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4.  
(2) The C hairperson so appointed shall hold office for a term of fi ve years in the first instance:  
Provided that his appointment may be renewed from time to time for a term not exceeding one year at 
a time:  
Provided further that where the Chairperson holds a lien o n any service under the Central 
Government or the Government,  the Central Government may at any time after reasonable notice to the 
Council replace his services at the disposal of the concerned Government.  
(3) The Central Government may remove the Chairperson from office at any time if it appears to that 
Government that he is incapable of performing the duties of his office or has been guilty of neglect or 
misconduct in the discharge of such duties, which renders his removal expedient.  
(4) The Chairperson shall not undertake any work unconnected with his office without the sanction of 
the Central Government and of the Council.  
14. Leave of absence of Chai rperson .—(1) Leave may be granted to the Chairperson by the 
Administrator.  
(2) Whenever such leav e is granted to the Chairperson, the Central Government shall appoint another 
person to officiate as Chairperson in his place.  
15. Appointment of officiating Chairperson in case of death, resignation or removal of 
Chairperson .—If any vacancy occurs in the office of Chairperson on account of death, resignation or 
removal, the Central Government shall appoint another person to officiate as Chairperson in his place for 
a term not exceeding two months, pendin g the appointment of a Chairperson under section 13.  
16. Salary and allowances of the Chairperson and members .—(1) The Chairperson shall be paid 
out o f the New Delhi Municipal Fund constituted under section 44 such monthly salary and such monthly 
allowances, if any, as may from time to time be fixed by the Central Government and may be given such 
facilities, if any, in relation to residential accommodat ion, conveyance and the like as may from time to 
time be fixed by that Government:  
Provided that the salary of the Chairperson shall not be varied to his disadvantage after his 
appointment.  
(2) The member s shall be entitled to receive allowances for attendance at meeting of Council and of 
any of its committees at such rates as may be determined by rules made in this behalf.  
17. Service regulations of memb ers.—If a member is an officer in the service of the Government or 
the Central Government, the Council shall make such contribution towards his leave allowances, pension 
and provident fund as may be required by the conditions of his service under the Gover nment or the 
Central Government to be paid by him or for him, as the case may be.  
18. Functions of the Chairperson .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act the entire executive 
power for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act and of any other Act, for the time being in 
force which confers, any power or imposes any duty on the Council, shall vest in the Ch airperson who 
shall also— 
(a) exercise all the powers and perform all the duties specifically conferred or imposed upon him 
by this Act or by any other law for the time being in force;  
(b) prescribe the duties of and exercise supervision and control over the acts and proceedings of, 
all municipal officers and other municipal employees and subject to any regulation that may be made 
in this behalf, dispose of all questions relating to the service of the said officers and other employees 
and their pay, privileges, allowances and other conditions of service;  22 
 (c) on the occurrence or threatened occurrence of an y sudden accident or any unforeseen event or 
natural calamity involving or likely to involve extensive damage to any property of the Council, or 
danger to human life, take such immediate action as he considers necessary and make a report 
forthwith to the C ouncil and the Administrator of the action he has taken and the reasons for the same 
as also of the amount of cost, if any, incurred or likely to be incurred in consequence of such action, 
which is not covered by a budget -grant; and  
(d) subject to any regulation that may be made in this behalf, be the disciplinary authority in 
relation to all municipal officers and other municipal employees.  
19. Chairper son not to be interested in any contract, etc., with the Council .—(1) A person shall 
be disqualified for being appointed as the Chairperson who has directly or indirectly, by himself or by a 
partner or a ny other person, any share or interest in any contract made with, or any work being done for, 
the Council other than as such Chairperson.  
(2) If the Chairperson acquires directly or indirectly, by himsel f or by his partner, or any other person, 
any share or interest in any such contract or work as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), he shall, unless the 
Central Government in any particular case otherwise decides, be liable to be removed from his office by 
the order of the authority competent to remove him under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that before an order of removal is made the Chairperson shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard  to him.  
20. Exercise of powers to be subject to sanction .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the 
exercise of any power or the performance of any duty conferred or imposed upon the Council by or under 
this Act which will involve expenditure, shall be subject to the  following conditions, namely: — 
(a) that such expenditure, in so far as it is to be incurred in the year in which such power is 
exercised or duty performed, shall be provi ded for under a current budget -grant; and  
(b) that if the exercise of such powers or the performance of such duty involves or is likely to 
involve expenditure f or any period or at any time after the close of the said year, such expenditure 
shall not be incurred without the sanction of the Council.  
CHAPTER V  
PROCEDURE  
Transaction of business by the Council  
21. Meetings .—(1) The Council shall ordinarily hold at least one meeting in every month for the 
transaction of business.  
(2) The Chairper son and in his absence the Vice -Chairperson may, whenever he thinks fit, and shall, 
upon a requisition in writing by not less than one -fourth of the total number of members, convene a 
special meeting of the Council.  
(3) Any meeting may be adjourned until the next or any subsequent date, and an adjourned meeting 
may be further adjourned in like manner.  
22. First meeting of the Council .—The first meeting of the Council shall be held as early as possible 
and shall be convened by the Administrator.  
23. Notice of meetings and business .—A list of the business to be transacted at every meeting 
except at an adjourned meeting shall be sent to the address of each member at least seventy -two hours 
before the time fixed for such meeting; and no business shall, except where the Chairperson otherwise 
directs, be brought before, or transacted at, in any meeting other than the busines s of which a notice has 
been so given:  
Provided that any member may send o f deliver to the Secretary notice of any resolution going beyond 
the matters mentioned in the notice given of such meeting so as to reach him at least forty -eight hours 
before the da te fixed for the meeting and the Secretary shall, with all possible despatch, take steps to 
circulate such resolution to every member in such manner as he may think fit.  23 
 24. Quorum .—(1) The quorum necessary for the transaction of business at a meeting of the Council 
shall be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) If at any time during a meeting of the Council, there is no quorum, it shall be the duty of the 
Chairperson or the person presiding over such meeting either to adjourn the meeting or to suspend the 
meeting until there is a quorum.  
(3) Wher e a meeting has been adjourned under sub -section ( 2), the business which would have been 
brought before the original meeting if there had been a quorum present there  at, shall be brought before, 
and may be transacted at an adjourned meeting, whether there is a quorum present or not.  
25. Presiding Officer .—1[(1) The meetings of the Council shall be presided ove r, in the following 
order, by, — 
(a) the Chief Minister of Delhi, if he is a member of the Legislative Assembly of 
Delhi  representing the constituency which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area, and 
attends  the meeting being a member of the Council under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of sectio n 4; or  
(b) the Union Minister, if he is a Member of Parliament representing the constituency 
which  comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area, and attends the meeting being a member of 
the Council under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4; or  
(c) the Minister in the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi, if he is a Member 
of the Legislative Assembly of Delhi representing the constituency which comprises wholly or  partly 
the New Delhi area, and attends the meeting being a member of the  Council under clause  (b) of     
sub-section ( 1) of section 4; or  
(d) the Member of Parliament not being a Minister for the Union representing the 
constituency  which comprises wholly or partly the New Delhi area, and attends the meeting being a 
member  of the Council under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 4; or  
(e) the Chairperson of the Council.]  
(2) The Chairperson or the person presiding over a meeting shall have and exercise a second or a 
casting vote in all cases of equality of votes.  
26. Method of deciding questions .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, all matters required 
to be decided by the Council shall be decided by the majority of the votes of the members present and 
voting.  
(2) The voting shall be by show of hands, but the Council may, subject to such regulations as may b e 
made by it, resolve that any question or class of question shall be decided by ballot.  
27. Members not to vote on matter in which they are interested .—No member shall vote at a 
meeting of the Council o r of any Committee thereof on any question relating to his own conduct or vote 
or take part in any discussion on any matter (other than a matter affecting generally the residents of New 
Delhi) which affect his pecuniary interest or any property in respect of which he is directly or indirectly 
interested, or any property of or for which he is a manager or agent.  
28. Right to attend meetings of Council and its committees, etc., and right of members to ask 
questions in relation to the mu nicipal government of New Delhi. —(1) Any municipal officer 
authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf may attend, speak in, or otherwise take part in the 
proceedings of, a ny meeting of the Council or any of its Committees, but none of the persons specified 
herein shall by virtue of this sub-section  be entitled to vote in any such meeting.  
(2) A member may, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), ask the Chairperson questions on any 
matter relating to the municipal government of New Delhi or the administration of this Act in any 
meeting of the Council.  
(3) The right  to ask a question shall be governed by the  following conditions, namely: — 
(a) not less than seven clear days‟  notice in writing specifying the question shall be given to the 
Secretary;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 5 of 201 2, s. 3, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -3-2012) . 24 
 (b) no question shall — 
(i) bring in any name or statement not strictly necessary to make the question intelligible,  
(ii) contain argument, ironical expressions, imputations, epithets or defamatory statements,  
(iii) ask for an expression of opinion or the solution of a hypothetical proposition,  
(iv) ask as to the character or conduct of any person except in his official or public capacity,  
(v) relate to a matter which is not primarily the concern of the Council,  
(vi) make or imply a charge of a personal character,  
(vii) raise  questions of policy too large to be dealt with within the limits of an answer to a 
question,  
(viii) repeat in substance questions already answered or to which an answer has been refused,  
(ix) ask for information on trivial matters,  
(x) ordinarily ask for information on matters of past history,  
(xi) ask for information set forth in accessible documents or in ordinary works of reference,  
(xii) raise matters under the control of bodies or persons not primarily responsible to the 
Council,  
(xiii) ask for any information on matter which is under adjudication by a court of law.  
(4) The Chairperson shall not be bound to answer a question if it asks for info rmation which has been 
communicated to him in confidence or if in the opinion of the Chairperson it cannot be answered without 
prejudice to public interest or the interest of the Council.  
(5) The Council may make regulations for the transaction of business at its meetings:  
Provided that the time, place and procedure for the first meeting after the constitution of the Council 
under section 4 shall be determined by the Administrator.  
29. Keeping of minutes  and proceedings .—Minutes in which shall be recorded the names of the 
members present at, and the proceedings of each meeting of the Council, and every other committee 
constituted under sub -section  (1) of section 9 shall be drawn up and recorded in a book to be kept for that 
purpose, and shall be laid before the next ensuring meeting of the Council, or of such committee, as the 
case may be, and signe d at such meeting by the presiding officer thereof.  
30. Circulation of minutes and inspection of minutes and reports of proceedings .—(1) Minutes 
of the proceedings of each meeting of the Council shall be circulated to all the members and shall at 
reasonable times be available at the municipal office for inspection by any other person on payment of a 
fee of two rupees.  
(2) Full reports, if any, of such proceedings shall similarly be available for inspection, by any member 
without charge and by any other person on payment of a fee of two rupees.  
31. Forwa rding minutes and reports of proceedings to the Administrator .—(1) The Secretary 
shall forward to the Administrator a copy of the minutes of the proceedings of each meeting of the 
Council, within ten days from the date on which the minutes of the proceedings of such meeting were 
signed under section 29.  
(2) The Administrator may also in any case ask for a copy of any paper or all the papers which were  
laid before the Council or any committee thereof and the Secretary shall forward to the Administrator a 
copy of such paper or papers.  
(3) The Secretary shall also forward to the Administrator as soon as  may be aft er the date referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) a full report of the proceedings of each meeting of the Council, if any such report be 
prepared.  
 25 
 Validation  
32. Validation of proceedings, etc .—(1) No act done or proceedings taken under this Act shall be 
questioned on t he ground merely of — 
(a) the seat of any member remaining unfilled from any cause whatsoever;  
(b) the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Council or in any 
committee thereof;  
(c) any member having voted or taken part in any proceedings in contravention of section 27;  
(d) any defect or irregularity not affecting the merits of the case.  
(2) Every meeting of the Council or of any committee thereof, the minutes of the proceeding of which 
have been duly drawn up and signed shall be deemed to have been duly convened and to be free from all 
defects and i rregularities.  
CHAPTER VI  
MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND OTHER MUNICIPAL EMPLOYEES  
33. Appointment of certain officers .—(1) The Council shall appoint suitable persons to be the 
Secretary and Chief Auditor of the Council, and such other officer or officers as the Council may deem fit 
on such monthly salaries and such allowances, if any, as may be fixed by the Council:  
Provided that the Chief Auditor shall not be eligible for any other office under the Council after he 
has ceased to hold this office.  
(2) The appointment of the Secretary and the Chief Auditor shall be made with the previous approval 
of the Administ rator.  
34. Schedule of permanent posts and creation of temporary posts .—(1) The Chairperson shall 
from time to time prepare and lay before the Council a  Schedule of category „A‟ and category „B‟ posts 
other than the posts of Secretary and Chief Auditor specified in section 33, setting forth the designations 
and grades of municipal officers and other municipal employees who should be maintained permanently  
in the service of the Council indicating therein the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to be 
paid to such officers and other employees.  
(2) The Council shall approve and sanction the Sche dule either without modifications or with such 
modifications as it thinks fit or may amend it either on its own motion or otherwise.  
(3) The Chairperson may create any category „B‟, or category „C‟, or Cat egory „D‟ post and for a 
period not exceeding six months any category „A‟ post:  
Provided that no such category „A‟ post shall be beyond the said period without the previous approval 
of the Council.  
(4) In this section and in section 36 — 
(i) “category „A‟ post” means any post, which having regard to its scale of pay or emoluments, 
would, if such post had been in the Central Government, be classified as  a Group „A‟ post under the 
Central Government in accordance with the orders issued by that Government from time to time;  
(ii) “category „B‟ post” means any post which having regard to its scale of pay o r emoluments, 
would, if such post had been in the Central Government, be classified as a Group „B‟ post under the 
Central Government in accordance with the orders issued by that Government from time to time;  
(iii) “category „C‟ posts ” means any post, which having regard to its scale of pay or emoluments 
would, if such post had been in the Central Government, be classified as a Group „C‟ post under the 
Central Government, in accordance with the orders issued by that Government from time to time;  
(iv) “category „D‟ posts ” means any post, other than a category „A‟ or category „B‟ or category 
„C‟ post.  
35. Restriction on employment of permanent officers and other employees .—No permanent 
officer or other employee shall be entertained in any department of the municipal administration unless he 26 
 has been appo inted under sub -section  (1) of section 33 or his office and emoluments are included in the 
Schedule for the time being in force prepared and sanctioned under section 34 or is appointed against a 
permanent  post under section 36.  
36. Power to make appointments .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 33, the power of 
appointing municipal officers and oth er municipal employees, w hether temporary or permanent ,— 
(a) to category „A‟, category „B‟ and category „C‟ posts, shall vest in the Chairperson; and  
(b) to category „D‟ posts shall vest in the Secretary.  
(2) The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes shall be taken into consideration, consistently 
with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the making of appointments of municipal officers 
and other municipal employees.  
37. Officers and other employees not to undertake any extraneous work .—No municipal officer 
or other muni cipal employee shall undertake any work unconnected with his duties under this Act except 
with the permission of the Chairperson.  
38. Officers and other employees not to be interested in any contract, et c., with the            
Council .—(1) A person shall be disqualified for being appointed as a municipal officer or employee if he 
has, directly or indirectly, by himself or by a partner or any other person  any share or interest in any 
contract made with, or any work being done for, the Council other than as such officer or employee.  
(2) If any such officer or other employee acquires, directly or indirectl y, by himself or by a partner or 
any other person, any share or interest in any such contract or work as is referred to in sub -section ( 1), he 
shall unless the authority appointing him in any particular case otherwise decides, be liable to be removed 
from his office by an order of such authority:  
Provided that before an order of removal is made, such officer or other employee shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propos ed to be taken in regard to him.  
39. Punishment for municipal officers and other employees .—(1) Every municipal officer or other 
municipal employee shall be liable to have his increments or promotion wit hheld or to be censured, 
reduced in rank, compulsorily retired, removed or dismissed for any breach of any departmental 
regulations or of discipline or for carelessness, unfitness, neglect of duty or other misconduct by such 
authority as may be prescribed by regulation:  
Provided that no such officer or other employee as aforesaid shall be reduced in rank, compulsorily 
retired, removed or dismissed by an authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed:  
Provided further that the Council may b y regulat ions provide that municipal employees belonging to 
such classes or categories as may be specified in the regulations shall be liable also to be fined by such 
authority as may be specified therein.  
(2) No such officer or other employee shall be punished under sub -section ( 1) unless he has been 
given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action propose d to be taken in regard to him:  
Provided that thi s sub -section shall not apply — 
(a) where an officer or other employee is removed or dismissed on the ground of conduct which 
had led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or  
(b) where the aut hority empowered to remove or dismiss such officer or other employee is 
satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority, it is not reasonably practicable to give 
that person an opportunity of showing cause.  
(3) If any question arises whether it is not reasonably practicable to give any officer or other 
employee an opportunity of showing cause under sub -section ( 2), the decision thereon of the authority 
empowered to remove or dismiss such o fficer or other employee shall be final.  
(4) An officer or other employee upon whom a punishment has been inflicted under this section may 
appeal to such officer or authority as may be prescribed by regul ations:  
Provided that in the case of an officer or other employee appointed by the Chairperson, an appeal 
shall lie to the Administrator.  27 
 40. Consultation with the Union Public Service Commission .—No appointment to any category A 
post within the meaning of clause ( i) of sub -section ( 4) of section 34 shall be made except after 
consultation with the Commission:  
Provided that no such consultation with the Commission shall be necessary in regard to  the sel ection 
for appointment — 
(a) to any acting or temporary post for a period not exceeding one year; or  
(b) to such ministerial posts as may from time to ti me be specified by the Council in consultation 
with the Commission when such posts are to be filled by promotion; or  
(c) to a post when at the time of such appointment the person to be appointed thereto is in the 
service of the Central Government or a State Government in a Group A post;  
(d) to a permanent or temporary post, if the officer or other employee to be appointed is not likely 
to hold that post f or more than one year; or if such officer or other employee is likely to hold the post 
for more than one year but not more than three years and the Commission advises that the 
appointment may be made witho ut consulting the Commission; or  
(e) to such other posts, as may, from time to time, be specified by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Commission.  
41. Power of Commission to make regulatio ns and reference to the Central Government in case 
of difference between  the Commission and the Council. —(1) The Commission may make regulations 
for the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure to be followed by the Commission in advertising posts, inviting applications, 
scrutini sing the same and selecting candidates for interview;  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Commission for selecting candidates for appointment and 
by the Council for consultation with the Commission;  
(c) any other matter which is incidental to, or nec essary for, the purpose of consultation with the 
Commission.  
(2) In the case of any difference of opinion between the Commission and the Council on any matter, 
the Council shall refer the matter to the C entral Government and the decision of that Government thereon 
shall be final.  
42. Recruitment to category B and category C posts .—The direct recruitment to category B and 
category C posts may be made by the Government through such agencies as may be prescribed for it.  
43. Power of Council to make regul ations .—(1) The Council may make regulations to pr ovide for 
any one or more of the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the tenure of office, salaries and allowances, provident funds, pensions, gratuities, leave of 
absence and other conditions of service of officers and other employees appointed under this Chapter;  
(b) the powers, duties and functions of Secretary;  
(c) the qualifications of candidates for appointment to posts specified in section 33 and to posts 
dealt with in the Schedule of posts referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 34 and the manner of 
selection for appointments to such posts;  
(d) the procedure to be followed in imposing any penalty under sub -section ( 1) of section 39, 
suspension pending departmental inquiries before the imposition of such penalty and the authority by 
whom such suspension may be ordered; the officer or authority to  whom  an appeal shall lie under 
sub-section ( 4) of that section;  
(e) any other matter which is incidental to or necessary for , the purpose of regulating the 
appointment and conditions of service of perso ns appointed to services and posts under the Council 
and any other matter for which in the opinion of the Council provisions should be made by 
regulations.  28 
 (2) No regulation under clause ( c) of sub -section (1) shall be made except after consultation with the 
Com mission.  
CHAPTER VII  
REVENUE AND EXPENDITURE  
The New Delhi Municipal Fund  
44. Constitution of the New Delhi Municipal Fund .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act — 
(a) all funds which immediately before the establishment of the Council vested in the New Delhi 
Municipal Com mittee;  
(b) all moneys received by or on behalf of the Council under the provisions of this Act or of any 
other law for the time being in force, or under any contract;  
(c) all proceeds of the disposal of property by, or on behalf of, the Council;  
(d) all rents accruing from any property of the Council;  
(e) all moneys raised by any tax, rate or cess levied for the purposes of this Act;  
(f) all fees collected and all fines levied under this Act or under any rule, regulation or bye -law 
made thereunder;  
(g) all moneys received by or on behalf of the Council from the Government or Central 
Government or any individual or association of individuals by way of grant or gift or deposit;  
(h) all interests and profits arising from any investment of, or from any transaction in connection 
with, any money belonging to the Council, including loans advanced under this Act; and  
(i) all moneys received by or on behalf of the Council from any other source whatsoever,  
shall form one Fund to be entitled  “the Municipal Fund of New Delhi ” (hereafter in this Act referred to as 
“the New  Delhi Municipal Fund ”). 
(2) The New Delhi Municipal Fund shall be held by the Council in trust for the purposes of this Act 
subject to the provisions herein contained and a General Account relating to al l moneys received by or on 
behalf of the Council shall be maintained.  
45. New Delhi Municipal Fund to be kept in the State Bank of India .—All moneys payable to the 
credit of the New Delhi Municipal Fund i n the General Account shall be received by the Chairperson and 
shall be forthwith paid into the State Bank of India to the credit of the said Account which shall be 
entitled “The General Account of the New Delhi Municipal Fund ”. 
46. Operation of the Accounts .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act no payment shall be 
made by the State Bank of India out of the New Delhi Municipal Fund exc ept on a cheque signed by 
both— 
(a) the Financial Adviser or an officer subordinate to him authorised by the Chairperson in this 
behalf; and  
(b) the Chairperson  or the Secretary or an officer subordinate to the Chairperson authorised by 
him in this behalf.  
(2) Payment of any sum due by the Council in excess of five hundred rupees shall be made by means 
of a cheq ue signed in accordance with sub -section ( 1) and not in any other way.  
(3) Payments not covered by sub -section ( 2) may be made in cash.  
47. Payments not to be made unless covered by a budget -grant .—No payment of any sum out of 
the New Delhi Municipal Fund shall be made unless the expenditure of the same is covered by a current 
budget -grant and a sufficient balance of such budget -grant is still available notwithstanding any reduction 
or transfer thereof which may have been made under the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that this section shall not apply to payments made in the following classes of cases, 
namely:— 
(a) refund of taxes and other moneys which are authorised under this Act;  29 
 (b) repayment of moneys belonging to contractors or other persons and held in deposit and of 
moneys collected or credit ed to the New Delhi Municipal Fund by mistake;  
(c) sums payable in any of the following circumstances — 
(i) under orders of the Central Government on fa ilure of the Council to take any action as 
required by that Government; or  
(ii) under any other enactment for the time being in force; or  
(iii) under th e decree or order of a civil or criminal court passed against the Council; or  
(iv) under a compromise of any claim, suit or other legal proceedings; or  
(v) on account of cost  incurred in   taking immediate   action  by  the  Chairperson under 
clause ( c) of section 18 to avert a sudden threat of danger to the property of the Council or to 
human life;  
(d) temporary payments for works urgently required by the Central Government in the public 
interest;  
(e) sums payable as compensation under this Act or under any rules, regulations or bye -laws 
made thereund er; 
(f) expenses incurred under section 287 by the Chairperson on special measures taken on the 
outbreak of dangerous diseases.  
48. Duty of persons si gning cheques. —Before any person signs a cheque in accordance with    
section 46, he shall satisfy himself that the sum for which  the cheque is drawn is either — 
(a) required for a purpose or work specifi cally sanctioned by the proper authority and covered by 
a current budget -grant, or  
(b) required for any payment referred to or specified in section 47.  
49. Procedure when money not covered by a budget -grant is expended. —Whenever any sum is 
expended under clauses ( c), (e) or ( f) of the proviso to section 47, the Chairperson shall forthwith 
communicate the circumstances to the Council, which may take such a ction under the provisions of this 
Act as shall, in the circumstances appear possible and expedient for covering the amount of the additional 
expenditure.  
50. Application of New Delhi Municipal Fund. —(1) The moneys from time to time credited to the 
New Delhi Municipal Fund shall be applied in payment of all sums, charges and costs necessary for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act, and of the rules, r egulations and bye -laws made thereunder, or of 
which payment is duly directed, sanctioned or required by or under any of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Such moneys shall likewise be applied in payment of  all sums payable out of the New Delhi 
Municipal Fund under any other enactment for the time being in force.  
51. Temporary payments from the New Delhi Municipal Fund for works urgently required for 
the pu blic service. —(1) On the written requisition of a Secretary to the Central Government, the 
Chairperson may at any time undertake the execution of any work certified by such Secretary to be 
urgently requi red in public interest, and for this purpose may temporarily make payments from the New 
Delhi Municipal Fund so far as the same can be met without unduly interfering with the regular work of 
the Council.  
(2) The cost of work so executed and of the establishment engaged in executing the same shall be 
paid by the Central Government and credited to the New Delhi Municipal Fund.  
(3) On the receipt of any requisition under sub -section ( 1) the Chairperson shall forthwith forward a 
copy thereof to the Council together with a report of the steps taken by him in pursuance of the same.  
52. Investment of surplus  moneys .—(1) Surplus money standing at the credit of General Account of 
the New Delhi Municipal Fund which cannot immediately be applied for the purposes specified in  
section 50 shall be deposited in th e State Bank of India or in such scheduled bank or banks as the Council 
may select or be invested in public securities.  30 
 (2) The loss, if any, arising from such deposit or investment shall be debited to th e General Account 
of the New Delhi Municipal Fund.  
53. Constitution of Finance Commission .—(1) After the commencement of this Act the Finance  
Commissio n referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 107A of the Delhi Municipal Co rporation Act, 1957 
(66 of 1957 ), shall review the financial position of the Council and make recommendatio ns to the 
Administrator as to, — 
(a) the p rinciples which should govern, — 
(i) the distribution between the National Capital Territory of Delhi and the Council of the net 
proceeds of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees leviable by the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
which may be divided between them;  
(ii) the determination of the taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to or  
appropriated by, the Council;  
(iii) the grants -in-aid to the Council from the Consolidated Fund of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi;  
(b) the me asures needed to improve the financial position of the Council,  
(c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Administrator in the interest of 
sound finance of the Council.  
(2) The Administrator shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission under this section 
together within an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before the 
Legislative Assembly of th e National Capital Territory of Delhi.  
Special Funds  
54. Constitution of special funds .—(1) The Council shall constitute such special fund or funds as 
may be prescribed by regulations and such other funds necessary for the purposes of this Act as may be so 
prescribed.  
(2) The constitution and disposal of such funds shall be effected in the manner laid down by 
regulations.  
Budget estimates  
55. Adoption of budget estimates .—(1) The Council shall, on or before the 31st day of March of 
every year, adopt for the ensuing year the budget estimate which shall be an estimate of the income and 
expenditure of the Council to be received and incurred on account of the municipal government of New 
Delhi.  
(2) On or before the 15th day of February of each year the Council shall determine the rates at which 
various municipal taxes, rates and cesses shall be levied in the next following year and save as otherwise 
provided in this Act the rates so fixed shall not be subs equently altered for the year for which they have 
been fixed.  
(3) Budget estimates shall be prepared in such form as may be approved by the Council and presented 
and adopted in such manner and shall provi de for all such matters as are prescribed by regulations made 
in this behalf.  
56. Power of Council to alter budget estimates .—(1) On the recommendatio n of the Chairperson in 
respect of the budget estimate, the Council may from time to time, during the year,  
(i) increase the amount of budget -grant  under any head;  
(ii) make additional budget -grant  for the purpose of meeting any special or unforeseen 
requirement arising during the said year;  
(iii) transfer the amoun t or portion of the amount of the budget -grant  under any head to any other 
head; or  31 
 (iv) reduce the amount of the budget -grant  under any head:  
Provided that due regard shall be had to all the requirements of this Act and in making any increase or 
any additional budget -grant, the estimated cash balance at the close of the year shall not be reduced below 
the sum of one lakh rupees or such higher sum as the Council may determine in respect of the budget 
estimate.  
(2) Every increase in a budget -grant  and every additional budget -grant  made in any year under       
sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to be included in the budget estimates finally adopted for that year.  
(3) The Council may fro m time to time during the year — 
(a) reduce the amount of a budget -grant ; or 
(b) sanction the transfer of any amount within a budget -grant . 
(4) The Chairperson may from time to time during the year sanction the transfer of any amount not 
exceeding ten thousand rupees within a minor head if such transfer does not  involve a recurring liability:  
Provided that every such transfer if it exceeds ten thousand rupees shall be reported forthwith by the 
Chairperson to the Council and the Chairpe rson shall give effect to any order that may be passed by the 
Council in relation thereto.  
57. Power of Council to re -adjust income and expenditure during the year .—(1) If at any time 
during the year it appears to the Council that, notwithstanding any reduction of budget -grant  that has been 
made under section 56 the income of the New Delhi Municipal Fund during the same year will not suffice 
to meet the  expenditure sanctioned in the budget estimates of that year and to leave at the close of the year 
the cash balance specified in or determined under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 56, then, it 
shall be incumbent on the Council to sanction forthw ith any measures which it may consider necessar y 
for adjusting the year‟ s income to the expenditure.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the Council may either diminish the sanctioned expenditure of 
the year so far as it may be possible so to do with regard to all the requirements of this Act, or have 
recourse to supplementary taxation under section 97 or to an increase of the rates of cesses, fees, fares and 
other charges leviable under this Act, or to adopt all or any of these methods.  
(3) If the whole or any part of any budget -grant included in the budget estimates for a year remains 
unexpended at the close of that year, and the amount thereof has not been taken into account in the 
opening balance entered in the budget estimates of any of the next two following years, the Chairperson 
may sanction the expenditure of such budget -grant or the unexpended portion thereof during the next two 
following years for the completion of the purpose or object for which the budget -grant was originally 
made  and not for any other purpose or object.  
ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
Scrutiny and audit of accounts  
58. Account s to be kept .—These shall be kept in such manner and in such form as may be prescribed 
by regulation s the General Account of all receipts and expenditures of the Council.  
59. Audit .—(1) The Chief Auditor shall conduct a monthly examination and audit o f the accounts of 
the Council and shall report thereon to the Chairperson, who shall publish monthly an abstract of the 
receipts and expenditure of the month last proceeding signed by him and by the Chief Auditor.  
(2) The Chairperson may also, from time to time and for such period, as he may think fit, conduct 
independently any examination and audit of the accounts of the Council.  
(3) For the purpose of  examination and audit of the accounts of the Council, the Chief Auditor shall 
have access to all the accounts of the Council and to all records and correspondence relating thereto.  
(4) The Chief Auditor  shall audit the accounts of the Council with the assistance of the officers and 
other employees subordinate to him.  
 32 
 (5) In the discharge of his functions under this se ction the Chief Auditor shall, — 
(a) audit the accounts of expenditure from the revenue of the Council, expenditure on account of 
loan works and expenditure incurred out of special funds and shall ascertain whether moneys shown 
therein as  have been disbursed were legally available for, and applicable to, the service or purpose to 
which they have been applied or charged, and whether the expenditure conforms to the authority 
which governs it;  
(b) audit the accounts of debts, deposits, sinking funds, advances, suspense and remittance 
transactions of the Council and report upon those accounts and upon the results of verification of the 
balance relating thereto.  
(6) The Chief Auditor shall examine and audit the statement of accounts relating to the commercial 
services conducted in any department of the Council including the trading, manufacturing and profit and 
loss accounts, and the balance -sheets where such accounts are maintained under the orders of the Council 
and shall certify and report upon these accounts.  
(7) The Chief Auditor shall in consultation with the Chairperson and subject to any directions given 
by the Council determine the form and manner in which his reports on the accounts of the Council shall 
be prepared and shall have authority to call upon any officer of the Council to provide any information 
necessary for the preparatio n of these reports.  
(8) The Chief Auditor may make such qu eries and observations in relation to any of the accounts of 
the Council which he is required to audit and call for such vouchers, statements, returns and explanation 
in relation to such accounts as he may think fit.  
(9) Every such query or observation as aforesaid shall be promptly taken into consideration by the 
officer or authority to whom it  may be addressed and returned without delay with the necessary vouchers, 
documents or explanations to the Chief Auditor.  
(10) The power of the Chief Auditor with regard to the disapproval of, and the pr ocedure with regard 
to the settlement of objections to expenditure from the revenues of the Council shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Chairperson in Consultation with Chief Auditor, and with the approval of the Council.  
(11) If the Chief Auditor considers it desirable that the whole or any part of the audit applied to any 
accounts which he is required to audit shall be conducted in the offices in which those accounts originate 
he may require that th ose accounts, together with all books and documents having relation there to, shall at 
all convenient times be made available in the said offices for inspection.  
(12) The Chief Auditor shall have the power  to require that any books or other documents relating to 
the accounts he is required to audit shall be sent for inspection by him:  
Provided that if the documents are confidential, he shall be responsible for preventing disclosure of 
their contents.  
(13) The Chief Auditor shall have authority to frame standing orders and to give directions on all 
matters relating to audit, and particularly, in respect of the method and the extent of audit to be applied 
and the raising and pursuing the objections.  
(14) Expenditure sanctioned by the Chief Auditor shall be audited by an officer to be nominated by 
the Council.  
(15) The Chief Auditor shall report to the Chairperson any material impropriety or irregularity which 
he may at any time observe in the expenditure or in the recovery of moneys due to the Council or in the 
accounts of the Council.  
(16) The Chairperson shall cause to be laid before the Council every report made by the Chief 
Auditor to the Chairperson and every statement of the views of the Chief Auditor on any matter affecting 
the exercise and performance  of the powers and duties assigned to him under this Act and the Council 
may take such action in regard to any of the matters as aforesaid as the Council may deem necessary.  
(17) As soon as may be after the commencement of each year, the Chief Auditor shall deliver to t he 
Council a report of the entire accounts of the Council for the previous year.  33 
 (18) The Chairperson shall cause the said report to be printed and shall forward as soon as may be 
printed copy thereof to each member of the Council.  
(19) The Chairperson shall also forward without delay to the Government so many copies of the said 
report, a s may be required by the Government with a brief statement of the action taken or proposed to be 
taken if any:  
Provided that the Government may at any time appoint auditor for the purpose of making a special 
audit of the General Account of the New Delhi Mu nicipal Fund and reporting thereon to the Government 
and the costs of such audit, as determined by the Government, shall be chargeable to the New Delhi 
Municipal Fund. The auditor so appointed may exercise any power which the Chief Auditor may 
exercise.  
CHAPTER VIII  
TAXATION  
Levy of taxes  
60. Taxes to be imposed by the Council under this Act. —(1) The Council shall for the purposes of 
this Act, levy the  following taxes, namely :— 
(a) property tax;  
(b) a tax on vehicles and animals;  
(c) a theatre -tax; 
(d) a tax on advertisements other than advertisements published in the newspapers;  
(e) a duty on the transfer of property; and  
(f) a tax on buildings payable along with the application for sanction of the building plan.  
(2) In addition  to the taxes specified in sub -section ( 1) the Council may, for the purposes of this Act; 
levy any of the following taxes, namely: — 
(a) an education cess;  
(b) a tax on professions, trades, callings and employments;  
(c) a tax on the consumption, sale or supply of electricity;  
(d) a betterment tax on the increase in urban land values caused by the execution of any 
deve lopment or improvement work;  
(e) tolls.  
(3) The taxes specified in sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) shall be levied,  assessed and collected in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and the bye -laws made thereunder.  
Property tax  
61. Rates of property tax .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the property tax shall be 
levied on lands and buildings in New Delhi and shall consist of not less than ten and not more than thirty 
per cent. of the rateable value of lands and buildings:  
Provided that the Council may, when fixing the rate at which the property tax shall be levied during 
any year, determine that the rate leviable in respect of lands and buildings or portions of lands and 
buildings in which any particular class of trade or business is carried on shal l be higher than the rate 
determined in respect of other lands and buildings or portions of other lands and buildings by an amount 
not exceeding one -half of the rate so fixed:  
Provided further that the tax may be levied on graduated scale, if the Council so determines.  
Explanation .—Where any portion of a land or building is liable to a higher rate of the tax such 
portion shall be deemed to be a separate property for the purpose of municipal taxation.  34 
 (2) The Council may exempt from the tax lands and buildings of which the rateable value does not 
exceed one thousand rupees.  
62. Premises in respect of which property tax is to be levied .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in 
this Act, the property tax shall be levied in respect of all lands and  buildings in New Delhi except — 
(a) lands and buildings or portions of lands and buildings exclusively occupied and used for 
public worship or by a society or body for a charitable purpose:  
Provided that such society or body is supported wholly or in part by voluntary contributions, 
applies its profits, if any, or other in come in promoting its objects and does not pay any dividend or 
bonus to its members.  
Explanation .— “Charitable purpose ” includes relief of the poor, education and medical relief but 
does not include a purpose which relates exclusively to religious teaching;  
(b) lands and buildings vested in the Council, in respect of whi ch the said tax, if levied, would 
under the provisions of this Act be leviable primarily on the Council;  
(c) agricultural lands and buildings (other than dwelling houses).  
(2) Lands and buildings or portions thereof shall not be deemed to be exclusively occupied and used 
for public worship or for a charitable purpose within the meaning of clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) if any 
trade or business is carried on in such lands and buildings or portions thereof or if in respect of such lands 
and buildings or portions thereof, any rent is derived.  
(3) Where any portion of any land or building is exempt from the p roperty tax by reason of its being 
exclusively occupied and used for public worship or for a charitable purpose such portion shall be deemed 
to be a separate property for the purpose of municipal taxation.  
63. Determination of rateable value of lands and buildi ngs assessable to property tax .—(1) The 
rateable  value of any lands or building assessable to any property taxes shall be the annual rent at which 
such land or building might reasonably be expected to let from year to year less a sum equal to               
ten per cent. of the said annual rent which shal l be in lieu of all allowances for cost  of repairs and 
insurance, and other expenses, if any, necessary to maintain the land or building i n a state to command 
that rent:  
Provided that in respect of any land or building the standard rent of which has been f ixed under the 
Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (59 of 1958) the rateable value thereof shall not exceed the annual amount 
of the standard rent so fixed.  
(2) The rateable value of any land which is not built upon but is capable of being built upon and of 
any land on which a building is in process of erection shall be fixed at five per cent. of estimated capital 
value of such land.  
(3) All plant and machinery  contained or situate in or upon any land or building and belonging to any 
of the classes specified from time to time by public notice by the Chairperson with the approval of the 
Council, shall be deemed to form part of such land or building for the purpos e of determining the rateable 
value thereof under sub -section ( 1) but save as aforesaid no account shall be taken of the value of any 
plant or machinery contained or situated in or upon any such land or building.  
64. Charge for supply of water .—(1) A charge shall be levied for the water supplied to any land or 
building by measurement at such rate as shall from time to time be prescribed by the Council in  this 
behalf.  
(2) The Council may prescribe such conditions as it may think fit regarding the use of the water and 
regarding the charges to be paid for water consumed whilst a meter i s out of order or und er repair:  
Provided that no condition prescribed under this sub -section shall be inconsistent with this Act or 
with any bye -law made thereunder.  
(3) Any sum payable by a person, who is charged for water supplied, and not paid when it becomes 
due shall be recoverable as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
(4) In prescribing charges for water supplied by measurement under sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful 
for the Council to prescribe different rates in respect of different classes of lands and buildings.  35 
 65. Taxation of Union properties .—(1) Notwithstandi ng anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this Chapter, lands and buildings being properties of the Union shall be exempt from the 
property tax specified in section 61:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall prevent the Council from lev ying property tax on such 
lands and buildings to which immediately before the 26th January, 1950, they were liable or treated as 
liable, so long as that tax continues to be levied by the Council on other lands and buildings.  
(2) Where the possession of any land or building, being property of the Union, has been delivered in 
pursuance of section 20 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and Rehabilitation) Act, 1954              
(44 of 1954) to a displaced p erson, or any association of displaced persons, whether incorporated or not, 
or to any other person  [hereafter in this sub -section and the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 66 
referred to as the transferee], the property tax specified in section 61 sha ll be leviable and shall be deemed 
to have been leviable in respect of such land or building with effect from the 7th day of April, 1958 or the 
date on which possession thereof has been delivered to the transferee, whichever is later, and such 
property tax  shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision of this Act, be recoverable 
with effect from that day or date, as the case may be.  
66. Incidence of property tax .—(1) The property tax shall be primarily leviable as follows: — 
(a) if the land or building is let, upon the lessor;  
(b) if the land or building is sub -let, upon the superior lessor;  
(c) if the land or building is unlet, upon the person in whom t he right to let the same vests:  
Provided that the property tax in respect of land  and building, being property of the Union, possession 
of which has been delivered in pursuance of section 20 of the Displaced Persons (Compensation and 
Rehabilitation) Act, 1954 (44 of 1954) shall be primarily leviable upon the transferee.  
(2) If any land has been let for a term exceeding one year to a tenant and such tenant has built upon 
the land, the property tax assessed in respect of that land and the building erected thereon shall be 
primarily levi able upon the said tenant, whether the land and building are in the occupation of such tenant 
or a sub -tenant of such tenant.  
Explanation .—The term  “tenant ” includes any person deriving title to the land or the building erected 
upon such land from the tena nt whether by operation of law or by transfer inter vivos . 
(3) The liability of the several owners of any buildings which is, or purports to be, severally owned in 
parts or flats or rooms, for payment of property tax or any instalment thereof payable during the period of 
such ownership shall be joint and several.  
67. Apportionment of liability for property tax wh en the premises are let or sub -let.—(1) If any 
land or building assessed to property tax is let, and it s rateable value exceeds the amount of rent payable 
in respect thereof to the person upon whom under the provision of section 66 the said tax is leviable, that 
person shall be entitled to receive from his tenant the difference between the amount of the pro perty tax 
levied upon him and the amount which would be leviable upon him if the said tax was calculated on the 
amount of rent payable to him.  
(2) If the land or building is sub -let and its rateable value  exceeds the amount of rent payable in 
respect thereof to the tenant by his sub -tenant, or the amount of rent payab le in respect thereof to a      
sub-tenant by the person holding under the sub -tenant, the tenant shall be entitled to receive from his   
sub-tenant or the sub -tenant shall be entitled to receive from the person holding under him, as the case 
may be, the difference between any sum recovered under this section from such tenant or sub -tenant and 
the amount of property tax which would be liable in  respect of the said land or building if the rateable 
value thereof were equal to the difference between the amount of rent which such tenant or sub -tenant 
receives and the amount of rent which he pays.  
(3) Any person entitled to receive any sum under this section shall have, for the recovery thereof, the 
same rights and remedies as if such sum were rent payable to him by the person from whom he is entitled 
to receive the same.  
68. Recovery of property tax from occupiers .—(1) On the failure to recover any sum due on 
account of property tax in respect of any land or building from the person primarily liable therefor under 36 
 section 66, the Chairperson shall recover from every occupier of such land or building by attachment, in 
accordance with section 108 of the rent payable by such occupier, a portion of the total sum due which 
bears, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to that sum as the rent annually payable by such occupier 
bears to the total amount of rent annually payabl e in respect of the whole of the land or building.  
(2) An occupier from whom any sum is recovered under sub -section ( 1) shall be entitled to be 
reimbursed by the person primarily liable for the payment, and may in addition to having recourse to 
other remedies that may be open to him, deduct the amount so recovered from the amount of any rent 
from time to time becoming due from him to such person.  
69. Property tax a first charge on premises on which it is assessed .—Property tax due under this 
Act in respect of any land or building shall, subject to the prior payment of the land revenue, if any, due to 
the Council or Government or Central Governm ent thereon , be a first charge — 
(a) in the case of any land or building held immediately from the Council or Government or 
Central Government, upon the interest in such land or building of the person liable for suc h tax and 
upon the goods and other movable properties, if any, found within or upon such land or building and 
belonging to such person; and  
(b) in the case of any other land or building, upon such land o r building and upon the goods and 
other movable properties, if any, found within or upon such land or building and belonging to the 
person liable for such tax.  
Explanation .—The term “property tax ” in this section shall be deemed to include the costs on 
recovery of property tax and the penalty, if any, payable as specified in the bye -laws.  
70. Assessment list .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Council shall cause an 
assessment list of all lands and buildings in New Delhi to be prepared in such form and manner and 
containing such particulars with respect to each land and buildi ng as may be prescribed by bye -laws.  
(2) When the assessment list has been prepared the Chairperson shall give public notice thereof and 
of the place where the list or a copy thereof may be inspected, and every person claiming to be the owner, 
lessee or occupier of any land or building included in the list and any authorised agent of such person, 
shall be at liberty to inspect the list and to take extracts therefrom free of charge.  
(3) The Chairperson shall, at the sam e time, give public notice of a date, not less than one month 
thereafter, when he will proceed to consider the rateable values of lands and buildings entered in the 
assessment list; and in all cases in which any land or building is for the first time asses sed, or the rateable 
value of any land or building is increased, he shall also give written notice thereof to the owner or to any 
lessee or occupier of the land or building.  
(4) Any objection to a rateab le value or any other matter as entered in the assessment list shall be 
made in writing to the Chairperson before the date fixed in the notice and shall state in what respect the 
rateable value, or other matter is disputed, and all objections so made shall  be recorded in a register to be 
kept for the purpose.  
(5) The objections shall be inquired into and investigated, and the persons making them shall be 
allowed an opportunity of being heard either in per son or by authorised agent, by the Chairperson or by 
any officer of the Council authorised in this behalf by the Chairperson.  
(6) When all objections have been disposed of, and the revision of the rateabl e value has been 
completed, the assessment list shall be authenticated by signature of the Chairperson or, as the case may 
be, the officer authorised by him in this behalf, who shall certify that except in the case, if any in which 
amendments have been mad e as shown therein, no valid objection has been made to the rateable value or 
any other matter entered in said list.  
(7) The assessment list so authenticated shall be deposited in the office of the Counc il and shall be 
open, free of charge during office hours to all owners, lessees and occupiers of lands and buildings 
comprised therein or the authorised agents of such persons, and a public notice that it is so open shall 
forthwith be published.  
71. Evidential value of assessment list .—Subject to such alterations as may thereafter be made in 
the assessment list under section 72 and to the result of any appeal made under the provisions of this Act, 37 
 the ent ries in the assessment list authenticated and deposited as provided in section 70 shall be accepted 
as conclusive evidence for the purpose of assessing any tax levied under this Act, of the rateable value of 
all lands and buildings to which such entries re spectively relate.  
72. Amendment of assessment list .—(1) The Chairperson may, at any t ime, amend the assessment 
list— 
(a) by inserting therein the name of any person whose name ought to be inserted; or  
(b) by inserting therein any land or building previously omitted; or  
(c) by striking out the name of any person not liable for the payment of property tax; or  
(d) by incre asing or reducing for adequate reasons the amoun t of any rateable value and of the 
assessment thereupon; or  
(e) by making or cancelling any entry exempting any land or building from liability to property 
tax; or  
(f) by altering the assessment on the land or building which has been erroneously valued or 
assessed through fraud, mistake or accident; or  
(g) by inserting or altering an entry in respect of any building erected, re -erected, altered or added 
to, after the preparation of the assessment list:  
Provided that no person shall by reason of any such amendment become liable to pay any tax or 
increase of tax  in respect of any period prior to the commencement of the year in which the notice under 
sub-section ( 2) is given.  
(2) Before making any amendment under sub -section ( 1) the Chairperson shall give to any  person 
affected by the amendment, notice of not less than one month that he proposes to make the amendment 
and consider any objection which may be made by such person.  
73. Preparation of new assessment list.—It shall be in the discretion of the Chairperson to prepare 
for the whole or any part of New Delhi, a new assessment list every year or to adopt the rateable value 
contained in the list for any year, with such alterations as may in particular cases b e deemed necessary, as 
the rateable value for the year following, giving the same public notice as well as individual notices, to 
persons affected by such alterations, of the rateable value as if a new assessment list had been prepared.  
74. Notice of transfers .—(1) Whenever the title of any person primarily liable for the payment of 
property tax on any land or building is transferred, the person whose tit le is transferred and the person to 
whom the same is transferred shall within three months after the execution of the instrument of transfer or 
after registration, if it is registered, or after the transfer is effected, if no instrument is executed, give 
notice of such transfer in writing to the Chairperson.  
(2) In the event of the death of any person primarily liable as aforesaid, the person on whom the title 
of the deceased devolves, shall give notice of  such devolution to the Chairperson within six months from 
the date of the death of the deceased.  
(3) The notice to be given under this section shall be in such form as may be determined by bye -laws 
made  under this Act, and the transferee or the other person on whom the title devolves shall, if so 
required, be bound to produce before the Chairperson any document evidencing the transfer or 
devolution.  
(4) Every person who makes a transfer as aforesaid without giving such notice to the Chairperson 
shall, in addition to any penalty to which he may be subjected under the provisions of this Act, continue 
to be liable for the payment of property tax from time t o time payable in respect of the land or building 
transferred until he gives such notice or until the transfer has be en recorded in the Chairperson‟ s book, but 
nothing in this section shall be held to affect the liability of the transferee for the payment of the said tax.  
(5) The Chairperson shall record every transfer or devolution of title notified to him under this section 
in his books and in the assessment list.  
(6) On a written request by the Chairperson, the registrar or sub -registrar of New Delhi appointed 
under the Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908) , shall furnish such particulars regarding the registration of 38 
 instruments of transfer of immovable properties in New Delhi, as the Chairperson may from time to time 
require.  
(7) Such information shall be furnished as soon as may be after the registration of an instrument of 
transfer is effected or, if  the Chairperson so requests, by periodical returns at such intervals as the 
Chairperson may fix.  
75. Notice of erection of building, etc .—When any new building is erected or when any building is 
rebuilt or enlarged or when any building which has been vacant is reoccupied, the person primarily liable 
for the property tax assessed on the building shall give notice thereof in writing to the Chairperson within 
fifteen days from the date of its completion or o ccupation whichever first occurs, or as the case may be, 
from the date of its enlargement or re occupation; and property tax shall be assessable on the building 
from the said date.  
76. Notice of demolition  or removal of buildings .—(1) When any building or any portion of a 
building, which is liable to the payment of property tax is demolished or removed, otherwise than by 
order of the Chairperson, the person primarily liable for the payment of the said tax shall give notice 
thereof in writing to the Chairperson.  
(2) Until such notice is given, the person aforesaid shall continue to be liable to the payment of such 
property tax as he would have been liable t o pay in respect of such building if the same or any portion 
thereof had not been demolished or removed.  
77. Power of Chairperson to call for information and returns and to enter and inspect 
premises .—(1) To enable him to determine the rateable value of any land or building and the person 
primarily liable for the payment of property tax leviable in respect thereof, the Chairperson may require 
the owner or  occupier of such land or building, or of any portion thereof to furnish him within such 
reasonable period as the Chairperson fixes in this behalf, with information or with a written return s igned 
by such owner or occupier — 
(a) as to the name and place of residence of the owner or occupier, or of both the owner and 
occupier of such land or buildings;  
(b) as to the measurements or dimensions of such land or building or of any portion thereof and 
the rent, if any, obtained for such land or building or any portion thereof; and  
(c) as to the actual cost or other specified details connected with the determination of the value of 
such land or building.  
(2) Every owner or occupier on whom any such requisition is made shall be bound to c omply with the 
same and to give true information or to make a true return to the best of his knowledge or belief.  
(3) Whoever omits to comply with any such requisition or fails to give true information o r to make a 
true return to the best of his knowledge or belief, shall, in addition to any penalty to which he may be 
liable, be precluded from objecting to any assessment made by the Chairperson in respect of such land or 
building of which he is the owner or occupier.  
78. Premises owned by, or let to two or more persons in severalty to be ordinarily assessed as 
one property .—Notwithstanding that any land or building is owned by, or let to, two or more per sons in 
severalty, the Chairperson shall for the purpose of assessing such land or building to property tax treat the 
whole of it as one property:  
Provided that the Chairperson may, in respect of any land or building which was originally treated as 
one pro perty but which subsequently passes on by transfer, succession or in any other manner to two or 
more persons who divide the same into several parts and occupy them in severalty, treat, subject to any 
bye-law made in this behalf, each such several part, or two or more of such several parts together, as a 
separate property and assess such part or parts to property tax accordingly.  
79. Assessment in case of amalgamation of premises .—If any land or building, bearing two or 
more municipal numbers, or portions thereof, be amalgamated into one or more new premises, the 
Chairperson shall on such amalgamation assign to them one or more number and assess them to property 
tax accordingly:  
Provided that the total asse ssment on amalgamation shall not be greater than the sum of the previous 
assessments of the several premises except when there is any re -valuation of any of the said premises.  39 
 80. Power of Chairperson to assess separately outhouses and portions of buildings .—The 
Chairperson may in his discretion assess any outhouse appurtenant to a building, or any portion of a land 
or building separately from such building or as the case may be, from the rest of such land  or building.  
81. Power of Chairperson to employ valuers .—(1) The Chairperson may, if he thinks fit, employ 
one or more competent persons to give advice or assistance in connection with the valuation of any land 
or building, and any person so employed shall have power, at all reasonable times and after giving due 
notice, and on production, if so required, of authorisation in writing in that behalf from the Chairperson, 
to enter on, survey and value any land or building which the Chairperson may direct him to survey and 
value.  
(2) No person shall wil lfully delay or obstruct any such person in the exercise of any of his powers 
under this section.  
Tax on vehicles and animals  
82. Tax on certain vehicles and animals and  rates thereof .—Save as otherwise provided in this 
Act, a tax at the rates not exceeding those specified in the Second Schedule shall be levied on vehicles 
and animals of the descriptions specified in that Schedule which are kept within New Delhi.  
83. The tax on whom leviable .—The tax on vehicles or animals shall be leviable upon the owner of , 
or the person having possession or control of, such vehicles or animals in respect of which the tax is 
leviable:  
Provided that in the case of an animal generally used or employed in drawing any vehicle, the tax in 
respect of such animal shall be leviable upon the owner of, or the person having possession or control of, 
such vehicle, whether or not such animal is owne d by such owner or person:  
Provided further that the tax under this section sha ll not be levied in respect of — 
(a) vehicles and animals belonging to the Central Government or to the Government or to the 
Council used or intended to be used solely for public purposes;  
(b) vehicles intended exclusively for the conveyance free of charge, of the injured, the sick or the 
dead;  
(c) children‟ s perambulators or tricycles;  
(d) a cow or a she -buffalo kept for milking for domestic use if the cow or the she -buffalo is the 
only cow or she -buffalo kept by the owner o r the person having possession or control thereof for such 
milking and is registered in accordance with bye -laws made in this behalf, so, however, that — 
(i) where more cows or, as the case may be, more sh e-buffaloes than one are kept by several 
such owners or persons constituting a family, the tax under this section shall be levied in respect 
of all such cows or all such she -buffaloes;  
(ii) where a cow a nd also a she -buffalo are kept by the owner or the person having the 
possession or control thereof or by several such owners or persons constituting a family, the tax 
under this section shall be levied in respect of the cow and the she -buffalo.  
84. Tax when payable .—The tax on vehicles or animals shall be payable in advance in such number 
of instalments and in such manner as may be determined by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
85. Power of Chairperson to compound with livery stable keeper, etc., for tax .—The Chairperson 
may with the approval of the Council, compound for any period not exceeding one year at a time, with 
any liver y stable keeper or other person keeping vehicles for hire or animals for sale or hire, for a lump 
sum to be paid in respect of the vehicles or animals so kept in lieu of the taxes leviable under section 82 
which such livery stable keeper or other person wo uld otherwise be liable to pay.  
Theatre -tax 
86. Theatre -tax.—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, there shall be levied a tax (referred to in 
this Act as theatre -tax) in respect of every cinema, theatre , circus, carnival and other place of 40 
 entertainment to which persons are ordinarily admitted on payment for performances or shows held or 
conducted thereat, at such rates not exceeding those specified in the Third Schedule as the Council may 
determine:  
Provided that the theatre -tax shall not be levied in respect of any performance or show i f the 
Chairperson is satisfied — 
(a) that the entire receipts from such performance or show will be devoted to philant hropic, 
religious or charitable purposes; or  
(b) that the performance or show is of a wholly educational character; or  
(c) that the performance or show is provided for partly educational or partly scientific purposes 
by a society not conducted or established for profit.  
87. Liability to pay theatre -tax.—Every proprietor, manager, or person -in-charge of a theatre, 
cinema, circus, carnival or other place of entertainment shall be liable to pay the theatre -tax and shall pay 
the same in advance before the commencemen t of the performances or shows:  
Provided that the Chairperson may, with the approval of the Council, compound for any series of 
performances or shows or for any period not exceeding one month, with such proprietor, manager or 
person for a lump sum to be paid for such series of performances or shows or for the performances or 
shows held or conduct ed during such period.  
Tax on advertisements other than advertisements published in the newspapers  
88. Tax on advertisements .—(1) Every person, who ere cts, exhibits, fixes or retains upon or over 
any land, building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or structure or upon or in any vehicle any advertisement or, 
who displays any advertisement to public view in any manner whatsoever, visible from a public street o r 
public place (including any advertisement exhibited by means of cinematographs), shall pay for every 
advertisement which is so erected, exhibited, fixed or retained or so displayed to public view, a tax 
calculated at such rates not exceeding those specif ied in the Fourth Schedule as the Council may 
determine:  
Provided that no tax shall be levied under this sect ion on any advertisement which — 
(a) relates to a public meeting, or to an election to Parliame nt or the Legislative Assembly of 
Delhi; or  
(b) is exhibited within the window of any building if the advertisement relates to the trade, 
profession or business carried on in that building; or  
(c) relates to the trade, profession or business carried on within the land or building upon or over 
which such advertisement is exhibited or to any sale or letting of such land or building or any effects 
therein or to any sale, entertainment or meeting to be held on or upon or in the same; or  
(d) relates to the name of the land or building upon or over which the advertisement is exhibited, 
or to the name of the o wner or occupier of such land or building; or  
(e) relates to the business of a railway administration and is exhibited within any railway station 
or upon any wall or other property of a railway administr ation; or  
(f) relates to any activity of the Central Government or the Government or the Council.  
(2) The tax on any advertisement leviable under this  section shall be payable in advance in such 
number of instalments and in such manner as may be determined b y bye -law made in this behalf.  
Explanation 1 .—The word “structure ” in this section includes any movable board on wheels used as 
an advertisement or an advertisement medium.  
Explanation 2 .—The word “advertisement ” in relation to a tax on advertisement under this Act means 
any word, letter, model, sign, placard, notice, device or representation, whether illuminated or not, in the 
nature of and employed wholly or in part for the purposes of advertisement, announcement or direction.  
89. Prohibition of advertisements without written permission of the Chairperson .—(1) No 
advertisement shall be erected, exhibited, fixed or retained upon or over any land, building, wall, 
hoarding, frame, post or structure or upon or in any vehicle or shall be displayed in any manner 41 
 whatsoever in any place within New Delhi without the written permission of the Chairperson granted in 
accordance with bye -laws made under this Act.  
(2) The Chairperson shal l not grant such permission if — 
(a) the advertisement contravenes any bye -law made under this Act; or  
(b) the tax, if any, due in respect of the advertisement has not been paid.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), in the case of an advertisement liable to the 
advertisement tax, the Chairperson shall grant permission for the period to which the payment of the tax 
relates and no fee shall be charged in respect of such permission.  
90. Permission of the Chairperson to become void in certain cases .—The permission granted 
under section 89 shall become void i n the following  cases, namely: — 
(a) if the advertisement contravenes any bye -law made under this Act;  
(b) if any material change is made in the advertisement or any par t thereof without the previous 
permission of the Chairperson;  
(c) if the advertisement or any part thereof falls otherwise than through accident;  
(d) if any addition or alteration is made to, or in the building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or 
structure upon or over which the advertisement is erected, exhibited, fixed or retained if such addition 
or alteration involves the disturbance of the advertisement or any part thereof; and  
(e) if the building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or structure over which the advertisement is 
erected, exhibited, fixed or retained is demolished or destroyed.  
91. Presumption in case of contravention .—Where any advertisement has been erected, exhibited, 
fixed or retained upon or over any land, building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or structure or upon or in 
any vehicle or displayed to public view from a public street or public place in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or any bye -laws made thereunder, it shall be presumed, unless and until contrary is 
proved, that the contravention has been committed by the person  or the persons on whose behalf the 
advertisement purports to be or the agents of such person or persons.  
92. Power of Chairperson in case of contravention .—If any advertisement is erected, exhibited, 
fixed or retained in contravention of the provisions of section 89, the Chairperson may require the owner 
or occupier of the land, building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or structure or vehicle upon, or over or in 
which the same is erected, exhibited, fixed o r retained, to take down or remove such advertisement or 
may enter any land, building, property or vehicle and have the advertisement dismantled, taken down or 
removed or spoiled, defaced or screened.  
Duty on transfer of property  
93. Duty on transfer of property a nd method of assessment thereto .—(1) Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act, the Council shall levy a duty on transfer of immovable property sit uated within the 
limits of New Delhi in accordance with the provisions hereafter in this section contained.  
(2) The said duty shall be levied — 
(a) in th e form of a surcharge on the duty imposed by the Stamp Act, 1899 (2 of 1899) , as in 
force for the time being in the National Capital Territory of Delhi, on every instrument of the 
description specified below, and  
(b) at such rate as may be determined by the Council not exceeding five per cent . on the amount 
specified below against such instruments:  
Description of instrument  Amount on which duty should be levied  
(i) Sale of immovable property . The amount of value of the consideration for 
the sale, as set forth in the instrument.  42 
 94. Provisions applicable on the introduction of transfer duty .—On the introduction of the  duty 
on transfers of property — 
(a) section 27 of the Stamp Act , 1899 (2 of 1899), as in force in the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi shall be read as if it specifically required the particulars to be set forth separately in respect of 
property situated within and without New Delhi;  
(b) section 64 of the said Act shall be read as if it referred to the Council as well as the 
Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi.  
Tax on buildings payable along with the application for sanction of building plans  
95. Tax on building applications .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act the Council shall levy 
a tax on buildings at such rates not exceeding those specified in the Fifth Schedule as the Council shall 
determine.  
(2) The tax shall be leviable on every person who makes an application to the Chairperson for the 
sanction of building plan and shall be pa yable along with the same.  
Other taxes  
96. Imposition of other taxes .—(1) The Council may, at a meeting, pass a resolution for the levy of 
any of the taxes specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 60, defining the maximum rate of the tax to be 
levied, the class or classes of persons or the description or descriptions of articles and properties to be 
taxed, the system of assessment to be adopted and the e xemptions, if any, to be granted.  
(2) Any resolution passed under sub -section ( 1) shall be submitted to the Central Government for its 
sanction, and if sanctioned by that Government, shall come into force  on and from such date as may be 
specified in the order of sanction.  
(3) After a resolution has come into force under sub -section ( 2), the Council may, subject to the 
maximum rate, pass a second resolutio n determining the actual rates at which the tax shall be leviable and 
the tax shall come into force on the first day of the quarter of the year next following the date on which 
such second resolution is passed.  
(4) After a tax has been levied in accordance with foregoing provisions of this section, the provisions 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 55, shall apply in relation to such tax as they apply in relatio n to any  tax 
imposed under sub -section ( 1) of section 60.  
Supplementary taxation  
97. Supplementary taxation .—Whenever the Council decides to have recourse to supplementary 
taxation under sub -section ( 2) of sectio n 57 in any year, it shall do so by increasing from such date as the 
Council may determine, the rates at which any tax leviable under this Act is being levied, but every such Description of instrument  Amount on which duty should be levied  
(ii) Exchange of immovable  property . The value of the property  of the greater value, 
as set forth in the instrument.  
(iii) Gift of immovable property.  The value of the property as set forth in the 
instrument . 
(iv) Mortgage with possession of  immovable  
property . The amount secured by the mortgage as set 
forth in the instrument.  
(v) Lease in perpetuity of  immovable property . The amount equal to one sixth of the whole 
amount or value of the rent which would be 
paid or del ivered in respect of the first fifty 
years of the lease as set forth in the instrument.  43 
 increase shall be made subject to the maximum rate and any other limitation speci fied in respect of such 
tax. 
Payment and recovery of taxes  
98. Time and manner of payment of taxes .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any tax levied 
under this Act shall be payable on such dates, in  such number of instalments and in such manner as may 
be determined by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
99. Presentation of bill .—(1) When any tax has bec ome due, the Chairperson shall cause to be 
presented to the person liable for the payment thereof, a bill for the amount due:  
Provided that no such bill sha ll be necessary in the case of — 
(a) a tax on vehicles and animals;  
(b) a theatre -tax; and  
(c) a tax on advertisements.  
(2) Every such bi ll shall specify the particulars of the tax and the period for which the charge is made.  
100. Notice of demand and notice fee .—(1) If the amount of the  tax for which a bill has been 
presented under section 99 is not paid within fifteen days from the presentation thereof, or if the tax on 
vehicles and animals or the theatre -tax or the tax on advertisements is not paid after it has become due, 
the Chairper son may cause to be served upon the person liable for the payment of the same a notice of 
demand in the form set forth in the Sixth Schedule.  
(2) For every notice of demand which the Chairperson causes t o be served on any person under this 
section, a fee of such amount not exceeding five rupees as may be determined by bye -laws made in this 
behalf, shall be payable by the said person and shall be included in the cost of recovery.  
101. Penalty in case of default of payment of taxes .—(1) If the person liable for the payment of any 
tax does not, within thirty days of the service of the notice of demand under section 100 pay the sum due 
and if no appeal is preferred against such tax, he shall be deemed to be in default.  
(2) When the person liable for the payment of any tax is deemed to be in default under                   
sub-section ( 1), such sum not exceeding twenty per cent. of the amount of the tax as may be determined 
by the Chairperson, may be recovered from him by wa y of penalty, in addition to the amount of the tax 
and the notice fee, payable under sub -section ( 2) of section 100.  
(3) The amount due as penalty under sub -section ( 2) shall be recoverable as an arrear of tax under this 
Act. 
102. Recovery of tax .—(1) If the person liable for the payment of the tax does not, within thirty days 
from the service of the notice of demand, pay the amount due, such sum together with all costs and the 
penalty provided for in section 101 may be recovered under a warrant, issued in the form set forth in the 
Seventh Schedule, by distress and sale of the movable property or the a ttachment and sale of the 
immovable property, of the defaulter:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall not recover any sum the liability for which has been remitted on 
appeal under the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every warrant issued under this section shall be signed by the Chairperson.  
103. Distress .—(1) It shall be lawful for any officer or other employees of the Council to whom a 
warrant issued under section 102 is addressed to distrain, wherever it may be found in any place in New 
Delhi; any movable property, or any standing timber, growing crops or gr ass belonging to the person 
therein named as defaulter, subject to the following conditions, exce ptions and exemptions, namely: — 
(a) the following pro perty shall not be distrained: — 
(i) the necessary wearing apparel and bedding of the defaulter, his wife and children and their 
cooking and eating utensils;  
(ii) tools of artisans;  44 
 (iii) books of account; or  
(iv) when the defaulter is an agriculturist his implements of  husbandry, seed, grain and such 
cattle as may be necessary to enable the defaulter to e arn his livelihood;  
(b) the distress shall not be excessive, that is to say, the property distrained  shall be as nearly as 
possible equal in value to the amount recoverable under the warrant, and if any property has been 
distrained which, in the opinion of the Chairperson, should not have been distrained , it shall forthwith 
be released.  
(2) The person charged with the execution of a warrant of distress shall forthwit h make an inventory 
of the property which he seizes under such warrant, and shall, at the same time, give a written notice in 
the form set forth in the Eighth Schedule, to the person in possession thereof at the time of seizure that the 
said property will be sold as therein mentioned.  
104. Disposal of distrained property and attachment and s ale of immovable property .—
(1) When the property seized is subject to speedy and natural decay or when the expense of keeping it in 
custody is, when added to the amount to be recovered, likely to exceed its value, the Chairperson shall 
give notice to the person in whose possession the property was at the time of seizure that it will be sold at 
once, and shall sell it accordingly by public auction unless the amount mentioned in the warrant is 
forthwith pai d. 
(2) If the warrant is not in the meantime suspended by the Chairperson, or discharged, the property 
seized shall, after the expiry of the period named in the notice served under sub -section ( 2) of section 103 
be sold by public auction by order of the Chairperson.  
(3) When a warrant is issued for the attachment and sale of immovable property, the attachment shall 
be made by an order prohibiting the  defaulter from transferring or charging the property in any way, and 
all persons from taking any benefit from such transfer or charge, and declaring that such property would 
be sold unless the amount of tax due with all costs of recovery is paid into the municipal office within 
fifteen days from the date of the attachment.  
(4) Such order shall be proclaimed at some place on or adjacent to such property by beat of drum or 
other customary mode and a copy o f the order shall be affixed on a conspicuous part of the property and 
upon a conspicuous part of the municipal office and also, when the property is land paying revenue to the 
Government, in the office of the collector.  
(5) Any transfer of or charge on the property attached or any interest therein made without written 
permission of the Chairperson shall be void as against all claims of the Council enforceable under the 
attachment.  
(6) The surplus of the sale -proceeds, if any, shall, immediately after the sale of the property, be 
credited to the New Delhi Municipal Fund, and notice of such credit shall be given at the sam e time to the 
person whose property has been sold or his legal representative and if the same is claimed by written 
application to the Chairperson, within one year from the date of the notice, a refund thereof shall be made 
to such person or representative . 
(7) Any surplus not claimed within one year as aforesaid shall be the property of the Council.  
(8) For every distraint and attachment made in accorda nce with the foregoing provisions, a fee of 
such amount not exceeding two and a half per cent. of the amount of the tax due as shall in each case be 
fixed by the Chairperson, shall be charged, and the said fee shall be included in the costs of recovery.  
105. Recovery from a person about to leave New Delhi or Delhi .—(1) If the Chairperson has 
reason to believe that any person from whom any sum is due or i s about to become due on account of any 
tax is about to move from New Delhi or Delhi, he may direct the immediate payment by such person of 
the sum so due or about to become due and cause a notice of demand for the same to be served on such 
person.  
(2) If, on the service of such notice, such person does not forthwith pay the  sum so due or about to 
become due, the amount shall be leviable by distress or attachment and sale in the manner hereinbefore 
provide d, and the warrant of distress or attachment and sale may be issued and executed without any 
delay.  45 
 106. Power to institute suit for recovery .—Instead of proceeding against a defaulter by distress and 
sale as hereinbefore provided, or after a defaulter has been so proceeded against unsuccessfully or with 
partial success, any sum due or the balance of any sum due, as the case may be, from such defaulter on 
account of a tax may be recovered from him by a su it in any court of competent jurisdiction.  
107. Power of seizure of vehicles and animals in case of non -payment of tax thereon .—(1) If the 
tax on any vehicle or animal is not paid, then, instead of proceeding against the defaulter by distress and 
sale of his other movable property as hereinbefore provided, the Chairperson may, at any time after the 
tax has become due, seize and detain the vehicle or ani mal or both and, if the owner or other person 
entitled thereto does not within seven days in respect of a vehicle and two days in respect of an animal 
from the date of such seizure and detention, claim the same and pay the tax due together with the charges  
incurred in connection with the seizure and detention, the Chairperson may cause the same to be sold and 
apply the proceeds of the sale or such part thereof as is required in discharge of the sum due and the 
charges incurred as aforesaid.  
(2) The surplus, if any, remaining after the application of the sale -proceeds under sub -section ( 1) shall 
be disposed of in the manner laid down in sub -sections ( 6) and ( 7) of section 104.  
108. Occupiers may be required to pay rent towards satisfaction of property tax .—(1) For the 
purposes of recovering the amount of any property tax from any occupier under section 68 , the 
Chairperson shall cause to be served on such occupier a notice requiring him to pay to the Council, any 
rent due or falling due from him in respect of the land or building to the extent necessary to satisfy the 
portion of the sum due for which he is liable under the said section.  
(2) Such notice shall operate as an attachment of the said rent unless the portion of the sum due shall 
have been paid and satisfied and the occupier shall be entitled to credit in account with the person to 
whom such rent is due for any sum paid by him to the Council in pursuance of such notice:  
Provided that if the person to whom such rent is due is not the person primarily liable for payment of 
the property tax, he shall  be entitled to recover from the person primarily liable for the payment of such 
tax any amount for which credit is claimed as aforesaid.  
(3) If any occupier fails to pay to the Council any rent due or f alling due which he has been required 
to pay in pursuance of a notice served upon him as aforesaid, the amount of such rent may be recovered 
from him by the Council as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
Remission and refund  
109. Demolition, etc., of buildings .—If any building is wholly or partly demolished or destroyed or 
otherwise deprived of value, the Chairperson may, on the application in writing of the owner or occupier, 
remit or refund such portion of any tax assessed on the rateable value thereof as he thinks fit.  
110. Remission or refund of tax .—(1) If any building together with land appurtenant th ereto has 
remained vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days, the Chairperson shall remit 
or refund, as the case may be, two -thirds of such portion of the property tax assessed on the rateable value 
thereof, as may be proportionate  to the number of days during which the said building together with the 
land appurtenant thereto has remained vacant and unproductive of rent.  
(2) If any land, not being land appurtenant to a building, has remained vacant and unproductive of 
rent for sixty or more consecutive days, the Chairperson  shall remit or refund, as the case may be, one 
half of such portion of the property tax assessed on the rateable value thereof, as may be, proportionate to 
the number of days during which the said land has remained vacant and unproductive of rent.  
111. Power to require entry in assessment list of details of buildings .—(1) For the purpose of 
obtaining a partial remission or refund of tax, the owner of a building composed of separate tenements 
may request the Chairperson, at the time of the assessment of the building, to enter in the assessment list, 
in addition to the rateable value of the whole building, a note regarding any detail of the rateable value of 
each separate tenement.  
(2) When any tenement, the rateable val ue of which has been thus separately recorded has remained 
vacant and unproductive of rent for sixty or more consecutive days, such portion of any tax assessed on 46 
 the rateable value of the whole building shall be remitted or refunded as would have been rem itted or 
refunded if the tenement had been separately assessed.  
112. Notice to be given of the circumstances in which remission or refund is claimed .—No 
remission or refund under section 110 or section 11 1 shall be made unless notice in writing of the fact that 
land, building or tenement has become vacant and unproductive of rent has been given to the Chairperson, 
and no remission or refund shall take effect in respect of any period commencing more than fi fteen days 
before delivery of such notice.  
113. What bu ildings are to be deemed vacant .—(1) For the purposes of sections 110 and 111 no 
land, building o r tenement shall be deemed vacant if maintained as a pleasure resort or town or country 
house or be deemed unproductive of rent if let to a tenant who has a continuing right of occupation 
thereof, whether he is in actual occupation or not.  
(2) The burden of proving the facts entitling any person to claim relief under sections 109, 110 or 
section 111, shall be upon him.  
114. Notice to be given of every oc cupation of vacant land or building .—The owner of any land, 
building or tenement in respect of which a remission or refund of tax has been given under section 110 or 
section 111, shall give notice of the re -occupation of such land, building or tenement wit hin fifteen days 
of such re -occupation.  
Appeals  
115. Appeal against assessment, etc .—(1) An appeal against the levy or assessment of any tax under 
this Act shall lie to the court of the district judges of Delhi.  
(2) If, before or on the hearing of an appeal under this section, any question of l aw or usage having 
the force of law or construction of a document arises, the Court of district judge on his own motion may, 
or on the application of any party to the appeal, shall, draw up a statement of the facts of the case, and the 
question so arising,  and refer the statement with his opinion on the question for the decision of the High 
Court.  
(3) On a reference being made under sub -section ( 2), the subsequent proceedings in the case shall be, 
as near ly as may be in conformity with the rules relating to references to the High Court contained in 
Order XLVI of the First Schedule to the Code of C ivil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ). 
(4) In every appeal, the  costs shall be in the discretion of the Court.  
(5) Costs awarded under this section to the Council shall be recoverable by the Council as an arrear of 
tax due from the appellant.  
(6) If the Council fails to pay any costs awarded to an appellant within ten days after the date of the 
order for payment thereof, the Court may order the Chairperson to pay the amount to the appellant.  
116. Conditions of right to appeal .—No appeal shall be heard or deter mined under section 115 
unless— 
(a) the appeal is, in the case of a property tax, bro ught within thirty days next after the date of 
authentication of the assessment list under section 70 (exclusive of the time requisite for obtaining a 
copy of the relevant entries therein) or, as the case may be, within thirty days of the date on which an 
amendment is finally made under section 72 and, in the case of any other tax, within thirty days next 
after the date of the receipt of the notice of assessment or of alteration of assessment or, if no notice 
has been given, within thirty days after the dat e of the presentation of the first bill or, as the case may 
be, the first notice of demand in respect thereof;  
(b) the amount, if any, in dispute in the appeal has been deposited by the appellant in the office of 
the Council.  
117. Condonation of delay in preferring the appeal .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
clause ( a) of section 116, an appeal may be admitted after the expiration of the period pr escribed therefor 
by that section if the appellant satisfies the court that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal 
within the period.  47 
 118. Finality of appellate orders .—The order of the Court confirming, setting aside or modifying an 
order in respect of any rateable value or assessment or liability to assessm ent or taxation shall be final:  
Provided that it shall be lawful for the Court upon application or on its own motion, to review any 
order passed by it in appeal within three months from the date of the order.  
Miscellaneous provisions relating to taxation  
119. Power to inspect for purposes of de termining rateable  value or tax .—(1) The Chairperson 
may, without giving any previous notice, enter upon and make an inspection of — 
(a) any land or building for the purpose of determining the rateable value of such land or 
building;  
(b) any stable, garage, or coach house or any place wherein he may have reason to believe that 
there is any v ehicle or animal liable to a tax under this Act;  
(c) any place or premises which he has reason to believe are being used or are about to be used 
for any performance or show in respect of which the theatr e-tax is payable or would be payable;  
(d) any land, building or vehicle in or upon which any advertisement liable to tax under this Act 
is exhibited or displayed.  
(2) The Chairperson may, by written summons, require the attendance before him of any person 
whom he has reason to believe to be liable to the payment of a tax in respect of a vehicle or animal, or of 
any servant of any such person and may exami ne such person or servant as to the number and description 
of vehicles and animals owned by or in the possession or under the control of such person; and every 
person or servant of such person so summoned shall be bound to attend before the Chairperson and  to 
give information to the best of his knowledge and belief as to the said matters.  
120. Composition .—(1) The Chairperson may with the previous sanctio n of Council allow any 
person to compound for any tax.  
(2) Every sum due by reason of the composition of a tax under sub -section ( 1) shall be recovered as 
an arrear of tax under this Act.  
121. Irrecoverable debts .—(1) The Chairperson may write off any sum due on account of any tax or 
of the costs of recovering any tax if such sum is, in his opinion irrec overable:  
Provided that where the sum written off in favour of any person exceeds one thousand rupees, the 
previous sanction of the Council shall be first obtained.  
(2) The Chairperson shall report to the Council every case in which any sum has been written off 
under sub -section ( 1). 
122. Obligation to disclose liability .—(1) The Chairperson may, by written notice, call upon any 
inhabitant of New Delhi to furnish such information as may be necessary for the purpose of 
ascertaining — 
(a) whether such inhabitant is liable to pay any tax imposed by the Council under this Act;  
(b) at what amount he should be assessed; or  
(c) the rateable value of the land or building which he occupies and the name and  address of the 
owner or lessee thereof.  
(2) If any person when called upon under sub -section ( 1) to furnish information neglects to furnish it 
within the period specified in this behalf by the Chairpers on or furnishes information which is not true to 
the best of his knowledge or belief, he shall be liable, in addition to any penalty which may be imposed 
under this Act, to be assessed at such amount on account of tax as the Chairperson may deem proper, an d 
the assessment so made shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, be final.  
123. Immaterial error not to affect liability .—No assessment and no charge or demand on account 
of any tax shall be impeached or affected by reason only of any mistake in the name, residence, place of 
business or occupation of any person liable to pay the tax or in the description of any property or th ing, or 
of any mistake in the amount of the assessment, charge or demand, or by reason only of clerical error or 48 
 other defect of form, if the directions contained in this Act and the bye -laws made thereunder have in 
substance and effect been complied with and it shall be enough in the case of any such tax on property or 
any assessment of value for the purpose of any such tax, if the property taxed or assessed is so described 
as to be generally known; and it shall not be necessary to name the owner or occupi er thereof.  
124. General power of exemption .—The Council may, by resolution passed in this behalf, exempt 
either wholly or in part from the payment of any tax levied under this Act, any class of persons or any 
class of property or goods.  
Taxes on entertainment and betting  
125. Payment of proceeds of entertainment and betting taxes to Council .—The proceeds of the 
entertainment and betting taxes collected in New Delhi under the provisions of the U. P. Entertainment 
and Betting Tax Act, 1937 (U.P. Act 18 of 1937), as extended to the National Capital Territory of Delhi 
(which shall form part of the Consolidated Fund of the National Capital Territory of Delhi)  reduced by 
the cost of collection as determined by the Government shall, if the Legislative Assembly of the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi by appropriation made by law in this behalf so provides, be paid to the Council 
for the performance of its func tions under this Act.  
CHAPTER IX  
BORROWING  
126. Power of Council to borrow .—(1) The Council may, in pursuance of any resolution passed by 
it, borrow by  way of debenture or otherwise on the security of all or any of the taxes, rates, cesses, fees 
and charges authorised by or under this Act, any sums of money which ma y be required — 
(a) for acquiring any land which it has power to acquire;  
(b) for erecting any building which it has power to erect;  
(c) for the execution of any permanent w ork, the provision of any  plant, or the doing of any other 
thing which it has power to execute, provide or do, if the cost of carrying out the purpose in question 
ought to be spread over a term of years;  
(d) to pay off any debt due to the Central Government or the Government;  
(e) to repay a loan previously raised under this Act or any other Act previously in force; or  
(f) for any other purpose for which the Council is, by virtue of this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force, authorised to borrow:  
Provided that — 
(i) no loan shall be raised wi thout the previous sanction of the Central Government or without 
previous publication of the application for sanction under the Local Authorities Loans Act, 1914       
(9 of 1914), and the rules made thereunder; and  
(ii) the amount of loan, the rate of interest and the terms including the date of floatation, the time 
and method of the repayment and the like shall be subject to the approval of the Central Government.  
(2) When any sum of money has been borrowed under sub -section ( 1), no portion of any sum of 
money borrowed for any of the purposes referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall be applied to the 
payment of salaries and allowances to any officers or other employees other than those exclusively 
employed in connection with the carrying out of that purpose.  
127. Time for repayment of money bo rrowed under section  126.—The time for the repayme nt of 
any money borrowed under section 126 shall in no case exceed sixty years and the time for repayment of 
any money borrowed for the purpose of discharging any previous loan shall not, except with the express 
sanction of Central Government, extend beyon d the unexpired portion of the period for which such 
previous loan was sanctioned.  
128. Form and effect of debenture .—All debentures issued under this Chapter shall be in such form 
as the Council may, wit h the previous sanction of the Central Government, determine and shall be 49 
 transferable in such manner as shall be therein expressed; and the right to sue in respect of the moneys 
secured by any of such debentures shall vest in the holders thereof for the t ime being without any 
preference by reason of some such debentures being prior in date to others.  
129. Payment to survivors of joint payees .—When any debenture or security issued under this Act 
is payable  to two or more persons jointly, and either or any of them dies, then, notwithstanding anything 
in section 45 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 1872), the debenture or security shall be payable to 
the survivor or survivors of such person:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall affect any claim by legal representative of a deceased 
person against such survivor or survivors.  
130. Receipt by joint holders for interest or dividend .—When two or mor e persons are joint 
holders of any debenture or security issued under this Act, any one of such persons may give an effectual 
receipt for any interest or dividend payable in respect of such debenture or security, unless notice to the 
contrary has been give n to the Council by the other of such persons.  
131. Maintenance and investment of sinking funds .—(1) The Council shall maintain sinking funds 
for the re payment of money borrowed on debentures issued and shall pay every year into such sinking 
funds such sum as will be sufficient for the repayment within the period fixed for the loan of all moneys 
borrowed on the debentures issued.  
(2) All money paid into the sinking funds shall, as soon as possible, be invested by the Chairperson in 
public securities and every such investment shall be reported by the Chairperson to the Council within 
fifteen days.  
(3) All dividends and other sums received in respect of any such  investment shall, as soon as possible 
after receipt, be paid into the sinking funds and invested in the manner laid down in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) When any part of a sinking fund is invested in New Delhi municipal debentures, or is applied in 
paying off any part of a loan before the period fixed for repayment, the interest which would otherwis e 
have been payable on such debentures or on such part of the loan shall be paid into the sinking fund and 
invested in the manner laid down in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Any investment made under this section may, subject to the provision of sub -section ( 2), be varied 
or transposed.  
132. Application of sinking funds .—A sinking fund or any part thereof shall be applied in or 
towards the discharge of the loan o r a part of the loan for which such fund was created, and until such 
loan or part is wholly discharged shall not be applied for any other purpose:  
Provided that when any loan or part thereof has been consolidated under section 134, the Chairperson 
shall tr ansfer to the sinking fund of the consolidated loan such part of the sinking funds of the original 
loans as may be proportionate to the amount of the original loans incorporated in the consolidated loan.  
133. Annual statement by Chairperson .—(1) The Chairperson shall, at the end of every year, 
submit to t he Council a statement showing — 
(a) the amount wh ich has been invested during the year under section 131;  
(b) the date of the last investment made previous to the submission of the statement;  
(c) the aggregate amount of the securities then in his hand; and  
(d) the aggregate amount which has up to the date of the statement been applied under section 
132, in or towards discharging loans.  
(2) Every such statement shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
134. Power of Council to consolidate loans .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in this Chapter, the Council may consolidate all or any of its loans and for that purpose may 
invite tenders for a new loan (to be called “the New Delhi Municipal Council Consolidated Loan, 19 —”) 
and i nvite holders of the municipal debentures to exchange their debentures for scrips of such loan.  50 
 (2) The terms of any such consolidated loan and the form of its scrip and the rates at which exchange 
into such consolidated loan shall be permitted shall be subject to the prior approval of the Central 
Government.  
(3) The period for the exchanging of any such consolidated loan shall not, without the sanction of the 
Central Government, extend beyond the farthest date within which any of the loans to be consolidated 
would otherwise be repay able. 
(4) The Council shall provide for the repayment of any such conso lidated loan by a sinking fund in 
the manner laid down in section 131 having regard to the amount transferred to such sinking fund under 
section 132.  
135. Priority of payment for interest and repayment o f loans over other payments .—(1) All 
payments due from the Council for interest on and repayment of loans shall be made in priority to all 
other payments due from the Council.  
(2) If any money borrowed or deemed to have been borrowed by the Council from Central 
Government or the Government or any interest or costs due in respect thereof be not repaid according to 
the conditions of the loan, the Central Government or the Government may attach the New Delhi 
Municipal Fund or any part thereof.  
(3) After such attachment no person except an officer appointed in this behalf by the Central 
Government shall in any way deal with the attached fund; but such officer may do all acts in respect 
thereof which any municipal authority, officer or other employee might have done if such attachment has 
not taken place, and may apply the proceeds  in satisfaction of the arrears and of all interests and cost due 
in respect thereof and of all expenses caused by the attachment and subsequent proceedings:  
Provided that no such attachment shall defeat or prejudice any debt for which the fund was previou sly 
charged in accordance with law; and all such prior charges shall be paid out of the proceeds of the fund 
before any part of the proceeds is applied to satisfaction of the debt due to the Central Government or the 
Government.  
136. Power to make regulations .—The Council may make regulations to carry out the purposes of 
this Chapter including, in particular, the issue of duplicates in case of loss of debentures by theft, 
destruction or otherwise, and rene wal of debentures on payment of fees prescribed in this behalf by such 
regulations.  
CHAPTER X  
PROPERTY AND CONTRACTS  
Property  
137. Acquisition of property .—The Council shall, for the purpose of this Act,  have power to acquire 
and hold movable and immovable property, or any interest therein.  
138. Acquisition of immovable property by agreement .—Whenever the Council decides to acquire 
any immovable property for the purpose of this Act, the Chairperson shall acquire such property on behalf 
of the Council by agreement on such terms and at such price as may be approved by the Council.  
139. Procedure when immovab le property cannot be acquired by agreement .—Whenever the 
Chairperson is unable to acquire any immovable property under section 138 by agreement, the Central 
Government may at the request of the Chairperson procure the acquisition thereof under the provisi ons of 
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) , and on payment by the Council of the compensation awarded 
under that Act and of the charges incurred by that Government in connection with the proceedings, the 
land shall vest in the Council.  
140. Disposal of movable property .—(1) With respect to the disposal of movable property 
belonging to Council the Chairperson may, in his discretion, disp ose of by sale or otherwise, any movable 
property belonging to the Council not exceeding in value in each instance one thousand rupees, or such 
higher amount as the Council may prescribe, or let out on hire any movable property or grant a lease of 51 
 any immo vable property belonging to the Council including any right of gathering and taking fruits and 
the like, for a period not exceeding one year at a time.  
(2) In cases not covered by sub -section ( 1), the Ch airperson may, with the sanction of the Council, 
lease, sell, let out on hire or otherwise transfer any movable property belonging to the Council.  
141. Disposal of immovable property .—(1) The Chairperson may, with the sanction of the Council, 
lease, sell, let out on hire or otherwise transfer any immovable property belonging to the Council.  
(2) The cons ideration for which any immovable property may be sold, leased or otherwise transferred 
shall not be less than the value at which such immovable property could be sold, leased or otherwise 
transferred in normal and fair competition.  
(3) The sanction of Council under section 140 or this section may be given either generally for any 
class of cases or specially for any particular case.  
(4) Subject to any co nditions or limitation that may be specified in any other provisions of this Act 
the foregoing provisions of section 140 and this section shall apply to every disposal of property 
belonging to the Council made under, or for any purpose of this Act.  
(5) Every case of disposal of property under sub -section ( 1) of section 140 shall be reported by the 
Chairperson without delay to the Council.  
Contracts  
142. Contracts by the Council .—Subject to the provisions of sections 143 and 144 the Council shall 
be competent to enter into and perform any contract necessary for the purposes of this Act.  
143. Procedu re for making contracts .—With respect to the making of contracts, the following 
provisi ons shall have effect, namely: — 
(a) every such contract shall be made on behalf of the Council by the Chairperson;  
(b) no such contract, for any purpose which in accordance with any provision of this Act the 
Chairperson may not carry out without the approval or sanction of the Council shall be made by him 
until and unl ess such approval or sanction has been duly obtained;  
(c) no contract which will involve an expenditure exceeding ten lakh rupees or such higher 
amount as the Central Government may from time to time, fix , shall be made by the Chairperson 
unless the same is previously approved by the Council; and  
(d) every contract made by the Chairperson involving an expenditure exceeding one lakh rupees 
but not exceeding ten lakh rupees or such higher amount as may be fixed under clause ( c) shall be 
reported by him, within one month after the same has been made to the Council.  
144. Mode of executing contracts .—(1) The mode of executing contracts under this Act shall be 
prescribed by bye -laws made in this behalf.  
(2) No contract which is not made in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act and the bye -laws 
made thereunder shall be binding on the Council.  
CHAPTER XI  
WATER SUPPLY, DRAINAGE AND SEWAGE COLLECTION  
General  
145. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless t he context otherwise requires, the following words and 
expressions in relation to water supply shall have the respective  meanings given below, namely: — 
(1) “communication pipe ” means,— 
(a) where the premises supplied with water abut on the part of the street in which the main is 
laid, and the service pipe enters those premises otherwise than through the outer wall of a 
building abutting o n the street and has a stopcock placed in those premises and as near to the 52 
 boundary of that street as is reasonably practicable, so much of the service pipe as lies between 
the main and that stopcock;  
(b) in any other case, so much of the service pipe as lies between the main and the boundary 
of the street in which the main is laid, and includes the ferrule at the junction of the servic e pipe 
with the main, and also — 
(i) where the communication pipe ends at a stopcock, that stopcock; and  
(ii) any stopcock fitted on the communication pipe between the end thereof and t he main;  
(2) “main ” means a pipe laid by the Council for the purpose of giving a general supply of water 
as distinct from a supply to individual consumers and includes any apparatus used in connection with 
such a pipe;  
(3) “service pipe ” means so much of any pipe for supplying water from a main to any premises as 
is subject to water pressure from that main, or would be so subject but for the closing of some tap;  
(4) “suppl y pipe ” means so much of any service pipe as is not a communication pipe;  
(5) “trunk main ” means a main constructed for the purpose of conveying water from a source of 
supply to a filter or reservoir or f rom one filter or reservoir to another filter or reservoir, or for the 
purpose of conveying water in bulk from one part of the limits of supply to another part of those 
limits, or for the purpose of giving or taking a supply of water in bulk;  
(6) “water fittings ” includes pipes (other than mains), taps, cocks, valves, ferrules, meters, 
cisterns, baths and other similar apparatus used in connection with the supply and use of water.  
146. Council may carry out surveys and formulate proposals .—(1) The Council may — 
(a) carry  out a survey of the existing consumption of and demand for water supplies in New Delhi 
and of the water resources in or likely to be made available in New Delhi;  
(b) prepare an estimate of the future wat er supply requirements of New Delhi;  
(c) carry out a survey of the existing quantity of sewage collection;  
(d) formulate proposals as to — 
(i) the existing or future water supply requirements of New Delhi;  
(ii) the existing or future sewage collection requirement in New Delhi including proposals for 
the manner in which and the place or places at which sewage should be carried and collected.  
(2) If the Council is of the opinion that the works and other properties for the time being vested in the 
Counc il, are inadequate for the purpose of sufficient supply of water or for the purpose of efficient 
collection of sewage under this Act it may take step in accordance with the provisions of this Act for the 
construction of additional works, whether within New  Delhi or outside New Delhi with the approval of 
the Administrator and for the acquisition of additional properties for such works.  
Water supply  
147. Functions in relation to water supplies .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Council to take steps 
from time to time — 
(a) for ascertaining the sufficiency and wholesomeness of water supplies within New Delhi and 
receiving bulk supplies of water from the authority prescribed by the Central Government;  
(b) for providing a supply of wholesome water in pipes to every part of New Delhi in which there 
are houses, for the domestic purposes of the occupants thereof, and for taking the pipes affording that 
supply to such point or points as will enable the houses to be connected thereto at a reasonable cost, 
so, however, that this clause shall not require the  Council to do anything which is not practicable at a 
reasonable cost or to provide such a supply to any part of New Delhi where such a supply is already 
available at such point or points aforesaid;  
(c) for providing as far as possible, a supply of wholesome water otherwise than in pipes to every 
part of New Delhi in which there are houses, for the domestic purposes of the occupants thereof and 53 
 to which it is not practicable to provide a supply in pipes at  a reasonable cost, and in which danger to 
health arises from the insufficiency or unwholesomeness of the existing supply and a public supply is 
required and can be provided at a reasonable cost, and for securing that such supply is available 
within a reas onable distance of every house in that part.  
(2) If any question arises under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) as to whether anything is or is not 
practicable at a reasonable cost or as to the point or point s to which pipes must be taken in order to enable 
houses to be connected to them at a reasonable cost, or under clause ( c) thereof, as to whether a public 
supply can be provided at a reasonable cost, the Council shall determine that question and thereupon it 
shall give effect to that determination.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Chairperson shall, for the purpose of 
securing, so far as is reasonably practicable, that every house has available a sufficient supply of 
wholesome water for domestic purposes, exercise his powers under this Act of requiring the owners of 
houses to provide a supply of water thereto.  
(4) The Council shall secure that the water in any water works belonging to the Council from which 
the water is supplied for domestic purpose is wholesome.  
148. Water supplied for domestic purposes not to be use d for non -domestic purposes .—No 
person shall, without the written permission of the Chairperson, use or allow to be used for other than 
domestic purposes water supplied for domestic purposes.  
149. Supply  of water for domestic purposes not to include any supply for certain specified 
purposes .—The supply of water for domestic purposes under this Act shall not b e deemed to include any 
supply— 
(a) for anima ls or for washing vehicles where such animals or vehicles are kept for sale or hire;  
(b) for any trade, manufacture or business;  
(c) for fountains, swim ming baths or any ornamental or mechanical purpose;  
(d) for gardens or for purposes of irrigation;  
(e) for making or for watering streets; or  
(f) for building purposes.  
150. Power to supply water for non -domestic purposes .—(1) The Chairperson  may supply water 
for any purpose other than a domestic purpose on such terms and conditions consistent with this Act and 
the bye -laws made thereunder as may be laid down in this behalf by the Council on receiving a written 
application specifying the purpo se for which the supply is required and the quantity likely to be 
consumed.  
(2) When a application under sub -section ( 1) is received, the Chairperson may subject to such charges 
and rates as may be fixed  by the Council, place or allow to be placed the necessary pipes and water 
fittings of such dimensions and character as may be prescribed by bye -laws and may arrange for the 
supply of water through such pipes and fittings.  
151. Use of water for extinguishing fire .—Water may be used for extinguishing fire.  
152. Power to require water supply to be taken .—(1) If it appears to the Chairperson that any 
premises in New Delhi are without supply of wholesome water for domestic purposes or that the existing 
supply of water for domestic purposes available for the persons usually occupying or employed in such 
premis es is inadequate or on any sanitary grounds objectionable, the Chairperson may by notice in writing 
require the owner of the premises or the persons primarily liable for the payment of the prope rty tax in 
respect of the same — 
(a) to take a connection from the municipal water works adequate for the requirements of the 
persons occupying or employed in the premises, or to take such additional or enlarged connection or 
connections f rom the municipal water works; and  
(b) to provide, supply pipes and water fittings, install and work a pump and do all such works and 
take all such measures as may, in the opinion of the Chairperson be n ecessary for the above purposes.  54 
 (2) The Chairperson may in the notice issued under sub -section ( 1) specify— 
(a) the size, material and quality of the  pipes and water fittings to be provided;  
(b) the position of the pipes and water fittings to be provided;  
(c) the means of access for the inspection of the pipes and water fittings;  
(d) the type of pump that should be installed and the period or periods of the day for which it 
should be kept working;  
(e) the period within which any or all the requisitions specified in the notice should be carried out.  
153. New premises not to be occupied without arrangement for water supply .—It shall not be 
lawful for the owner of any premises which may be newly constructed or reconstructed within any portion 
of New Delhi to occupy it or cause or permit it to be occupied until he has obtained a certificate from the 
Chairperson that there is provided within, or within a reasonable distance of, the premises such supply of 
wholesome water as appears to the Chairperson to be adequate for the persons who may occupy, or be 
employed in, such premises for their domestic purposes.  
154. Public gratuitous water supply .—(1) The Chairperson with the approval of the Council may 
provide gratuitous supply of wholesome water to the public withi n New Delhi and may, for that purpose, 
erect public hydrants or other conveniences.  
(2) The Chairperson may with like approval close a public hydrant or other convenience when it is no 
longer required fo r the supply of wholesome water to the public.  
155. Power to lay mains .—(1) The Chairperson may lay a main whether within or without t he local 
limits of the Council — 
(a) in any street; and  
(b) with the consent of every owner and occupier of any land not forming part of a street, in, over 
or on that la nd,  
and may, from time to time, inspect, repair, alter or renew or may at any time remove any main so laid 
whether by virtue of this section or otherwise:  
Provided that where a consent required for the purpose of this sub-section  is withheld, the 
Chairperson may, after giving the owner or occupier of the land a written notice of his intention so to do, 
lay the main in, over or on that land even without such consent.  
(2) Where th e Chairperson, in exercise of the powers under this section, lays a main in, over or on any 
land not forming part of a street, or inspects, repairs, alters, renews or removes a main so laid down in, 
over or on any such land, he shall pay compensation to ev ery person interested in that land for any 
damage done to, or injurious affection of that land by reason of the inspection, laying, repair, alteration, 
renewal or removal of the main.  
156. Power to lay ser vice pipes, etc .—(1) The Chairperson may, in any street whether within or 
without the local limits of the Council lay such service pipes with such stopcocks and other water fittings 
as he may deem necessa ry for supplying water to premises and may, from time to time, inspect, repair, 
alter or renew and may, at any time, remove any service pipe laid in a street whether by virtue of this 
section or otherwise.  
(2) Where a service pipe has been lawfully laid in, over, or on the land not forming part of a street, 
the Chairperson may from time to time enter upon that land and inspect, repair, alter, renew or remove the 
pipe or lay a new pipe in substitution there of but shall pay compensation for any damage done in the 
course of such action.  
157. Provision of fire hydrants .—(1) The Chairperson shall fix hydrant s on water mains (other than 
trunk mains) at such places as may be most convenient for affording a supply of water for extinguishing 
any fire which may break out and shall keep in good order and from time to time renew every such 
hydrant.  
(2) To denote the situation of every hydrant placed under this section, letters, marks or figures shall 
be displayed prominently on some wall, building or other structure near such hydrant.  55 
 (3) As soon as any such hydrant is completed, the Chairperson shall deposit a key thereof at each 
place where a public fire engine is kept and in such other places as he deems necessary.  
(4) The Chairperson may, at the request and expense of the owner or occupier of any factory, 
workshop, trade premises or place of business situated in or near a street in which a pipe is laid (and not 
being a trunk main an d being of sufficient dimensions to carry a hydrant), fix on the pipe and keep in 
good order and from time to time renew one or more fire hydrants, to be used only for extinguishing fires 
as near as conveniently may be to that factory, workshop, trade prem ises or place of business.  
(5) The Chairperson shall allow all persons to take water for extinguishing fires from any pipe on 
which a hydrant is fixed without any payment.  
158. Supply of water .—(1) The Chairperson may permit the owner, lessee or occupier of any 
premises to connect the premises by means of supply pipes for c onveying to the premises a supply of 
water for his domestic purposes from the municipal water works subject to the requirements specified in 
section 159 and the conditions, if any, laid down in the bye-laws made in this behalf.  
(2) The owner of every premises connected with the municipal water works, shall, when so required 
by the Chairperson, set up electric pumps or other contrivances whereby water may be caused to reach to 
the top of the top -most story of such premises.  
159. Laying of supply pipes, etc .—(1) An owner, lessor or occupier of any premises, who desires to 
have a supply of water for his domestic purposes from the municipal water works, shall comply with the 
following requirements, namely: — 
(a) he shall give t o the Chairperson fourteen days‟  notice of his intention to lay the necessary 
supply pipe; and  
(b) he shall lay the supply pipe at his own expense, having first obtained, as respects any land not 
forming part of a street, the consent of the owners or occupiers thereof:  
Provided tha t where any part of the supply pipe is to be laid in a street, he shall not himself break 
open the street or lay that part of the pipe.  
(2) Upon the receipt of such a notice as is referred to in sub -section (1), the Chairperson shall lay the 
necessary communication pipe and any part of the supply pipe which is to be laid in street shall connect 
the communication pipe with the supply pipe.  
(3) The expense s, reasonably incurred by the Chairperson in executing the work which he is required 
or authorised by this section to execute, shall be repaid to him by the person to whom the notice was 
given and may be recovered from such person as an arrear of tax under  this Act:  
Provided that if under the provisions of this section, the Chairperson lays a main in lieu of a supply 
pipe, the additional cost incurred in laying the main instead of a supply pipe shall be borne by him.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, the Chairperson 
may, within a reasonable time after the service of the notice upon him, require the person giving the 
notice either to pay to him, in advance t he cost of the work, as estimated by the Chairperson or any officer 
authorised by in this behalf or to give security for payment thereof to his satisfaction.  
(5) If any payment made to the Chairperson un der sub -section ( 4) exceeds the expenses which the 
Chairperson would be entitled to recover from the person giving the notice, the excess shall be repaid by 
him and if and so far as those expenses are not covered by the payment, the Chairperson may recover  the 
balance from such person as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
160. Power to require separate service pipes .—(1) The Chairperson may require the provision of a 
separate service pipe for each of the premises supplied or to be supplied by him with water.  
(2) If, in the case of any premises already supplied with water but not having a separate servic e pipe, 
the Chairperson gives notice to the owner of the premises requiring the provision of such a pipe, the 
owner shall, within three months, lay so much of the required pipe as will constitute a supply pipe and is 
not required to be laid in a street, an d the Chairperson, shall, within fourteen days after the owner has 
done so, lay so much of the required pipe as will constitute a communication pipe or a supply pipe to be 
laid in a street and make all necessary communications.  56 
 (3) If an owner upon whom a notice has been served under sub -section ( 2) fails to comply therewith 
the Chairperson may himself execute the work which  the owner was required to execute and recover the 
expenses reasonably incurred by  him in executing the work as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
161. Stopcocks .—(1) On every service pipe laid after the commencement of this Act the Cha irperson, 
shall, and on every service pipe laid before such commencement, Chairperson may, fit a stopcock 
enclosed in a cover box or a pit of such size as may be reasonably necessary.  
(2) Every stopcocks  fitted on a service pipe after the commencement of this Act shall be placed in 
such position as the Chairperson deems most convenient:  
Provided that — 
(a) a stopcock in private premises shall be placed as near as is reasonably practicable to the street 
from which the service pipe enters those premises; and  
(b) a stopcock in a street shall be placed as near to the boundary thereof as is reasonably 
practicable.  
162. Power of Chairperson to provide meters .—(1) The Chairperson may provide a water -meter 
and attach the same to the service pipe in premises connected with municipal water works.  
(2) The expense of providing and attaching a meter under sub -section ( 1) shall be paid out of the New 
Delhi Municipal  Fund.  
(3) The use, rent to be paid for such use, maintenance and testing of meters shall be regulated by 
orders made by the Council in this behalf.  
163. Presumption as to correctness of meters .—Whenever water is supplied under this Chapter 
through a meter it shall be presumed that the quantity indicated by the meter has been consumed until the 
contrary is proved.  
164. Prohibition of waste or misuse of water .—(1) No person shall wilfully or negligently cause or 
suffer any water fitting w hich he is liable to maintain, — 
(a) to be or remain so out of order or so in need of repair, or  
(b) to be or remain so constructed or adapted or to be so used , 
that the water supplied t o him by the Council is or is likely to be wasted, misused or unduly consumed, or 
contaminated before use, or that foul air or any impure matter is likely to return into any pipe belonging 
to, or connected with, a pipe belonging to the Council.  
(2) If any water fittings which any person is liable to maintain is in such a condition, or so constructed 
or adapted as aforesaid, the Chairperson, without prejudice to his right to proceed against the person 
under  any other provision of this Act may require that person to carry out any necessary repairs or 
alterations and if he fails to do so within forty -eight hours, may himself carry out the work and recover 
from him the expenses reasonably incurred by him in so doing, as an arrear of tax.  
165. Power to enter premises to detect waste or misuse of water .—The Chairperson or any 
municipal officer authorised by the Chairperson in writing may, between sunrise and sun set, enter any 
premises supplied with water by the Council in order to examine if there be any waste or misuse of such 
water and the Chairperson or such officer shall not be refused admittance to the premises nor shall be 
obstructed by any person in making  his examination.  
166. Power to test water fittings .—The Chairperson may test any water fitting used in connection 
with water supplied by the Council.  
167. Power to close or restrict use of water from polluted source of supply .—(1) If the 
Chairperson is of opinion that the water in or obtained from any well, tank or other source of supply not 
vested in  the Council, being water which is or is likely to be used for domestic purposes, or for the 
preparation of food or drink for human consumption, is or is likely to become so polluted as to be 
prejudicial to health, the Chairperson may, after giving the own er or occupier of the premises in which the 
source of supply is situated a reasonable opportunity of being heard, by order, direct that the source of 
supply be permanently or temporarily closed or cut off or the water therefrom be used for certain 
purposes  only or make such order as appears to him necessary to prevent injury or danger to the health of 
persons using the water or consuming food or drink prepared therewith or therefrom.  57 
 (2) Before making any  order under this section, the Chairperson may cause the water to be analysed 
at the cost of the Council.  
(3) If the person to whom an order is made under this section fails to comply ther ewith, the 
Chairperson may do whatever may be necessary for giving effect to the order, and any expenses 
reasonably incurred by him in so doing may be recovered by him from the person in default as an arrear 
of tax under this Act.  
168. Water pipes, etc., not to be plac ed where water will be polluted .—(1) No water pipes shall be 
laid in a drain or on the surface of an open channel or house gully or within six meters of a cesspool or in 
any position where the pipe is likely to be injured or the water therein polluted; and no well or tank and 
except with the consent of the Chairperson, no cistern shall be constructed within six meters of a latrine, 
or cesspool.  
(2) No latrine, or cesspool shall be constructed or made within six meters of any well, tank, water 
pipe or cistern or in any position where the pipe, well, tank or cistern is likely to be injured or the water 
therein polluted.  
169. Power to cut off private water supply or to turn off water .—(1) The Chairperson may, 
subject to the conditions laid down in this behalf in the bye -laws, cut off or turn off water supply from 
any municipal water work to any premises or part thereof to which a private water supply is furnished by 
the Council.  
(2) The expenses of cutt ing off or turning off water supply shall be paid by the owner or occupier of 
premises and shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
170. Joint and several liabil ity of owners and occupiers for offence in relation to water 
supply .—If any offence relating to water supply is committed under this Act on any premises connected 
with the municipal water works, the owner, the person primarily liable for the payment of pro perty tax 
and occupiers of the said premises shall be jointly and severally liable for such offence.  
Drainage and sew erage 
171. Public drains, etc., to vest in the Council .—(1) All public drains, all drains in, alongside or 
under any public street, and all sewage collection works, whether constructed out of the New Delhi 
Municipal Fund or otherwise and all works, materials and  things appertaining thereto, which are situated 
in New Delhi shall vest in the Council.  
(2) All public and other drains which are vested in the Council are hereafter in this Act referred to as 
municipal  drains.  
(3) For the purposes of enlarging, deepening or otherwise repairing or maintaining any such drain or 
sewage collection work so much of the sub -soil appertaining thereto as may be necessary for th e said 
purpose shall be deemed all so to vest in the Council.  
(4) All drains and ventilation shafts, pipes and all appliances and fittings connected with the drainage 
works constructed, erected or set up  out of the New Delhi Municipal Fund in or upon premises not 
belonging to the Council whether — 
(a) before or after the commencement of this Act, and  
(b) for the use of the owner or occupier of such premises or not,  
shall, unless the Council has otherwise determined, or does at any time otherwise determine, vest and be 
deemed always to have vested in the Council.  
172. Control of drains and sewage collection works .—(1) All municipal drains, all sewage 
collection and all works, materials and things appertaining thereto shall be under the control of the  
Chairperson.  
(2) The Chairperson shall maintain and keep in repair all municipal drains and sewage collection 
works and when authorised by the council, shall construct as many new drains and sewage coll ection 
works as may from time to time be necessary for effectual drainage and sewage collection.  58 
 173. Certain matters not to be passed into municipal drains .—(1) No person shall throw, empty, 
or turn into any municipal drain or into any drain communicating with a munic ipal drain — 
(a) any matter likely to injure the drain or to interfere with the free fl ow of its contents, or to 
affect prejudicially the treatment and disposal of its contents; or  
(b) any chemical, refuse or waste steam, or any liquid of a temperature higher than forty -five 
degrees centigrade, being refuse or steam which, or a liquid which when so heated, is, either alone or 
in combination with the contents of the drain, dangerous, or the cause of a nuisance, or prejudicial to 
health; or  
(c) any dangerous petroleum.  
(2) In this section, the expression “dangerous petroleum ” has the same meaning as in the Petroleum 
Act, 1934 (30 of 1934).  
174. Application by owners and occupiers to drain into municipal drains .—(1) Subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed by bye -laws made in this behalf, the owner or occupier of any premises 
having a private drain, or the owner of any private drain within New Delhi may apply to the Chairperson 
to have his drain made to communicate with the municipal drains and thereby to discharge foul water and 
surface water from those premises or that privat e drain:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall entitle any person — 
(a) to discharge directly or indir ectly into any municipal drain — 
(i) any trade effluent from any trade premises except in accordance with bye -laws made in 
this behalf; or  
(ii) any liquid or other matter the discharge of which into municipal drains is prohibited by or 
under t his Act or any other law; or  
(b) where separate municipal drains are provided for foul water and for surface water to di scharge 
directly or indirectly — 
(i) foul water into a drain provided for surface water; or  
(ii) except with the permission of the Chairperson, surface water into a drain provided for 
foul water; or  
(c) to have his drains made to communicate directly with a strom -water overflow drain.  
(2) Any person desirous of availing himself of the provisions of sub -section  (1) shall give to the 
Chairperson notice of his proposals, and at any time within one month after receipt thereof, the 
Chairperson may by notice to him refuse to permit the communication to be made, if it appears to him 
that the  mode of construction or condition of the drain is such that the making of the communication 
would be prejudicial to the drainage system, and for the purpose of examining the mode of construction 
and condition of the drain he may, if necessary, require it to be laid open for inspection.  
(3) The Chairperson may, if he thinks fit, construct such parts of the work necessary for having a 
private drain made to communicate with a municipal drain, as is in or under a public street and in such a 
case, the expenses incurred by the Chairperson shall be paid by the owner or occupier of the premises, or 
as the case may be, the owner of the private drain and shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier as 
an arrea r of tax under this Act.  
175. Drainage of and drained premises .—(1) Where any premises are in the opinion of the 
Chairperson, without sufficient means o f effectual drainage and a municipal drain or some place approved 
by the Chairperson for the discharge of filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter is situated at a 
distance of not exceeding thirty meters from any part of the said premises, he may, by written notice, 
require the owner of the said premises — 
(a) to make a drain emptying into such municipal drain or place;  
(b) to provide and set up all  such appliances and fittings as may appear to the Chairperson 
necessary for the purposes of gathering and receiving the filth and other polluted and obnoxious 59 
 matter from, and conveying the same off, the said premises and of effectually flushing such drai n and 
every fixture connected therewith;  
(c) to remove any existing drain or other appliance or thing used or intended to be used for 
drainage which is injurious to health;  
(d) to provide a closed drain in substitution of an open drain or to provide such other appliance or 
thing either newly or in substitution of any existing appliance or thing or to provide both a close drain 
and such other appliance or thing in substitution of the existing open drain and other appliance or 
thing, which is or is likely to be injurious to health;  
(e) to provide and set up all such appliances and fittings as may appear to the Chairperson to be 
necessary for the purpose of gathering and receiving the waste water from floors and galleries of 
buildings when they are washed, and conveying the same through spouts, by down -take pipes so as to 
prevent such waste water from disc harging directly on streets or inside any lower portion of the 
premises;  
(f) to carry out any work to improve or re -model an existing drain which is inadequate, 
insufficient or faulty.  
(2) Where in any case not provided for in sub -section ( 1) any premises are, in the opinion of the 
Chairperson, without sufficient means of effectual drainage, he may, by written notice, req uire the owner 
of the premises — 
(a) to construct a drain up to a point to be prescribed in such notice but not at a distance of more 
than thirty meters from any part of the premises; or  
(b) to construct a closed cesspool or soakage pit and drain or drains emptying into such cesspool 
or soakage pit.  
(3) Any requisition for the construction of any drain under sub -sectio n (2) may contain any of the 
details specified in sub -section ( 1). 
176. New premises not to be erected without drains .—(1) It shall n ot be lawful to erect or to        
re-erect any premises in New Delhi or to o ccupy any such premises unless — 
(a) a drain be constructed of such size, materials and description, at such level and with such fall 
as shall a ppear to the Chairperson to be necessary for the effectual drainage of such premises;  
(b) there have been provided and set up on such premises such appliances and fittings as may 
appear to the Chairperson  to be necessary for the purposes of gathering or receiving the filth and other 
polluted and obnoxious matter from, and conveying the same off, the said premises and of effectually 
flushing the drain of the said premises and every fixture connected therewi th. 
(2) The drain so constructed shall empty into a municipal drain situated at a distance of not exceeding 
thirty meters from the premises; but if no municipal drain is situated within that distance then  such drain 
shall empty into a cesspool situated within that distance to be specified by the Chairperson for the 
purpose.  
177. Power to drain group or block of premises by combined operations .—(1) If it appears to the 
Chairperson that any group or block of premises may be drained more economically or advantageously in 
combination than separately, and a municipal drain of sufficient size already exists or  is about to be 
constructed within thirty meters of any part of that group or block of premises, the Chairperson may cause 
that group or block of premises to be drained by a combined operation.  
(2) The e xpenses incurred in carrying out any work under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any group or 
block of premises shall be paid by the owners of such premises in such proportions as the Chairperson 
may determine and shall be recoverable from them as an arrear o f tax under this Act.  
(3) Not less than fifteen days before any such work is commenced, the Chairperson  shall give to each 
such owner — 
(a) written  notice of the nature of the proposed work, and  60 
 (b) an estimate of the expenses to be incurred in respect thereof and of the proportion of such 
expenses payable by him.  
(4) The Chairperson may require the owners of such groups or block of premises to maintain the work 
executed under this section.  
178. Power of Chairperson to close or limit the use of pri vate drains in certain cases .—Where a 
drain connecting any premises with a municipal drain is sufficient for the effectual drainage of such 
premises and is otherwise unobjectionable but is not in the opinion of the Chairperson, adapted to the 
general syste m of drainage in New Delhi, he may, by written notice addressed to the owner of the 
premi ses, direct — 
(a) that such drain be closed, discontinued or destroyed and that any work necessary for that 
purpose be done; or  
(b) that such drain shall, from such date as may be specified in the notice in this behalf, be used 
for filth and polluted water only or for  rain water and unpolluted sub -soil water only:  
Provided that — 
(i) no drain may be closed, discontinued or destroyed by the Chairperson under clause ( a) except 
on condition of his providing another drain equally effectual for the drainage of the premises and 
communicating with any municipal drain which he thinks fit; and  
(ii) the expenses of the construction of any drain so provided by the Council and of any work 
done under clause ( a) may be pai d out of the New Delhi Municipal Fund.  
179. Use of drain b y a person other than the owner .—(1) Where the Chairperson either on receipt 
of an application  from the owner of any premises or otherwise is of the opinion that the only, or the most 
convenient means of effectual drainage of the premises into a municipal drain is through a drain 
belonging to another person, the Chairperson may by notice in writing  require the owner of such drain to 
show cause within a period specified in the notice as to why an order under this section should not be 
made.  
(2) Where no cause is shown within the specified period or the cause shown appears to the 
Chairperson invalid or insufficient, the Chairperson may by order in writing either authorise the owner of 
the premises to use the drain or declare him to be a joint owner thereof.  
(3) An order made under sub -section ( 2) may contain directions as to — 
(a) the payment of rent or compensation by the owner of the premises;  
(b) the construction of a drain for the premises for the purpose of connecting it with the aforesaid 
drain;  
(c) the entry upon the land in which the aforesaid drain is situate with assistants and workmen a t 
all reasonable hours;  
(d) the respective responsibilities of the parties for maintaining, repairing, flushing, cleaning and 
emptying the aforesaid drain.  
180. Sewage and rain water drains to be distinct .—Whenever it is provided in this Chapter that 
steps shall or may be taken for the effectual drainage of any premises, it shall be competent to the 
Chairperson to require that there shall be one drain fo r filth and polluted water and an entirely distinct 
drain for rain water and unpolluted sub -soil water or both rain water and unpolluted sub -soil water, each 
emptying into separate municipal drains or other suitable places.  
181. Power of Chairperson to require owne r to carry out certain works for satisfactory 
drainage .—For the purpose of efficient drainage of any premises, the Chairpe rson may, by notice in 
writing— 
(a) require any courtyard, alley or passage between two or more buildings to be paved by the 
owner or owners of such buildings with such materials and in such manner as may be approved by the 
Chairperson, and  
(b) require such pavi ng to be kept in proper repair.  61 
 Collection of sewage  
182. Appointment of places for the emptying of drains and collection of sewage .—The 
Chairperson may cause any or all of the municipal drains to empty into, and all sewage to be collected of 
at, such place or places as he considers suitable:  
Provided that no place which has not been before the commencement of this Act used for any of t he 
purposes specified in this section shall, after such commencement be used therefor without the approval 
of the Council:  
Provided further that on and after such date as may be appointed by the Central Government in this 
behalf no sewage shall be discharg ed into any water course until it has been so treated as not to affect 
prejudicially the purity and quality of the water into which it is discharged.  
Miscellaneous  
183. Connection with water works and dr ains not to be made without permission .—Without the 
written permission of the Chairperson, no person shall, for any purpose whatsoever, at any time make or 
cause to be made any connection or communication with any drain referred to in section 172 or any wa ter 
works, constructed or maintained by, or vested in, the Council.  
184. Building , railways and private streets not to be erected or constructed over drains or water 
works without permission .—(1) Without the written permission of the Chairperson no railway or private 
street shall be constructed and no building, wall, fence or other structure shall be erected on any 
municipal drain or on any water works constructed or maintained by, or vested in, the Council.  
(2) If any railway or private street be constructed or any building, wall, fence or structure erected on 
any drain or water works as aforesaid without the written permission of the Chairperson, the Chairperson 
may remove or otherwise deal with the same as he may think fit.  
(3) The expenses incurred by the Chairperson in so doing shall be paid b y the owner of the private 
street or of the building, fence, wall or other structure or, as the case may be, by the railway 
administration or the person offending and shall be recoverable as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
185. Rights of user of property for aqueducts, lines, etc .—(1) The Chairperson may place and 
maintain aqueducts, conduits and lines of mains or pipes or drains over, under, along or a cross any 
immovable property whether within or without the local limits of the Council without acquiring the same, 
and may at any time for the purpose of examining, repairing, altering or removing any aqueducts, 
conduits or lines of mains or pipes or drain s, enter on any property over, under, along or across which the 
aqueducts, conduits or lines of mains or pipes, or drains have been placed:  
Provided that the Council shall not acquire any right other than a right of user in the property over, 
under, along or across which any aqueduct, conduit or line of mains or pipes, or drain is placed.  
(2) The powers conferred by sub -section ( 1) shall not be exercisable in respect of any property vested 
in the Union or  under the control or management of the Central Government or railway administration or 
vested in any local authority save with the permission of the Central Government or railway 
administration or the local authority, as the case may be, and in accordance  with any bye -laws made in 
this behalf:  
Provided that the Chairperson may, without such permission, repair, renew or amend any existing 
works of which the character or position is not to be altered if such repair, renewal or amendment is 
urgently necessary  in order to maintain without interruption the supply of water, drainage or collection of 
sewage or is such that delay would be dangerous to health, human life or property.  
(3) In exercise of the powers c onferred upon him by this section, the Chairperson shall cause as little 
damage and inconvenience as may be possible, and shall make full compensation for any damage or 
inconvenience caused by him.  
186. Power of owner of premises to place pipes and drains through land belonging to other 
persons .—(1) If it appears to the Chairperson that the only or most convenient means of water supply to, 
and drainage o f, any premises is by placing or carrying any pipe or drains over, under, along or across the 62 
 immovable property of another person, the Chairperson may, by order in writing, authorise the owner of 
the premises to place or carry such pipe or drain over, und er, along or across such immovable property:  
Provided that before making any such order the Chairperson shall give  to the owner of the immovable 
property a reasonable opportunity of showing cause within such time as may be prescribed by bye -laws 
made in this behalf as to why the order should not be made:  
Provided further that the owner of the premises shall not acquire any right other than a right of user in 
the property over, under, along or across which any such pipe or drain is placed or carried.  
(2) Upon the making of an order, under sub -section ( 1), the owner of the premises may, after giving 
reasonable notice of his intention so to do, enter upon the immovable property with assistants and 
workmen a t any time between sunrise and sunset for the purpose of placing a pipe or drain over, under, 
along or across such immovable property or for the purpose of repairing the same.  
(3) In placing or carrying a pipe or drain under this section, as little damage as possible shall be done 
to the immovable property and t he owner of the premises shall — 
(a) cause the pipe or drain to be placed or carried with the l east practicable delay;  
(b) fill in, re -instate and make good at his own cost and with the least practicable delay, any land 
opened, broken up or removed for the purpose of placing or carrying such pipe o r drain; and  
(c) pay compensation to the owner of the immovable property and to any other person who 
sustains damage by reason of the placing or carrying of such pipe or drain.  
(4) If the owner of the immovable property, over, under, along or across which a pipe or drain has 
been placed or carried under this section whilst such immovable property was not built upon, desires to 
erect any building on such property, the Chairperson shall, by notice in writing, require the owner of the 
premises to close, remove or divert the pipe or drain in such manner as shall be approved by him and to 
fill in, re -instate and make good the immovable property as if the pipe or drain had not been placed or 
carried over, under, along or across the same:  
Provided that no such requisition shall be made unless in the opinion of the Chairperson it is 
necessary or expedient for the construction of the proposed building or the safe e njoyment thereof that the 
pipe or drain should be closed, removed or diverted.  
187. Power to require railway level, etc., to be raised or lowered .—If the Council places or carries 
any pipe or drain or does any other work connected with the water supply or drainage across any railway 
line, it may, with the sanction of the Central Government and at the cost of the New Delhi Municipal 
Fund, require the railway administration to raise or lower the level the reof. 
188. Power of Chairperson to execute work after giving notice to the person liable .—(1) When 
under the provisions of this Chapter any person may be required or is liable to execute any work, the 
Chairperson may, in accordance with the provisions of this Act and of any bye -laws made in this behalf, 
cause such work to be executed after giving such person an opportunity of executing the same within such 
time as may be specified by him for this purpose.  
(2) The expenses incurred or likely to be incurred by the Chairperson in the execution of any such 
work shall be payable by the said person and the expens es incurred by the Chairperson in connection with 
the maintenance of such work or the enjoyment of amenities and conveniences rendered possible by such 
work shall be payable by the person or persons enjoying such amenities and conveniences.  
(3) The expenses referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be recoverable from the person or persons liable 
therefor as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
189. Power of Chai rperson to affix shafts, etc., for ventilation of drain or cesspool .—For the 
purpose of ventilating any drain or cesspool, whether vested in Council or not, the Chairperson may, in 
accordance with bye -laws made in this behalf, erect upon any premises or af fix to the outside of any 
building or to any tree any such shaft or pipe as may appear to him to be necessary.  
190. Power of Chairperson to examine and test drains, etc., believed to be defective .—(1) Where 
it appears to the Chairperson that there are reasonable grounds for believing that a private drain or 
cesspool is in such condition as to be prejudicial to health or a nuisance or that a private d rain 63 
 communicating directly or indirectly with a municipal drain is so defective as to admit sub -soil water, he 
may examine its condition, and for that purpose may apply any test, other than a test by water under 
pressure, and if he deems it necessary, ope n the ground.  
(2) If on examination the drain or cesspool is found to be in proper condition, the Chairperson shall, 
as soon as possible, re -instate any ground which has been opened by him and make good any damage 
done by him.  
191. Bulk receipt of water and de livery of sewage by the Council .—(1) The Council shall receive 
bulk supply of water from, and deliver in bulk all the sewage to, the authority prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The Council shall be entitled to receive bulk supply of water from, and to deliver in bulk all the 
sewage to, th e authority prescribed under sub -section ( 1) subject to such charges for the supply of water 
in bulk to the Council and the delivery of sewage of the area of New Delhi as may be determined by 
means of an agreement entered into between that other authority and the Council. The agreement 
mentioned in this sub-section  shall provide also for a stipulation therein that in case of any dispute about 
the payments to be made to that other authority by the Council, the matter shall be referred to the Central 
Government whose decision thereon shall be final and binding on both  parties.  
192. Employment of Government agencies for repairs, etc .—The Central Government may for 
reason to be recorded, direct that any specified work, repair, renewal or replacement which is to be 
under taken by or for the Council under this Chapter, shall be carried out on behalf of the Council by the 
Central Government and the Council shall pay the charges therefor at the rates and subject to the terms for 
the time being applicable in the case of works constructed by that Government on behalf of a local 
authority.  
193. Work to be done by licensed plumber .—(1) No person other than a licensed plumber sha ll 
execute any work described in this Chapter and no person shall permit any such work to be executed 
except by a licensed plumber:  
Provided that if, in the opinion of the Chairperson, the work is of a trivial nature, he may grant 
permission in writing for  the execution of such work by a person other than a licensed plumber.  
(2) Every person who employs a licensed plumber to execute any work shall, when so required, 
furnish to the Chairperson the name of s uch plumber.  
(3) When any work is executed except in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), such 
work shall be liable to be dismantled at the discretion of the Chairperson without prejudice to  the right of 
the Council to prosecute under this Act the person at whose instance such work has been executed.  
(4) The Council may make bye-laws for the guidance of licensed plumb ers and a copy of all su ch 
bye-laws shall be attached to every licence granted to a plumber by the Council.  
(5) The Council may, from time to time, prescribe the charges to be paid to licensed plumbers for any 
work done by them  under or for any of the purposes of this Chapter.  
(6) No licensed plumber shall, for any work referred to in sub -section ( 5), demand or receive more 
than the charges prescribed therefor, under that sub-section.  
(7) The Council shall make by e-laws providing for — 
(a) the exercise of adequate control on all licensed plumbers;  
(b) the inspection of all works carried out by them; and  
(c) the hearing and disposal of complaints made by the owners or occupiers of premises with 
regard to the quality of work done, material used, delay in execution of work, and the charges made, 
by a licensed plumber.  
(8) No licensed plumber shall contravene any of the bye -laws made under this sectio n or execute 
carelessly or negligently any work under this Act or make use of bad materials appliances or fittings.  
(9) If any licensed plumber contravenes sub -section ( 8), his licence may be suspended or  cancelled 
whether he is prosecuted under this Act or not.  64 
 194. Prohibition of certain acts .—(1) No person shall — 
(a) wilfully obstruct any person acting under the authority of the Council, or the Chairperson, in 
setting out the lines of any works or pull up or remove any pillar, post or stake fixed in the ground for 
the purpose of setting out lines of such work, or deface or destroy any works made for the same 
purpose; or  
(b) wilfully or negligently break, injure, turn on, open, close, shut off or otherwise interfere  with 
any lock, cock, valve, pipe, meter or other work or apparatus belonging to the Council; or  
(c) unlawfully obstruct the flow of or flush, draw off, or divert, or take water from any water 
work belong ing to the Council; or  
(d) unlawfully obstruct the flow of, or flush, draw off, divert or take sewage from any sewage 
work belonging to the Council or break or damage any electrical transmission line mai ntained by the 
Council; or  
(e) obstruct any officer or other employee of the Council in the discharge of his duties under this 
Chapter or refuse or wilfully  neglect to furnish him with the means necessary for the making of any 
entry, inspection, examination or inquiry thereunder in relation to any water or sewage work; or  
(f) bathe in, at or upon any water w ork or wash or throw or cause to enter therein any animal, or 
throw any rubbish, dirt or filth into any water work or wash or clean therein any cloth, wool or leather 
or the skin of any animal, or cause the water of any sink, or drain or any steam -engine o r boiler or any 
polluted water to turn or be brought into any water work, or do any other act whereby the water in any 
water work is fouled or likely to be fouled.  
(2) Nothing in clause ( b) of sub -sectio n (1) shall apply to a consumer closing the stopcock fixed on 
the service pipe supplying water to his premises so long as he has obtained the consent of any other 
consumer whose supply will be affected thereby.  
CHAPTER XII  
ELECTRICITY SUPPLY  
195. Functions in relation to electricity supply .—(1) It shall be the duty of the Council to develop 
and maintain an efficient, co -ordinated and economical system of  electricity supply for New Delhi area 
under its jurisdiction and for that purpose t o take steps from time to time — 
(a) acquiring supplies of electricity and its distribution to consumers;  
(b) for preparing and carrying out in accordance with rules made in this behalf schemes for 
distribution of electricity.  
(2) In the discharge of its functions in relation to electricity supply, the Counci l shall, as far as 
practicable — 
(a) promote the use of all economical methods of transmitting and distributing electricity;  
(b) secure the development of supplies of electricity;  
(c) secure the extension of supplies of electricity to areas without such supplies;  
(d) promote the standardisation of systems of supply and types of electrical fittings;  
(e) promote the simplification and standardisation of methods of charge for supplies of electricity.  
196. Additional functions in relation to electricity supply .—(1) The Council may take steps to 
manufacture, purchase, sell or let on hire on the execution of a hire purchase agreement or otherwise, any 
electrical machinery, control gear, fittings, wires or apparatus for lighting, heating, cooling or motive 
power or for any other purpose for which electricity can or may be used, or any industrial or agricultural 
machin ery operated by electricity, and to install, connect, repair, maintain or remove such machinery, 
control gear, fitting, wires or apparatus and in respect thereof demand and take such remuneration or rents 
and charges and make such terms and conditions as i t deems fit.  
(2) The Council may also maintain shops and show rooms for the display, sale or hire of machinery, 
control gear, fittings, wires or apparatus as aforesaid, conduct displays, exhibitions and d emonstrations 65 
 thereof and generally do all things, including advertising incidental to the sale or hire of such machinery, 
control gear, fittings, wires and apparatus and to the promotion and encouragement of the use of 
electricity.  
(3) Moneys received and expended in connection with additio nal functions specified in                       
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be shown separately in the accounts.  
197. Council to have powers and obligations of licensee under Act 9 of 1910 .—Subject to the 
provision of this Act the Council shall in respect of the New Delhi areas under its jurisdiction have all the 
powers and obligations of a licensee under the Elect ricity Act, 1910, and this Chapter shall be deemed to 
be the licence of the Counci l for the purposes of that Act:  
Provided that nothing in sections 3 to 12 of, or in clauses I to IX of the Schedule to, that Act relating 
to the duties and obligations of a l icensee shall apply to the Council.  
198. Restriction on building and other acts interfering with the works of electric supply .—
(1) No building, wall or  other structure shall be newly erected and no street or railway shall be 
constructed over, or in such a manner as to interfere with, any work constructed or maintained for the 
purposes of the electric supply except with the written permission of the Chair person.  
(2) The Chairperson may cause any building, wall or other structure erected, or any street or railway 
constructed in contravention of sub -section ( 1), to be removed or otherwise dealt with as he deems fit, and 
the expenses incurred therefor shall be paid by the person or authority responsible and shall be 
recoverable from such person or authority as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
199. Power of Council to make arrangements with licensees .—(1) The Council may enter into an 
agreement with any licensee within or outside New Delhi in regard to the purchase of electricity and price 
thereof and within  New Delhi in regard to sale and price thereof or in regard to operation or control of any 
generating station or main transmission line and notwithstanding anything contained in any law or in any 
licence, memorandum of association or other instrument regul ating the constitution and powers of the 
licensee, it shall be lawful for the licensee to enter into and carry out any agreement.  
(2) In entering into an agreement under this section the Council shall no t show any undue preference 
to any licensee.  
200. Charges for supply of electricity .—Subject to the provisions of any law for the time being in 
force, charges shall be leviable for the supply of electrici ty by the Council at such rates as may, from time 
to time, be fixed by the Council.  
201. Bulk receipt of electricity by the Council .—(1) The Council sh all receive bulk supply of 
electricity from the authority which may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Council shall be entitled to receive bulk supply of electricity from that authority pre scribed by 
the Central Government subject to such terms and conditions as may be determined by means of a 
contract entered into between that other authority and the Council. The contract  mentioned in this        
sub-section shall provide also for a stipula tion therein that disputes between that other authority and the 
Council in regard to any matter relating to the bulk supply of electricity to the Council shall be referred to 
the Central Government whose decision thereon shall be fin al and binding on both parties.  
CHAPTER XIII  
STREETS  
Construction, maintenance and improvement of streets  
202. Vesting of public streets in the Council .—(1) All streets within New Delhi which are or at any 
time become public streets and the pavements, stones and other materials thereof shall vest in the 
Council:  
Provided that no public street which immediately before the commencement of this Act vested in the 
Union shall,  unless the Central Government with the consent of the Council so directs, vest in the Council 
by virtue of this sub -section.  66 
 (2) All public streets vesting in the Council shall be under the control of t he Chairperson and shall be 
maintained, controlled and regulated by him in accordance with the bye -laws made in this behalf.  
203. Functions of Chairperson in respect of public streets .—(1) The Chairperson shall, from time 
to time, cause all public streets vested in the Council to be levelled, metalled or paved, channelled, altered 
or repaired, and may widen, extend or otherwise improve a ny such street or cause the soil thereof to be 
raised, lowered or altered or may place and keep in repair fences and posts for the safety of foot 
passengers:  
Provided that no widening, extension or other improvement of a public street, the aggregate cost o f 
which will exceed one lakh rupees, shall be undertaken by the Chairperson except with the previous 
sanction of the Council.  
(2) With the previous sanction of the Council, the Chairperson may permanently  close the whole or 
any part of a public street:  
Provided that before according such sanction the Council shall by notice, published in the manner 
specified by bye -laws give reasonable opportunity to the residents likely to be affected by such closure to 
make suggestions or objections with respect to such closure and shall consider all such suggestions or 
objections which may be made within one month from the date of publication of the said notice.  
204. Disposal of land forming site of public streets permanently closed .—Whenever any public 
street or a part thereof is permanently closed under sub -section ( 2) of section 203 the site of such street or 
of the portion thereof may be disposed of as land vesting i n the Council.  
205. Power to make new public streets .—The Chairperson may at any time with the pre vious 
sanction of the Council, — 
(a) lay out and make ne w public streets;  
(b) construct bridges and sub -ways;  
(c) turn or divert any existing public street; and  
(d) lay down and determine the position and direction of a street or streets in any part of New 
Delhi notwithstanding that no proposal for the erection of any building in the vicinity has been 
received.  
206. Minimum width of new public streets .—The Chairperson shall, from time to time, with the 
sanction of council, specify the minimum width of different classes of new public streets according to the 
nature  of the traffic likely to be carried thereon, and the streets with which they join at one or both ends, 
the localities in which they are situated, the heights up to which buildings abutting thereon may be erected 
and other similar considerations.  
207. Power to prohibit or regulate use of public streets for certain kind of traffic .—(1) The 
Chairperson may — 
(a) prohibit or regulate vehicular traffic in any public street or any portion thereof so as to prevent 
danger, obstruction or inconvenience to the public or to ensure decongestion or smooth flow or 
quietne ss in any locality;  
(b) prohibit or regulate in respect of all public streets, or any particular public street, the transit of 
any vehicle of such form, construction weight or size or laden with such hea vy or unwieldly objects 
as may be likely to cause injury to th e road -ways or any construction thereon, except under such 
conditions as to time, mode of traction or locomotion, use of appliances for the protection of 
roadways, number of lights and assistant s and other general precautions and upon the payment of 
such charges as may be specified by the Chairperson generally or specially in each case; and  
(c) prohib it or regulate access to premises from any pa rticular public street carrying high speed 
vehicular traffic:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall not take action without sanction of the Council in cases under 
clauses ( a) and ( c). 67 
 (2) Notices of such pr ohibition as are imposed under sub -section ( 1) shall be posted in conspicuous 
places at or near both ends of public streets or portions thereof to which they relate, unless such 
prohibition applies generally to all public streets.  
208. Power to acquire lands and buildings for public streets and for public parking places .—  
(1) Subject to the provisions contained in Chapter X, the Chairperson may — 
(a) acquire any land required for the purpose of opening, widening, extending or otherwise 
improving any public street or of making any new public street, and any building standing upon such 
land;  
(b) acquir e in relation to any such land or building, all such land with buildings, if any, thereon as 
the Council may think expedient to acquire outside of the regular line, or of the intended regular line, 
of such street;  
(c) acquire any land for the purpose of laying out or making a public parking place.  
209. Defining the regular line of streets .—(1) The Chairperson may define a line on one or both 
sides of any public street in ac cordance with the bye -laws made in this behalf and may, with the previous 
sanction of the Council, redefine at any time any such regular line:  
Provided that, before according sanc tion the Council shall by public notice afford reasonable 
opportunity to the residents or premises abutting on such public street to make suggestions or objections 
with respect to the proposed redefined line of the street and shall consider all such sugges tions or 
objections which may be made within one month from the date of the publication of the said notice:  
Provided further that the regular line of any public street operative under any law in force in any part 
of New Delhi immediately before the commenc ement of this Act shall be deemed to be a line defined by 
the Chairperson under this sub -section.  
(2) The line for the time being defined or redefined shall be called the regular line of street.  
(3) No person shall construct or reconstruct any building or a portion thereof or any boundary wall or 
other structure whatsoever within the regular line of a street except with the written permission of the 
Chai rperson:  
Provided that if within sixty days after the receipt of application from any person for permission to 
construct or reconstruct a boundary wall or portion thereof, the Chairperson fails to take steps to acquire 
the land within the regular line of t he street in the accordance with section 212, then that person may, 
subject to any other provisions of this Act and the bye -laws made thereunder, proceed with the work of 
construction or reconstruction of such boundary wall or portion thereof.  
(4) When the Chairperson grants permission for the construction or reconstruction of any building or 
any boundary wall or other structure within the regular line of a street, he may require the owner of the 
building to execute an agreement binding himself and his successors -in-interest not to claim 
compensation in the event of the Chairperson at any time thereafter calling upon him or any of his 
successors by written notice to remove any work carried out in pursuance of such permission and to pay 
the expenses of such removal if, in default, such removal is carried out by the Chairperson and may for 
that purpose require such owner to deposit in the New Delhi Municipal Fund such sum as may be 
determined by him.  
(5) The Chairperson shall maintain — 
(a) a register containing such particulars as may be specified by him in this behalf with plans 
attached thereto showing all  public streets in respect of which the regular line of the street has been 
defined or redefined and containing any other particulars which the Chairperson may deem necessary;  
(b) a register of all agreements executed under sub -section ( 4) and of all deposits made 
thereunder.  
(6) All such registers shall be open to inspection by any person on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed  by the Chairperson with the sanction of Council.  
(7) Any agreement entered into in pursuance of sub -section ( 4) shall be in writing, shall be registered 
under the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), and  shall be deemed to be an agreement in respect of the 68 
 land to which it relates and any condition contained in such agreement shall be deemed to be an 
obligation annexed to the ownership of the said land and enforceable against the successors -in-interest of  
the owner of such land.  
210. Setting back building to regular line of street .—(1) If any part of a building abutting on a 
public street is within the regular line of that street, the Chairperson may, whe never it is proposed — 
(a) to repair, rebuild or construct such building or to take down such building to an extent 
exceeding one -half thereof above the ground level, such half to be measured in cubic metres; or  
(b) to repair, re move, construct or reconstruct or make any additions to, or structural alterations 
of, any portion of such building which is within the regular line of the street,  
by any order which he issues concerning the addition to, rebuilding construction, repair or alterations of, 
such building, require such building to be set back to the regular line of the street.  
(2) When any building or any part thereof within the regular line of a public street falls down or is  
burnt down or is, whether by the order of the Chairperson or otherwise, taken down, the Chairperson may 
forthwith take possession on behalf of the Council of the portion of the land within the regular line of the 
street therefor occupied by the said build ing and, if necessary, clear the same.  
(3) Land acquired under this section shall be deemed to be part of the public street and shall vest in 
the Council.  
211. Compulsory setting back of building to regular line of street .—(1) Where any building or 
any part thereof is within the regular line of a public street and in the opinion of the Chairperson it is  
necessary to set back the building or part thereof to the regular line of the street he may, by notice served 
on the owner in accordance with the provisions of this Act, require him to show cause within such period 
as may be specified in the notice as to why such building or part thereof which is within the regular line 
of the street should not be pulled down and the land within the regular line acquired by the Chairperson 
on behalf of the Council.  
(2) If such owner fails to show cause as required by sub -section ( 1) the Chairperson may require the 
owner by another notice to be served on him in accordance with the provisions of this Act, to pull down 
the building or part thereof which is within the regular  line of the street within such period as is specified 
in the notice.  
(3) If within such period the owner of the building fails to pull down the  building or part thereof as 
required by the Chairperson, t he Chairperson may pull down the same and all the expenses incurred in so 
doing shall be paid by the owner and recoverable from him as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
(4) The Chairperson shall at once t ake possession on behalf of the Council of the portion of the land 
within the regular line of the street occupied by the said building or part thereof and such land shall 
thereupon be deemed to be part of the public street and shall vest in the Council.  
212. Acquisition of open land and land occupied by platform, etc., within the regular line of 
street .—If any land, whether open or enclosed, not vesting in the Council and not occupied by any 
building is within the regular line of a public street or if a platform, verandah, step, compound wall, hedge 
or fence or some other structure external to a building abutting on a public street or a portion of such 
platform, verandah, step, compound wall, hedge, fence  or other structure is within the regular line of such 
street, the Chairperson may, after giving to the owner of the land or building not less than seven clear 
days‟ notice of his intention so to do, take possession on behalf of the Council of the said lan d with its 
enclosing wall, hedge or fence, if any, or of the said platform, verandah, step, compound wall, hedge, 
fence or other structure or of any portion thereof which is within the regular line of the public street and, 
if necessary, clear the same and  the land so acquired shall thereupon be deemed to be a part of the public 
street and shall vest in the Council:  
Provided that where the land or building is vested in the Union or a State the Chairperson shall not 
take possession thereof without the previo us sanction of the Central Government.  
213. Acquisition of the remaining part of a building and land after their portions within a 
regular line of street have been acquired .—(1) Where a land or building is partly within the regular line 
of a public street and the Chairperson is satisfied that the land remaining after the excision of the portion 
within the said line will not be suitable or fit for any be neficial use, he may, at the request of the owner, 69 
 acquire such land in addition to the land within the said line and such surplus land shall be deemed to be a 
part of the public street and shall vest in the Council.  
(2) Such surplus land may thereafter, be utilised for the purpose of setting forward a building under 
section 214.  
214. Setting forward of buildings to the regular line of street .—The Chair person may, upon such 
terms as he thinks fit, allow any building to be set forward for the purpose of improving the regular line of 
a public street and may, with the approval of the Council, by notice require any building to be set forward 
in the case of r econstruction thereof or of a new construction.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section a wall separating any premises from a public street 
shall be deemed to be a building, and it shall be deemed a sufficient compliance with permission or 
requisition  to set forward a building to the regular line of a street if a wall of such material and 
dimensions as are approved by the Chairperson is erected along the said line.  
215. Compensation to be paid in cert ain cases of setting back or setting forward of buildings, 
etc.—(1) Compensation shall be paid by the Chairperson to the owner of any building or land acquired 
for a public street under the provisions of sections 210, 211 and 212 for any loss which such owner may 
sustain in consequence of his building or land being so acquired and for any expense incurred by such 
owner in consequence of any order made by the Chairperson:  
Provided that — 
(a) any increase or decrease in the value of the remainder of the property of which the building or 
land so acquired formed part, likely to accrue from the setting back to the regular line of the street 
shall be taken into consideration and allowed for in determining the amount of such compensation;  
(b) if any such increase in the value exceeds the amount of loss sustained or expenses incurred by 
the owner, the Chairperson may recover from him half the amount of such excess as a betterment 
charge.  
(2) If in consequence of any order to set forward a building made by the Chairperson the owner of 
such building sustains any loss or damage, compensation shall be paid to him by the Chairperson for such 
loss or damage after taking into account any increase in value likely to accrue from the setting forward.  
(3) If the additional land which will be included in the premises of any person required or permitted 
under sub -section ( 2) to set forward a building belongs to the Council, the order or permission of the 
Chairperson to set forward the building shall be a suffici ent conveyance to the said owner of the said land; 
and the price to be paid to the Council by the owner for such additional land and the other terms and 
conditions of the conveyance shall be set forth in the order or permission.  
(4) If, when the Chairperson requires any building to be set forward, the owner of the building is 
dissatisfied with the price fixed to be paid to the Council or with any of the terms or conditions of 
conveyance, the Chairperson s hall, upon the application of the owner at any time within fifteen days after 
the said terms and conditions are communicated to him, refer the case for the determination of the court 
of the district judge of Delhi whose d ecision thereon shall be final.  
Private streets  
216. Owner’ s obligation when dealing with land as building sites .—If the owner of any land 
utilises, sells, leases out or otherwise disposes of such land for the construction of buildings thereon he 
shall lay down and make a street or streets giving access to the plots into which the land may be divided 
and connecting with an existing public or private street.  
217. Lay-out plans .—(1) Before utilising, selling or otherwise dealing with any land under        
section 216, the owner thereof shall send to the Chairperson a written ap plication with a layout plan of the 
land showing the followi ng particulars, namely: — 
(a) the plots into which the land is proposed to be divided for the erection of buildings thereon 
and the purpose or purposes for which such buildings are to be used;  70 
 (b) the reservation or allotment of any site for any street, open space, park, recreation ground, 
school, market or any other public purpose;  
(c) the intended leve l, direction and width of street or streets;  
(d) the regular line of street or streets;  
(e) the arrang ement to be made for levelling , paving, metalling, flagging, channelling, sewering, 
draining, conserving and lighting street or streets.  
(2) The provisions of this Act and the bye-laws made thereunder as to width of the public streets  and 
the height of buildings abutting thereon, shall apply in the case of streets referred to in sub -section ( 1) and 
all the particulars referred to in that sub -section shall be subject to the sanction of the Council.  
(3) Within sixty days after the receipt of any application under sub -section  (1) the Council shall either 
accord sanction to the layout plan on such conditions as it may think fit or disall ow it or ask for further 
information with respect to it.  
(4) Such sanction shall be refused — 
(a) if the particulars shown in the lay -out plan would conf lict with any arrangement s which have 
been made or which are in the opinion of the Council likely to be made for carrying out any general 
scheme of development of New Delhi whether contained in the master plan or a zonal development 
plan prepared for New D elhi or not; or  
(b) if the said lay-out plan does not conform to the provisions of this Act and bye -laws made 
thereunder; or  
(c) if any street proposed in the plan is not designed so as to connect at one end with a street 
which is already open.  
(5) No person shall utilise, sell or otherwise deal with any land or lay-out or make any new street 
without or otherwise than in conformity with the orders of the Council and if further information is asked 
for, no step shall be taken to utilise, sell or otherwise deal with the land or to lay-out or make the street 
until orders have been passe d upon receipt of such information:  
Provided that the passing of such orders shall not be in any case delayed for more than sixty days 
after the Council has received the information which it considers necessary to enable it to deal with the 
said applicatio n. 
(6) The lay-out plan referred to earlier in this section, shall be prepared by an architect.  
218. Alteration or demolition of street made in breach o f section 217 .—(1) If any person lays-out 
or makes any street referred to in section 217 without or otherwise than in conformity with the orders of 
the Council, the Chairperson may, whether or not the offender be prosec uted under this Act, by notice — 
(a) require the offender to show cause by a written statement signed by him and sent to the 
Chairperson on or before such date as may be specified in the notice, why such street should not be 
altered to the satisfaction of the Chairperson or if such a lteration be impracticable, why such street 
should not be demolished; or  
(b) require the offender to appear before the Chairperson either personally or by a duly authorised 
agent on such day and at such time and place as may be specified in the notice and show cause as 
aforesaid.  
(2) If any person on whom such notice is served fails to show cause to the satisfaction of the 
Chairperson why such street sho uld not be so altered or demolished, the Chairperson may pass an order 
directing the alternation or demolition of such street.  
219. Power of Chairperson to order work to be carried out or to carry it out himself in 
default .—(1) If any private street or part thereof is not levelled, paved, metalled, flagged, chanelled, 
sewered, drained, conserved or lighted to the satisfaction of Chairperson, he may by not ice require the 
owners of such street or part and the owners of the lands and buildings fronting or abutting on such street 
or part to carry out any work which in his opinion may be necessary, and within such time as may be 
specified in such notice.  71 
 (2) If such work is not carried out within the time specified in the notice, the Chairperson, may, if he 
thinks fit, execute it and the expenses incurred shall be paid by the owners referred to in sub-section  (1) in 
such proportion as may be determined by the Chairperson and shall be recoverable from them as an arrear 
of tax under this Act.  
220. Right of owner to require streets to be declared public .—If any street has been levelled, 
paved, metalled, flagged, channelled, sewered, drained, conserved and lighted under the provisions of 
section 219, the Chairperson may, and on the requisition of a majority of the owners referred to in       
sub-section  (1) of that section shall, declare such a street to be a public street and thereupon the street 
shall vest in the Council.  
Encroachments on streets  
221. Prohibition of projections upon streets, etc .—(1) Except as provided in section 222, no person 
shall erect, set up, add to, or place against or in front of any premises any s tructure or fixture which wil l— 
(a) overhang, jut or project into, or in any way encroach upon, and obstruct in any way the safe or 
convenient passage of the public along any street, or  
(b) jut or project into or encroach upon any drain or open channel in any street so as in any way to 
interfere with the use or proper working of such drain or channel or to impede the inspection or 
cleansing thereof.  
(2) The Chairperson may by notice require the owner or occupier of any premises to remove, or to 
take such other action as he may direct in relation to, any structure or fixture which has been erected,        
set up, added to or placed against, or in front of, the said premises in contravention of this section.  
(3) If the occupier of the said premises removes or alters any structure or fixture in accordanc e with 
such notice, he shall be entitled, unless the structure or fixture was erected, set up or placed by himself, to 
credit into account with the owner of the premises for all reasonable expenses incurred by him in 
complying with the notice.  
222. Projections over streets may be permitted in certain cases .—(1) The Chairperson may give a 
written permission, on such terms and on payment of such fee as he  in each case thinks fit, to the owner 
or occupier of the b uilding abutting on any street — 
(i) to erect an arcade over such street or any portion thereof; or  
(ii) to put up a verandah, balcony, arch, connecting passage, sun -shade, weather frame, canopy, 
owning or other such structure or thing projecting from any storey over or across any street or po rtion 
thereof:  
Provided that no permission shall be given by the Chairperson for the erection of an arcade in any 
public street in which construction of an arcade has not been generally sanctioned by the Council.  
(2) The Chairperson may at any time by notice require the owner or occupier of any building to 
remove a verandah, balcony, sun -shade, weather frame or the like put up in accordance with the 
provisions of any law and such owner or occupier shall be bound to take action accordingly but shall be 
entitled to compensation for the loss caused to him by such removal and the cost incurred thereon.  
223. Ground floor doors, etc., not to open outwards on streets .—The Chair person may at any time 
by notice require the owner of any premises on the ground floor of which any door, gate, bar, or window 
opens outwards upon a street or upon any land required for the improvement of a street in such manner, as 
in the opinion of the C hairperson, to obstruct the safe or convenient passage of the public along such 
street, to have the said door, gate, bar or window altered so as not to open outwards.  
224. Prohibition of structures or fix tures which cause obstruction in street .—(1) No person shall, 
except with the permission of the Chairperson granted in this behalf, erect or set up any wall, fence, rail, 
post, step, booth or other struc ture whether fixed or movable or whether of a permanent or temporary 
nature, or any fixture in or upon any street or upon or over any open channel, drain, well or tank in any 
street so as to form an obstruction to, or an encroachment upon, or a projection over, or to occupy any 
portion of such street, channel, drain, well or tank.  72 
 (2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any erection or thing to which clause ( c) of sub-section  (1) of 
section 229 applies.  
225. Prohibition of deposit, etc., of things in streets .—(1) No person shall, except with the 
permission of the Chairperson and on payment of such fee as he in each case thinks fit, place or deposit 
upon any street, or upon any open channel, drain or well in any street or upon any public place any stall, 
chair, bench, box, ladder, bale, or other thing whatsoever so as to form an obstruction thereto or 
encroachment thereon.  
(2) Nothing in sub-section  (1) applies to building material.  
226. Power to remove anything deposited or exposed for sale in contravention of this Act .—The 
Chairperson may, witho ut notice, cause to be removed — 
(a) any stall, chair, bench, box, ladder, bale, or other thing whatsoever, placed, deposited, 
projected, attached or su spended in, upon, from or to any place in contravention of this Act.  
(b) any article whatsoever hawked or exposed for sale on any public street or in other public place 
in contravention of this Act and an y vehicle, package, box or any other thing in or on which such 
article is placed.  
227. Prohibition of the tethering of animals and milking of cattle .—(1) No person shall tether any 
animal or cause or permit the same to be tethered in any public street or public place.  
(2) No person shall milk or cause or permit to be milked any cow or buffalo in any street or public 
place.  
(3) Any animal tethered or any cow or buffalo found being milked as aforesaid in any street may be 
removed by the Chairperson or any municipal officer or employee and be impounded  and dealt with 
under the provisions of the Cattle -trespass Act, 1871 (1 of 1871).  
Provision concerning execution of works in or near to streets  
228. Precautions during repair of streets .—(1) The Chairperson shall, so far as is practicable, 
during the construction or repair of any public street, or any municipal drain or any premises vested in the 
Council— 
(a) cause the same to be fenced and guarded,  
(b) take proper precautions against accident by shoring up and protecting the adjoining buildings,  
(c) cause such bars, chains or posts to be fixed across or in any street in which any such work of 
construction or repair is under execution as are necessary in order to prevent the passage of vehicles 
or animals and avert danger.  
(2) The Chairperson shall cause such street, drain or premises to be sufficiently lighted or guarded 
during night while under construction or repair.  
(3) The Chairperson shall, with all reasonable speed, cause the said work to be completed, the ground 
to be filled in, the street, drain or premises to be repaired and the rubbish occasioned thereby to be 
removed.  
(4) No person shall, without the permission of the Chairperson or other lawful authority, remove any 
bar, chain, post or shorting, timber, or remove or extinguish any light set up under this section.  
229. Streets not to be opened or broken up and building materials not to be deposited thereon 
without permission .—(1) No person other than the Chairperson or a municipal officer or other municipal 
empl oyee shall, without the written  permission of the Chairperson — 
(a) open, break up, displace, take up or make any alteration in, or cause any injury to the soil or 
pavement or any wall, fence, post, chain or other materials or thing forming part of any street; or  
(b) deposit any building materials in any street; or  73 
 (c) set up in any street any scaffold or any temporary erection for the purpose of any work 
whatever, or any posts, bars, rails, boards or other things by way of an enclosure, for the purpose of 
making mortar or depositing bricks, lime, rubbish or other materials.  
(2) Any permission granted under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub-section  (1) shall be terminable at the 
discretion of the Chairperson on h is giving not less than twenty -four hours ‟ notice of such terminatio n to 
the person to whom such permission was granted.  
(3) The Chairperson may, without notice, cause to be removed any of the things referred to in    
clause ( b) of sub-section  (1) which has been deposite d or set up in any street without the permission 
specified in that sub-section  or which having been deposited or set up with such permission has not been 
removed within the period specified in the notice issued under sub-section  (2): 
Provided that nothing in this sub-section  shall apply to cases under clause ( b) or clause ( c) of         
sub-section  (1) in which an application for permission has been made with such fee as may be prescribed 
by the Chairperson in this behalf but no reply has been sent to the a pplicant within seven days from the 
date of the application.  
230. Disposal of things removed under this Chapter .—(1) Any of the things caused to be removed 
by the Chairperson under this Chapter shall, unless the owner thereof turns up to take back such thing and 
pays to the Chairperson the charges for the removal and storage of such thing, be disposed of by the 
Chairperson by public auction or in such  other manner and within such time as the Chairperson thinks fit.  
(2) The charges for removal and storage and sale of the thing sold under sub-section  (1) shall be paid 
out of the proceeds of the sale ther eof and the balance, if any, shall be paid to the owner of the thing sold 
on a claim being made therefor within a period of one year from the date of sale, and if no such claim is 
made within the said period, shall be credited to the New Delhi Municipal Fu nd. 
Naming and numbering of streets and numbering of buildings  
231. Naming and numbering of streets .—(1) The Chairperson may — 
(a) with the sanction of the Council determine the name or number by which any street or public 
place vested in the Council shall be known;  
(b) cause to be put up or painted at  a conspicuous part of any building, wall or place at or near 
each end, corner or entrance of such street or on some convenient part of such street, the name or 
number by which it is to be known;  
(c) cause to be put up or painted on boards of suitable size the name of any public place vested in 
the Council;  
(d) determine the number or sub -number by which any premises or part of such premises shall be 
known and cause such number or sub -number to be fixed to the side or outer door of such premises or 
to some place at the entrance of the enclosure thereof.  
(2) No person shall destroy, remove, deface or i n any way injure or alter any such name or number or 
sub-number or put up or p aint any name or number or sub -number different from that put up or painted by 
order of the Chairperson.  
Repair or enclosure of dangerous places  
232. Chairperson to take steps for repairing or enclosing dangerous places .—(1) If any place is, 
in the opinion of the Chairperson, for want of sufficient repair or protection or enclos ure, or owing to 
some work being carried on thereupon, dangerous or causing inconvenience to passengers along a street 
or to other persons including the owner or occupier of the said place, who have legal access thereto or to 
the neighbourhood thereof, the  Chairperson may by notice in writing require the owner or occupier of 
such place to repair, protect or enclose the same or take such other step as shall appear to the Chairperson 
necessary in order to prevent the danger or inconvenience arising therefrom.  
(2) The Chairperson may before giving any such notice or before the period of any such notice has 
expired, take such temporary measures as he thinks fit to prevent the danger or inconvenience arising 74 
 therefrom; and any expense incurred by the Chairperson in taking such temporary measures shall be 
recoverable from the owner or occupier of the place as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
Lighting of streets  
233. Measures for lighting .—The Chairperson sh all— 
(a) take measures for lighting in a suitable manner all such public streets and public places as 
may be specified by him;  
(b) procure, erect and maintain such number of lamps, lamp posts and other appurtenances as 
may be necessary for the said purpose;  
(c) cause such lamps to be lighted by means of oil,  electricity or such other light as he may 
determine.  
234. Prohibi tion of removal, etc., of lamps .—(1) No person shall, without lawful authority, take 
away or wilfully or negligently break or thro w down or damage — 
(a) any lamp or any appurtenance of any lamp or lamp post or lamp iron set up; in any public 
street or any public place;  
(b) any electric wire for lighting such lamp;  
(c) any post, pole, standard, stay, strut, bracket or other contrivance for carrying, suspending or 
supporting any electric wire or lamp.  
(2) No person shall wilfully or negligently extinguish the light of any l amp set up in any public street 
or any public place.  
(3) If any person wilfully or through negligence or accident breaks, or causes any damage to any of 
the things described in sub-section  (1), he shall in addition to any penalty to which he may be subjected 
under this Act, pay the expenses of repairing the damage so done by him.  
CHAPTER XIV  
BUILDING REGULATIONS  
235. General superintendence, etc., of th e Central Government .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other provision of this Act, the Chairperson shall exercise his powers and discharge his 
functions under this Chapter, under the general superintendence, direction and control of the Central 
Government.  
236. Definition .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression “to erect a 
building ” means— 
(a) to erect a new building on any site whether previously built upon or not;  
(b) to re-erect— 
(i) any building of which more than one -half of the cubical c ontents above the level of the 
plinth have been pulled down, burnt or destroyed; or  
(ii) any building of which more than one -half of the superficial area of the external walls 
above the level of the plin th has been pulled down; or  
(iii) any frame building of which more than -half of the number of the columns or beams in 
the external walls have been pulled down;  
(c) to convert into a dwelling house any building or any part of a building not originally 
constructed for human habitation or, if originally so constructed, subsequently appropriated for any 
other purpose;  
(d) to convert into more than one dwelling house a building originally constructed as one 
dwelling house only;  
(e) to convert into a place of religio us worship or into a sacred building any place or building not 
originally constructed for such purpose;  75 
 (f) to roof or cover an open space between walls or buildings to the extent of the structure which 
is formed by the roofing or covering of such space;  
(g) to convert two or more tenements in a building into a greater or lesser number;  
(h) to convert into a stall, shop, warehouse or godown, stable, factory or garage any building not 
originally constructed for use as such or which was not so used before the change;  
(i) to convert a buildin g which when originally constructed was legally exempt from the 
operations of any building regulations contained in this Act or in any bye-laws made thereunder or in 
any other law, into a building which had it been originally erected in its converted form,  would have 
been subject to such building regulations;  
(j) to convert into or use as a dwelling house any building which has been discontinued as or 
appropriated for any purpose other than, a dwelling ho use. 
237. Prohibition of building without sanction .—(1) No person shall erect or commence to erect any 
building or execute any of the works specified in section 239 except with the previous sanction of the 
Chairperson not otherwise than in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter and of the bye-laws 
made  under this Act in relation to the erection of buildings or execution of works.  
(2) In such areas as may be specified by bye-laws made in this behalf, no roof, verandah, pandal or 
wall of a building or n o shed or fence shall be constructed or reconstructed of cloth, grass leaves, mats or 
other inflammable materials except with the written permission of the Chairperson, nor shall any such 
roof, verandah, pandal, wall, shed or fence constructed or reconstru cted in any year be retained in a 
subsequent year except with fresh permission obtained in this behalf.  
238. Erection of building .—(1) Every person who intends to erect a building shall apply for sanction 
by giving notice in writing of his intention to the Chairperson in such form and containing such 
information as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf.  
(2) Every such notice shall be accompanied by such documents and plans as may be so prescribed.  
239. Applications for additions to, or repairs of, buildings .—(1) Every person who intends to 
execute any of the fo llowing works, that is to say, — 
(a) to make any addition to a building;  
(b) to make any alteration or repairs to a building involving the removal or re -erection of any 
external or partly wall thereof or of any wall which supports the roof thereof to an extent exceeding 
one-half of such wall above the plinth level, such half to be  measured in superficial metres;  
(c) to make any alteration or repairs to a frame building involving the removal or re -erection of 
more than one -half of the columns or posts in any such wall thereof as af oresaid; or involving the 
removal or re -erection of any such wall thereof as aforesaid to an extent exceeding one -half of such 
wall above plinth level, such half to be measured in superficial metres;  
(d) to make any alteration in a buildin g involving — 
(i) the sub -division of any room in such building so as to convert the same into two or more 
separate rooms; or  
(ii) the conversion of any passage or space in such building into a room or rooms;  
(e) to repair, remove, construct, reconstruct or make any addition to or structural alteration in any 
portion of a building abutting on a street which stands within the regular line of such street;  
(f) to close permanently any door or window in an external wall;  
(g) to remove or reconstruct the principal staircase or to alter its position;  
shall apply for sanction by giving notice in writing of his intention to the Chairperson in such form and 
containing such information as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf.  
(2) Every such notice shall be accompanied by such documents and plans as may be so prescribed.  76 
 240. Conditions of valid notice .—(1) A person giving the notice required by section 238 shall 
specify the purpose for which it is intended to use the building to which such notice relates; and a person 
giving the notice required by sect ion 239, shall specify whether the purpose for which the building is 
being used is proposed or likely to be changed by the execution of the proposed work.  
(2) No notice shall be valid until the information required under sub-section  (1) and any further 
information and plans which may be required by bye-laws made in this behalf have been furnished to the 
satisfaction of the Chairperson alongwith the notice.  
241. Sanction or refusal of building or work .—(1) The Chairperson shall sanction the erection of a 
building or the execution of a work unless such building  or work would contravene any of the provisions 
of sub-section  (2) of this section or the provisions of section 245.  
(2) The grounds on which the sanction of a building or work may be refused s hall be the  following, 
namely:— 
(a) that the building or work or the use of the site for the building or work or any of the 
particulars comprised in the site plan, ground plan, elevation, section or specification w ould 
contravene the provisions of any bye -law made in this behalf or of any other law or rule, bye -law or 
order made under such other law;  
(b) that the notice for sanction does not contain the particular s or is not prepared in the manner 
required under the bye-laws made in this behalf;  
(c) that any information or documents required by the Chairperson under this Act or any bye-laws 
made thereunder has or have not been duly furnished;  
(d) that in cases falling under section 216, lay-out plans have not been sanctioned in accordance 
with section 217;  
(e) that the building or work would be an encroachment on Central Government or Government 
land or land vested in the Council;  
(f) that the site of the building or work does not abut on a street or projected str eet and that there 
is no access to such building or work from any such street by a passage or pathway appertaining to 
such site;  
(g) that the land on which it is proposed to erect or re -erect such buildi ng is vested in the Central 
Government or Government or in the Council, and the consent of the Government concerned or, as 
the case may be, of the Council has not been obtained, or if the title of the land is in dispute between 
such person and the Council or any Government, or for any other reason, to be communicated in 
writing to the person, which is deemed to be just and sufficient as effecting such building.  
(3) The Chairperson shall communicate the sanction to the person who has given the notice; and 
where he refuses sanction on any of the grounds specified in sub-section  (2) or under section 245 he shall 
record a brief statement of his reasons for such refusal and the Chairperson shall communicate the refusal 
alongwith the reasons therefor to the person who has given the notice.  
(4) The sanction or refusal as aforesaid shall be communicated in such manner as m ay be specified in 
the bye-laws made in this behalf.  
242. When building or work may be proceeded with .—(1) Where within a period of sixty days or 
in ca ses falling under clause ( b) of section 236 within a period of thirty days, after the receipt of any 
notice under section 238 or section 239 or of the further information, if any, required under section 240, 
the Chairperson does not refuse to sanction the building or work or upon refusal, does not communicate 
the refusal to the person who has given the notice, the Chairperson shall be deemed to have accorded 
sanction to the building or work and the person by whom the notice has been given shall be free to 
commence and proceed with the building or work in accordance with his intention as expressed in the 
notice and the documents and plans accompanying the same:  
Provided that if it appears to the Chairperson that the site of the proposed building or work is li kely to 
be affected by any scheme of acquisition of land for any public purpose or by any proposed regular line of 
a public street or extension, improvement, widening or alteration of any street, the Chairperson may 
withhold sanction of the building or wor k for such period not exceeding three months as he deems fit and 77 
 the period of sixty days or as the case may be, the period of thirty days specified in this sub-section  shall 
be deemed to commence from the date of the expiry of the period for which the san ction has been 
withheld.  
(2) Where a building or work is sanctioned or is deemed to have been sanctioned by the Chairperson 
under sub-section  (1), the person who has given the notice shall be bound to ere ct the building or execute 
the work in accordance with such sanction but not so as to contravene any of the provisions of this Act or 
any other law or of bye-law made thereunder.  
(3) If the person or anyone lawfully claiming under him does not commence the erection of the 
building or the execution of the work within one year of the date on which the building or work is 
sanctioned or is deemed to have been sanctioned, he shall have to give notice under section 238 or, as the 
case may be, under section 239 for fresh sanction of the building or the work and the provisions of this 
section shall apply in relation to such notice as they apply in relation to the original notice.  
(4) Before commencing the erection of a building or exec ution of a work within the period specified 
in sub-section  (3), the person concerned shall give notice to the Chairperson of the proposed date of the 
commencement of the erection  of the building or the execution of the work:  
Provided that if the commencement does not take place within seven days of the date so notified, the 
notice shall be deemed not to have been given and a fresh notice shall be necessary in this behalf.  
243. Sanction accorded under misrepresen tation.—If at any time after the sanction of any building 
or work has been accorded, the Chairperson is satisfied that such sanction was accorded in consequence 
of any mate rial misrepresentation or fraudulent statement contained in the notice given or information 
furnished under sections 238, 239 and 240, he may by order in writing cancel for reasons to be recorded 
such sanction and any building or work commenced, erected or  done shall be deemed to have been 
commenced, erected or done without such sanction:  
Provided that before making any such order the Chairperson shall give reasonable opportunity to the 
person affected as to why such order should not be made.  
244. Buildings at corners of streets .—The Chairperson may require any building intended to be 
erected at the corner of two streets to be rounded off or splayed or cut off to such height and to such 
extent as he may det ermine, and may acquire such portion of the site at the corner as he may consider 
necessary for public convenience or amenity.  
245. Provisions as to buildings and works on either side of new streets .—(1) The erection of any 
building on either side of a new street may be refused by the Chairperson unless and until such new street 
has been levelled , and wherever in the opinion of the Chairperson practicable, metalled or paved, drained, 
lighted and laid with a water main to its satisfaction.  
(2) The erection of any such building or the execution of any such work may be refused by the 
Chairperson if such building or any portion thereof or such work comes within the regular line of any 
street, the position and direction of which has been laid down by the Chairperson but which has not been 
actually cons tructed or if such building or any portion thereof or such work is in contravention of any 
building or any other scheme or plan prepared under this Act or any other law for the time being in force.  
246. Period for completion of building or work .—The Chairperson, when sanctioning the erection 
of a building or execution of a work, shall specify a reasonable period after the commencement of the 
building or work within which the building or work is to be comp leted and if the building or work is not 
completed within the period so specified, it shall not be continued thereafter without fresh sanction 
obtained in the manner hereinbefore provided, unless the Chairperson on application made therefor has 
allowed an extension of that period.  
247. Order of demolition and stoppage of buildings or works in certain cases and appeal .—
(1) Where the erection of any buildi ng or execution of any work has been commenced, or is being carried 
on, or has been completed without or contrary to the sanction referred to in section 241 or in 
contravention of any condition subject to which such sanction has been accorded or in contrav ention of 
any of the provisions of this Act or bye-laws made thereunder, the Chairperson may, in addition to any 
other action that may be taken under this Act, make an order directing that such erection or work shall be 
demolished by the person at whose in stance the erection or work has been commenced or is being carried 78 
 on or has been completed, within such period (not being less than five days and more than fifteen days 
from the date on which a copy of the order of demolition with a brief statement of the  reasons therefor has 
been delivered to that person), as may be, specified in the order of demolition:  
Provided that no order of demolition shall be made unless the person has been given by means of a 
notice served in such manner as the Chairperson may thi nk fit, a reasonable opportunity of showing cause 
why such order shall not be made:  
Provided further that where the erection or work has not been completed, the Chairperson may by the 
same order or by a separate order, whether made at the time of the issue  of the notice under the first 
proviso or at any other time, direct the person to stop the erection or work until the expiry of the period 
within which an appeal against the order of demolition, if made, may be preferred under sub-section  (2). 
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Chairperson made under sub-section  (1) may prefer an 
appeal against the order to the Appellate Tribunal within the period specified in the order for the 
demolition of the erection or work to which it relates.  
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under sub-section  (2) against an order of demolition the Appellate 
Tribunal may, subject to the provisions of sub-section  (3) of section 255 stay the enforcement of that 
order on such terms, if any, and for such period, as it may think fit:  
Provided that where the erection of any building or execution of any work has not been completed at 
the time of the making of the order of demol ition, no order staying the enforcement of the order of 
demolition shall be made by the Appellate Tribunal unless security, sufficient in the opinion of the said 
Tribunal has been given by the appellant for not proceeding, with such erection or work pendin g the 
disposal of the appeal.  
(4) No court shall entertain any suit, application or order proceeding for injunction or other relief 
against the Chairperson to restrain him from taking any action or makin g any order in pursuance of the 
provisions of this section.  
(5) Subject to an order made by the Administrator on appeal under section 256, every order made by 
the Appellate Tribunal on appeal under this section, and subject to the orders of the Administrator and the 
Appellate Tribunal on appeal, the order of demolition made by the Chairperson shall be final and 
conclusive.  
(6) Where no appeal has been pre ferred against an order of demolition made by the Chairperson 
under sub-section  (1) or where an order of demolition made by the Chairperson under that sub-section  has 
been confirmed on appeal, whether with or without variation, by the Appellate Tribunal an d by the 
Administrator in a case where an appeal has been preferred against the order of the Appellate Tribunal, 
the person against whom the order has been made shall comply with the order within the period specified 
therein, or as the case may be, within the period, if any fixed by the Appellate Tribunal or the 
Administrator on appeal and on the failure of the person to comply with the order within such period, the 
Chairperson may himself cause the erection or the work to which the order relates to be demo lished and 
the expenses of such demolition shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
248. Order of stoppage of buildings or works in certain cases .—(1) Where the erection of any 
building or execution of any work has been commenced or is being carried on (but has not been 
completed) without or contrary to the sanction referred to in section 241, or in contravention of any 
condition subject to which such sanction has been accorded or in contravention of any provisions of this 
Act or bye-laws made thereunder, the Chairperson may in addition to any other action that may be taken 
under this Act, by order require the person at whose instance the building or the work has been 
commenced or is being carried on to stop the same forthwith.  
(2) If an order made by the Chairperson under section 247 or under sub-section  (1) of this section 
directing any person to stop the erection of any building or execution of any work is not complied with, 
the Chairp erson may require any police officer to remove such person and all his assistants and workmen 
from the premises or to seize any construction material, tool, machinery, scaffolding or other things used 
in the erection of any building or execution of any wor k within such time as may be specified in the 
requisition and such police officer shall comply with the requisition accordingly.  79 
 (3) Any of the things caused to be seized by the Chairperson under sub-section (2) shall be disposed 
of by him in the manner specified in section 230.  
(4) After the requisition under sub-section  (2) has been complied with, the Chairperson may, if he 
thinks fit, depute by a writ ten order a police officer or a municipal officer or other municipal employee of 
the Council to watch the premises in order to ensure that the erection of the building or the execution of 
the work is not continued.  
(5) Where a police officer or a municipal officer or other municipal employee has been deputed under 
sub-section  (4) to watch the premises, the cost of such deputation shall be paid by the person at whose 
instance such erection or execution is b eing continued or to whom notice under sub-section  (1) was given 
and shall be recoverable from such person as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
249. Power of Chairperson to require alteration of work .—(1) The Chairperson may at any time 
during the erection of any building or execution of any work or at any time after the completion thereof 
by a written notice of not less than seven days specify any matt er in respect of which such erection or 
execution is without or contrary to the sanction referred to in section 241 or is in contravention of any 
condition of such sanction or any of the provisions of this Act or any bye-laws made thereunder and 
require th e person who gave the notice under section 238 or section 239 or the owner o f such building or 
work either — 
(a) to make such alterations as may be specified in the said notice with the object of bringing the 
building or work in conformity with the said sanction, condition or provisions, or  
(b) to show cause why such alterations should not be made, within a period stated in the notice.  
(2) If the person or the owner does not show cause as aforesaid, he shall be bound to make the 
alterations specified in the notice.  
(3) If the person or th e owner shows cause as aforesaid, the Chairperson shall by an order either 
cancel the notice issued under sub-section  (1) or confirm the same subject to such modifications as he 
thinks fit.  
250. Power to  seal unauthorised constructions .—(1) It shall be lawful for the Chairperson, at any 
time, before or after making an order of demolition under section 247 or of the stoppage of the erection of 
any building or execution of any work under section 247 or under section 248, to make an order directing 
the sealing of such erection or work or of the premises in which such erection or work is being carried on 
or has been completed in the manner prescribed b y rules, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of 
this Act, or for preventing any dispute as to the nature and extent of such erection or work.  
(2) Where any erection or work or any premises in w hich any erection or work is being carried on, 
has or have been sealed, the Chairperson may, for the purpose of demolishing such erection or work in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act, order such seal to be removed.  
(3) No person  shall remove such seal except — 
(a) under an order made by the Chairperson under sub-section  (2); or 
(b) under an or der of an Appellate Tribunal or the Administrator, made in an appeal under this 
Act. 
251. Completion certificates .—(1) Every person who employs an architect registered with the 
Council or an architects or an engineer or a person approved by the Chairperson to design or erect a 
building or execute any work shall, within one month after the completion of the erection of the  building 
or execution of the work, deliver or send or cause to be delivered or sent to the Chairperson a notice in 
writing of such completion accompanied by a certificate in the form prescribed by bye-laws made in this 
behalf and shall give to the Chairpe rson all necessary facilities for the inspection of such building or 
work.  
(2) No person shall occupy or permit to be occupied any such building or use or permit to be used any 
building or a part thereof  effected by any such work until permission has been granted by the Chairpe rson 
in this behalf in accordance with bye-laws made under this Act:  
Provided that if the Chairperson fails within a period of thirty days after the receipt of the notice of 
complet ion to communicate its refusal to grant such permission, such permission shall be deemed to have 
been granted.  80 
 252. Restrictions on uses of buildings .—No person shall, without the written permission of t he 
Chairperson, or otherwise than in conformity with the conditio ns, if any, of such permission — 
(a) use or permit to be used for human habitation any part of a  building not originally erected or 
authori sed to be used for that purpose or not used for that purpose before any alteration has been 
made therein by any work executed in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the bye-laws 
made thereunder;  
(b) change or allow the change of the use of any land or building;  
(c) convert or allow the conversion of one kind of tenement into an other kind.  
253. Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
constitute one or more Appellate Tribunals with headquarters at Delhi or New Delhi, for deciding appeals  
preferred under section 247 or section 254.  
(2) An Appellate Tribunal shall consist of one person to be appointed by the Central Government on 
such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed b y rules.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the presiding officer of an Appellate tribunal 
unless he is, or has been, a district judge or an additional district judge or has, for at l east ten years, held a 
judicial office in India.  
(4) The Central Government may, if it so thinks fit, appoint one or more persons having special 
knowledge of, or experience in, matters involved in such ap peals, to act as assessors to advise the 
Appellate Tribunal in the proceedings before it, but no advice of the assessors shall be binding on the 
Appellate Tribunal.  
(5) The Central Government shall, by n otification in the Official Gazette, define the territorial limits 
within which an Appellate Tribunal shall exercise its jurisdiction, and where different Appellate Tribunals 
have jurisdiction over the same territorial limits, the Central Government shall also provide for the 
distribution and allocation of work to be performed by such Tribunals.  
(6) For the purpose of enabling it to discharge its functions under this Act, every Appellate Tribunal 
shall have a Registrar and such other staff on such terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed 
by rules:  
Provided that the Registrar and staff may be employed jointly for all or any number of such Tribunals 
in accordance with the rules.  
254. Appeals against certain orders or notices issued under the Act .—(1) Any person aggrieved 
by any of the following orders made or notices issued under  this Act, may prefer an appeal against such 
order or notice to t he Appellate Tribunal, namely: — 
(a) an order according or disallowing sanction to a lay-out plan under section 217;  
(b) an order directing the alteration or demolition of any street under section 218;  
(c) a notice under sub-section  (1) of section 219;  
(d) a notice under sub-section  (2) of section 221;  
(e) an order directing the disposal of things removed under Chapter XIII or seized under section 
248, or an order rejecting the claim of any person for the balance of the proceeds of sale of things so 
disposed of;  
(f) an order sanctioning or refusing to sanction the erection of any building or the execution of 
any work under section 241;  
(g) an order withholding sanction under the proviso to sub-section  (1) of section 242;  
(h) an order cancelling a sanction under section 243;  
(i) an order requiring the rounding off, splaying or cutting off the height of a building intended to 
be erected, or for the acquisition of any portion of a site , under section 244;  81 
 (j) an order disallowing the erection of any building or the execution of any work under        
section 245;  
(k) an order requiring the stoppage of any erection or work under section 24 8; 
(l) an order requiring the alteration of any building or work under section 249;  
(m) an order directing the sealing of unauthorised constructions u nder section 250;  
(n) an order refusing to grant permission under sub-section  (2) of section 251;  
(o) an order granting or refusing permission under section 252;  
(p) any such other order or notice relating to or arising out of planned development under the 
provisions of this Act as may be prescribed by rule s. 
(2) An appeal under this section shall be filed within thirty days from the date of the order or notice 
appealed against:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of  the said period of 
thirty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Tribunal shall be made in such form and shall be acc ompanied by a 
copy of the order or notice appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed by rules.  
255. Procedure of the Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or annulling the order or notice appealed against or may refer the case back to the authority or 
officer against whose order or notice th e appeal is filed, for a fresh order or notice, after taking additional 
evidence, if necessary, or such other action as the Appellate Tribunal may specify.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of  every order passed by it to the parties to the appeal.  
(3) No Appellate Tribunal shall, in any appeal pending before it in respect of any order or notice 
under this Act, make an interim order (whether by  way of injunction or stay) against the Council or 
against any officer or servant of the Council acting or purporting to act in his official capacity, unless an 
opportunity is given to the Council or its officer or servant to be heard in the matter:  
Provid ed that the Appellate Tribunal may without giving an opportunity as aforesaid make an interim 
order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied for reasons to be recorded by it in writing that it is 
necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caused to the person filing the appeal which cannot be 
adequately compensated in money:  
Provided further that every such interim order shall, if it is not vacated earlier, cease to have effect on 
the expiry of a period of fourteen days from the date on which it i s made unless before the expiry of that 
period, the Appellate Tribunal confirms or modifies that order after giving to the Council or its officer or 
servant an opportunity of being heard.  
(4) Subject to rules that may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the awarding of 
damages in and the costs of, and incidental to, any appeal before an Appellate Tribunal, shall be in its 
discretion and it shall have full power to determine by and to whom an d to what extent and subject to  
what conditions, if any, such damages or costs are to be paid and to give, in its order disposing of an 
appeal, necessary directions for the purposes aforesaid.  
(5) An order  of the Appellate Tribunal made under this section may be executed or caused to be 
executed by it on the application of the person in whose favour the order has been made.  
(6) In hearing and deciding an appeal or in the execution of an order, an Appellate Tribunal shall 
follow such procedure as may be prescribed by rules.  
(7) Every Appellate Tribunal , shall in addition to the powers conferred on it unde r this Act, have the 
same power as are vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908     
(5 of 1908) in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and inspection of documents;  82 
 (c) receiving evidence on aff idavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed by rules . 
and every proceeding of an Appellate Tribunal in hearing or deciding an appeal or in connection with the 
execution of its order, shall  be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 
228 and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), and every Appellate 
Tribunal shall be deemed to be a Civil Court for the purposes of section 195 and  Chapter XXVI of the 
Code of Criminal P rocedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
256. Appeal against orders of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) An appeal shall lie to the Administrator, 
against an order of the Appellate Tribunal made in an appeal under section 247 or section 254, 
confirming, modifying or annulling an order made or notice issued under this Act.  
(2) The prov isions of sub-section s (2) and ( 3) of section 254 and section 255 and the rules made 
thereunder, shall, so far as may be, apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under this section as they 
apply to the filing and disposal of an appeal under those sec tions.  
(3) An order of the Administrator on an appeal under this section, and subject only to such order, an 
order of the Appellate Tribunal under section 254, and subject to such orders of the Administra tor or an 
Appellate Tribunal, an order or notice referred to in sub-section  (1) of that section, shall be final.  
257. Bar of jurisdiction of courts .—(1) After the commencement of this Act, no court shall entertain 
any suit, application or other proceedings in respect of any order or notice appealable under section 247 or 
section 254 and no such order or notice shall be called in question otherwise than b y preferring an appeal 
under those sections.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  (1), every suit, application or other proceeding 
pending in any court immediately before the commencement of this Act, in respect of any order or notice 
appealable under section 247 or section 254, shall continue to be dealt with and disposed of by that court 
as if the said section had not been brought into force.  
258. Removal of dangerous buildings .—(1) If it appears to the Chairperson at any time that any 
building is in a ruinous condition, or likely to fall, or  in any way dangerous to any person occupying, 
resorting to or passing by such building or any other building or place in the neighbourhood of such 
building, the Chairperson may, by order in writing, require the owner or occupier of such building to 
demoli sh, secure or repair such building or do one or more of such things within such period as may be 
specified in the order, so as to prevent all cause of danger therefrom.  
(2) The Chairperson may also, if he  thinks fit, require such owner or occupier by the said order either 
forthwith or before proceeding to demolish, secure or repair the building, to set up a proper and sufficient 
hoard or fence for the protection of passers -by and other persons, with a conv enient platform and      
hand -rail wherever practicable to serve as a foot -way for passengers outside of such hoard or fence.  
(3) If it appears to the Chairperson that danger from a building which is in a  ruinous condition or 
likely to fall is imminent, he may, before making the order aforesaid, fence off, demolish, secure or repair 
the said building or take such steps as may be necessary to prevent the danger.  
(4) If the owner or occupier of the building does not comply with the order within the period specified 
therein, the Chairperson shall take such steps in relation to the building as to prevent all cause of danger 
therefrom.  
(5) All expenses incurred by the Chairperson in relation to any building under this section shall be 
recoverable from the owner or occupier thereof as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
259. Power to order building to be vacated in certain circumstances .—(1) The Chairperson may 
by order in writing direct that any building which in his opinion is in a dangerous condition or is not  
provided with sufficient means of egress in case of fire or is occupied in contravention of section 251 be 
vacated forthwith or within such period as  may be specified in the order:  
Provided that at the time of making such order the Chairperson shall recor d a brief statement of the 
reasons therefor.  83 
 (2) If any person fails to vacate the building in pursuance of such order the Chairperson may direct 
any police officer to remove such person from the building and the police officer shall comply with such 
direction accordingly.  
(3) The Chairperson shall, on the application of any person who has vacated, or been removed from 
any building in pursuance of an order made by him, re -instate such person in the building on the expiry of 
the period for which the order has been in force according as the circumstances prevailing at that time 
permit.  
260. Power of  the Central Government to make bye-laws .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make bye-laws for carrying out the provisions of this Chapter:  
Provided that all bye-laws made by the New Delhi Municipal Committee under sub-section  (3) of 
section 189 of the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Punjab Act 3 of 1911 ) and in force immediately before 
such commencement, shall be deemed to have been made under the provision of this sectio n and shall 
continue to have the same force and effect after such commencement until it is amended, varied, 
rescinded or superseded under the provision of this section.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such bye-laws may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the regulation or restriction of the use of s ites for buildings for different areas;  
(b) the regulation or restriction of buildings in different areas;  
(c) the form of notice of erection of any bui lding or execution of any work and the fee in respect 
of the same;  
(d) the plans and documents to be submitted together with such notice and the information and 
further information to be furnished;  
(e) the level and width of foundation, level of lowest floor and stability of structure;  
(f) the construction of buildings and the materials to be used in th e construction of buildings;  
(g) the height of buildings whether absolute or relative to the width of streets or to different areas;  
(h) the number and height of storeys composing a building and the height of rooms and the 
dimensions of rooms intended for human habitation;  
(i) the provision of open spaces external and internal, and adequate m eans of light and ventilation;  
(j) the provision of means of egress in case of fire, fire -escapes and water lifting devices;  
(k) the provision of secon dary means of access for the removal of house refuse;  
(l) the materials and methods of construction of external and party walls, roofs and floors;  
(m) the position, materials and methods of construction of hearths, s moke -escapes, chimneys, 
stair-cases, latrines, drains and cesspools;  
(n) the provision of lifts;  
(o) the paving of yards;  
(p) the restrictions on the use of inflammable materials in buildings;  
(q) the restriction on construction of fou ndation on certain sites;  
(r) the measures to be taken to protect building fr om dump arising from sub -soil; 
(s) the wells, tanks and cisterns and pumps  for the supply of water for human consumption in 
connection with buildings;  
(t) in the case of wells, the dimensions of the well, the manner of enclosing it and; if the well is 
intended for drinking purposes, the means which shall be used to prevent pollution of the water;  
(u) the supervision of buildings;  
(v) the setting back of garages and shops f rom the regular line of a street;  84 
 (w) the construction of partable structures and permission for such construction.  
(3) The draft of the bye-laws referred to in sub-section  (1) shall be forwarded to the Chairperson, who 
shall cause the same to be published in the Official Gazette for inviting objections and suggestions from 
the public within thirty days from the date of such publication.  
(4) The Chairperson shall forward the draft bye-laws to the Central Government along with his 
recommendations and the objections and suggestions received from the public, within three months of 
their publication in the  Official Gazette.  
(5) The Central Government may issue such directions to the Chairperson as it thinks fit, for ensuring 
proper implementation of the bye-laws made under this section.  
CHAPTER XV  
SANITATI ON AND PUBLIC HEALTH  
Conservancy and sanitation  
261. Provision for daily cleansing of streets and removal of rubbish and filth .—(1) For the 
purpose of securing the efficient scavenging and cleansing of all streets and premises, the Chairperson 
shall  provide— 
(a) for the daily surface -cleansing of all streets and the removal of the sweepings therefrom, and 
(b) for the removal of the contents of all receptacles and depots and of the accumulations at all 
places provided or appointed by him under the provisions of this Act for the temporary deposit of 
rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter.  
(2) The Chairperson may, by public notice, issue directions as to the time at which, the manner in 
which, and the conditions subject to which, any matt er referred to in sub-section  (1) may be removed 
along a street or may be deposited or otherwise disposed of.  
262. Rubbish, etc., to be the property of the Council .—All matters deposited in public receptacles, 
depots and places provided or appointed under section 263 and all matters collected by municipal 
employees or contractors in pursuance of section 261 and section 265 shall be the property of the Council.  
263. Provision or appointment of receptacles, depots and places for rubbish, etc .—(1) The 
Chairperson shall — 
(a) provide or appoint in proper and convenient situations public receptacles, depots or places for 
the temporary deposit of rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter and for the final 
disposal of rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxio us matter;  
(b) provide dustbins for the temporary deposit of rubbish;  
(c) provide vehicles or other suitable means for the removal of  rubbish and offe nsive matter; and  
(d) provide covered vehicles or vessels for the removal of filth and other polluted and obnoxious 
matter.  
(2) Differ ent receptacles, depots or places may be provided or appointed for the temporary deposit or 
final disposal of any of the matters specified in sub-section  (1). 
(3) The Chairperson shall make adequate provi sion for preventing receptacles, depots, places, 
dustbins, vehicles and vessels referred to in sub-section  (1) from becoming sources of nuisance.  
264. Duty of owners and occupiers to collect and deposit r ubbish, etc .—It shall be the duty of the 
owners and occupiers of all premises — 
(a) to have the premises swept and cleaned;  
(b) to cause all filth, rubb ish and other polluted and obnoxious matter to be collected from their 
respective premises and to be deposited at such times as the Chairperson, by public notice prescribes, 
in public receptacles, depots or places provided or appointed under section 263 fo r the temporary 
deposit or final disposal thereof;  85 
 (c) to provide receptacles of the type and in the manner prescribed by the Chairperson for the 
collection therein of all filth, rubbish and other pollute d and obnoxious matter from such premises 
and to keep such receptacles in good condition and repair.  
265. Collection and removal of filth and polluted matter .—(1) It shall be the duty of the owner 
and occupier of every premises situate in any portion of New Delhi in which there is not a latrine, or 
urinal connected by a drain with a municipal drain, to cause all  filth and polluted and obnoxious matter 
accumulating upon such premises to be collected and removed to the nearest receptacle or depot provided 
for this purpose under section 263 at such times, in such vehicle or vessel by such route and with such 
precaut ions as the Chairperson may by public notice prescribe.  
(2) It shall be lawful for the Chairperson to take or cause to be taken measures for the daily collection, 
removal and disposal of all filth and po lluted and obnoxious matters from latrines, urinals and cesspools 
not connected by a drain with a municipal drain from all premises situate in any portion of New Delhi.  
(3) In such portion of New Delhi a nd in any premises where situate in which there is a latrine or 
urinal connected with a municipal drain, it shall not be lawful, except with the written permission of the 
Chairperson, for any person who is not employed by or on behalf of the Chairperson to  discharge any of 
the duties of scavengers.  
266. Removal of rubbish, etc., accumulated on premises used as factories, workshop, etc .—The 
Chai rperson may, if he thinks fit, — 
(a) by written notice require the owner or occupier of any premises used for carrying on any 
manufacture, trade or business or used as a factory, workshop, trade premises or market or in any way 
so that rubbish, filth and other pollut ed and obnoxious matter are accumulated in large quantities, to 
collect all such rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter accumulating thereon and to 
remove the same at such times and in such carts or receptacles and by such routes as may be specified 
in the notice to a depot or place provided or appointed under section 263, or  
(b) after giving such owner or occupier notice of his intention, cause all rubbish, filth and other 
polluted and obn oxious matter accumulated in such premises to be removed, and charge the said 
owner or occupier for such removal such fee as may, with the sanction of the Council be specified in 
the notice issued under clause ( a). 
267. Prohibition against accumulation of rubbish, etc .—(1) No owner or occupier of any premises 
shall keep or allow to be kept for more than twenty -four hours or otherwise than in a receptacle approved 
by the Chairperson, any rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter on such premises or any 
place belonging thereto or neglect to employ proper means to remove such rubbish, filth and other 
pollut ed and obnoxious matter from, or to cleanse, such receptacle and to dispose of such rubbish, filth 
and other polluted and obnoxious matter in the manner directed by the Chairperson, or fail to comply with 
any requisition of the Chairperson as to the constr uction, repair, pavement or cleansing of any latrine, or 
urinal  on or belonging to the premises.  
(2) No owner or occupier shall allow the water of any sink, drain, latrine or urinal or any rubbish, filth  
and other polluted and obnoxious matter to run down on or to, or be thrown or put upon, any street or into 
any drain in or along the side of any street except in such manner as shall prevent any avoidable nuisance 
from any such water, rubbish, filth or ot her polluted and obnoxious matter.  
(3) No person shall, after due provision has been made in this respect under  the foregoing provisions 
of this Chapter for the d eposit and removal of the same — 
(a) deposit any rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter in any street or on the 
verandah of any building or on any unoccupied ground alongside any street or on the bank of a water 
course; or  
(b) deposit any filth or other polluted and obnoxious matter in any dustbin or in any vehicle not 
intended for the removal of the same; or  
(c) deposit rubbish  in any vehicle or vessel intended for the removal of filth and other polluted 
and obnoxious matter.  86 
 268. Prohibition in respect of air pollutant .—No owner or occupier of any pr emises shall allow or 
cause to be allowed any air pollutant above the standards, laid down under clause ( g) of sub-section  (1) of 
section 17 of the Air (Prevention and Control of P ollution) Act, 1981 (14 of 1981 ). 
269. Chairperson’ s power to get premises scavenged and cleansed .—If any premises are not 
properly and regularly scavenged or cleansed or are in a filthy and unwholesome condition, the 
Chairperson may cause them to be  scavenged and cleansed and recover the expenses from the owner or, 
as the case may be, occupier as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
270. Public latrines, urinals, etc .—(1) The Chairperson shall provide and maintain in proper and 
convenient places a sufficient number of public latrines and urinals.  
(2) Such public latrines and urinals shall be so cons tructed as to provide separate compartments for 
each sex and not to be a nuisance, and shall be provided with all necessary conservancy establishments, 
and shall regularly be cle ansed and kept in proper order.  
Latrines and urinals  
271. Construction of latrines and urinals .—(1) It shall not be lawful to construct any latrine or 
urinal for any premises except with the written permission of the Chairperson and in accordance with 
such terms not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or any bye-laws made thereunder as he may 
prescribe.  
(2) In prescribing any such terms the Chairper son may determine in such case — 
(a) whether the premises shall be served by the service system o r by the flush system or partly by 
the one and partly by the other; and  
(b) what shall be the site or position of each latrine or urinal.  
(3) If any la trine or urinal is constructed on any premises in contravention of the foregoing provisions, 
the Chairperson may, after giving not less than ten days ‟ notice to the owner or occupier of such premises, 
alter, reconstruct, close or demolish such latrine or u rinal and the expenditure incurred by the Chairperson 
in so doing shall be recoverable from the owner or occupier as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
272. Latrines and urinals, etc., in new buildings .—(1) It shall not be lawful to erect any building or 
execute any work on or in relation to such building without providing such latrine accommodation and 
urinal accommodation and accommodation for bathing or  for washing clothes and utensils on each floor 
of such building as the Chairperson may prescribe.  
(2) In prescribing any such accommodation, the Chairper son may determine in each case — 
(a) that such building shall be served by the flush system only;  
(b) what shall be the site or position of each latrine, urinal, bathing or washing place or site and 
their number on each floor and their clear internal dimensions.  
(3) It shall not be lawful to erect a residential building composed of separate tenements on the flat 
system without providing at least one lat rine and one bathing or washing place for servants on the ground 
floor of such building or at any other suitable place in the same premises.  
(4) In this section, the expression  “to erect a building ” has the same meaning as in section 236.  
273. Latrines and urinals for labourers, etc .—Every person employing workmen, labourers  or 
other persons exceeding twenty in number shall provide and maintain for the separate use of persons of 
each sex so employed, latrines and urinals of such description and number as the Chairperson may by 
notice require and within such time as may be fix ed in the notice and shall keep the same in clean and 
proper order.  
274. Provision of latrines and urinals for markets, etc .—The Chairpe rson may by notice require 
any owner or manager of a market, cart stand, cattle shed, theatre, railway station and other places of 
public resort within such time as may be specified in such notice to provide and maintain for the separate 
use of persons of each sex, latrines and urinals of such description and number and in such position as 
may be specified and to keep the same in clean and proper order.  87 
 275. Other provisions as to private latrines .—The Chai rperson may, by written notice — 
(a) require the owner or other person having the control of any private latrine or urinal not to put 
the same to public use; or  
(b) require the owner or other person having the control  of such private latrine or urinal which in 
the opinion of the Chairperson constitutes a nuisance, to remove the latrine or the urinal; or  
(c) require any person having the control whether as owner, lesse e or oc cupier of any land or 
building— 
(i) to have any latrine provided for the same shut out by a sufficient roof, wall or fence from 
the view of persons passing by or dwelling in the neighbourhood; or  
(ii) to clean in such manner as the Chairperson may prescribe in the notice any latrine or 
urinal belonging to the land or building; or  
(d) where any premises intended or used for human habitation are without any latrine or urinal 
accommodation or are provided with insufficient latrine or urinal accommodation, require the owner, 
lessee or occupier of such premises to provide such or such addi tional latrine or urinal 
accommodation as he may prescribe, if necessary by causing any part of such premises to be vacated 
and demolished in accordance with bye-laws made in this behalf.  
Removal of congested buildings and buildings unfit for human habitat ion 
276. Removal of congested buildings .—(1) Where it appears to the Chairperson that any block of 
buildings is in an unhealthy condition by reasons of the manner in which the buildings are crowded 
together, or of the narrowness, closeness, or faulty arrangement of streets, or of the want of proper 
drainage and ventilation, or of the impracticability of cleansing the buildings or other similar cause, he 
shall cause the block to be inspected to by the officer authorised by him and such officer shall make a 
report in writing the Chairperson regarding the sanitary condition of the block.  
(2) If upon receipt o f such report the Chairperson considers that the sanitary condition of the block is 
likely to cause risk of disease to the inhabitants of the buildings or of the neighbourhood or otherwise to 
endanger the public health, he shall with the approval of the Co uncil select the buildings which in his 
opinion should wholly or in part be removed in order to abate the unhealthy  condition of the block and 
may thereupon by notice in writing require the owners of such building remove them within such period 
as may be s pecified in the notice:  
Provided that before issuing the notice reasonable opportunity shall be afforded to the owners to show 
cause why the buildings should not be removed:  
Provided further that the Chairperson shall make compensation to the owners for an y buildings so 
removed which may have been erected under proper authority.  
(3) If a notice under sub-section  (2) requiring any owner of a building to remove it is not complied 
with, then, after the expiration of the time specified in the notice the Chairperson may himself remove or 
cause to be removed the building required to be removed by the notice and recover from owner of the 
building the expenses of such removal as an arrear of tax under this Ac t. 
277. Power of Chairperson to require improvement of building unfit for human habitation .—
(1) Where the Chairperson upon information in his possessi on is satisfied that any building is in any 
respect unfit for human habitation, he may, unless in his opinion the building is not capable at a 
reasonable expense of being rendered fit, serve upon the owner of the building a notice requiring him 
within such  time not being less than thirty days as may be specified in the notice to execute the works of 
improvement specified therein and stating that in his opinion those works will render the building fit for 
human habitation.  
(2) In addition to serving a notice under this section on the owner the Chairperson may serve a copy 
of the notice on any other person having an interest in the building whether as a lessee, mortgagee or 
otherwise.  
(3) In determining whether a building can be rendered fit for human habitation at a reasonable 
expense regard shall be had to the estimated cost of the work necessary to render it so fit and the value 
which it is estimated that  the building will have when the works are completed.  88 
 278. Enforcement of notice requiring execution of works of improvement .—If a notice under 
section 277 requiring the owner of the building to execute w orks of improvement is not complied with, 
then after the expiration of the time specified in the notice the Chairperson may himself do or cause to be 
done the works required to be done by the notice and recover the expenses incurred in connection 
therewith  as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
279. Power of Chairperson to order demolition of buildings unfit for human habitation .—
(1) Where the Chairperson upon any information in his possession is satisfied that any building is unfit 
for human habitation and is not capable at a reasonable expense of being rendered so fit he shall serve 
upon the owner of the building and upon any other person having an intere st in the building, whether as a 
lessee, mortgagee or otherwise a notice to show cause within such time as may be specified in the notice 
as to why an order of demolition of the building should not be made.  
(2) If any of the person upon whom a notice has been served under sub-section  (1) appears in 
pursuance thereof before the Chairperson and gives an undertaking to him that such person shall, within a 
period specified by the Chairperson, execute such works of improvement in relation to the building as 
will, in the opinion of the Chairperson, render the building fit for human habitation or an undertaking that 
the building shall not be used for human habitation until the Chairperson on being satisfied th at it has 
been rendered fit for that purpose, cancels the undertaking, the Chairperson shall not make an order of 
demolition of the building.  
(3) If no such undertaking as is mentioned in sub-section  (2) is given or if in a case where any such 
undertaking has been given, any work of improvement to which the undertaking relates is not carried out 
within the specified period, or the building is at any time used in contravention of the terms of the 
undertaki ng, the Chairperson shall , forthwith make an order of demolition of the building requiring that 
the building shall be vacated within a period to be  specified in the order not being less than thirty days 
from the date of the order, and that it shall be demo lished within six weeks after the expiration of that 
period.  
(4) Where an order of demolition of building under this section has been made, the owner of the 
building or any other person having an interest  therein, shall demolish that building within the time 
specified in that behalf by the order, and if the building is not demolished within that time, the 
Chairperson shall demolish or cause to be demolished the building and sell the materials thereof.  
(5) Any expenses incurred by the Chairperson under sub-section  (4) if not satisfied out of the 
proceeds of the sale of materials of the building shall be recovered from the owner of the building or any 
other person having an interest therein as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
(6) In determining for the purposes of section 277 and this section whether a building is unfit for 
human habitation, regard shall be  had to its condition in respect of the foll owing matters, that is to say, — 
(a) repair;  
(b) stability;  
(c) freedom from damp;  
(d) natural light and air;  
(e) water supply;  
(f) drainage and sanitary conveniences;  
(g) facilities for storage, preparation and cooking of food and for the disposal of rubbish, f ilth and 
other polluted matter,  
and the building shall be deemed to be unfit as aforesaid if it is so far defective, in one or more of the said 
matters that it is not reasonably suitable for occupation in that condition.  
(7) For the purpose of section 277, section 278 and this section, “work of improvement ” in relation to 
a building includes any one or more of the following works, namely: — 
(a) necessary repairs;  
(b) structural alterations;  89 
 (c) provision of light points and water taps;  
(d) construction of drains, open or covered;  
(e) provision of latrines and urinals;  
(f) provision of additional or improved fixtures and fittings;  
(g) opening up or paving of courtyard;  
(h) removal of rubbish, filth and other polluted and obnoxious matter;  
(i) any other work including the demolition of any building or any part thereof which, in the 
opinion of the Chairperson, is necessary for executing any of the works specified above.  
(8) The p rovisions of section 276, section 277, section 278 and this section shall not apply in relation 
to any building in any area which has been declared to be a slum area under the Slum Areas 
(Improvement and Clearance) Act, 1956 (96 of 1956).  
280. Insanitary huts and sheds .—Where the Chairperson upon any information in his possession is 
satisfied that any hut or shed used as a dwelling house or as a stable or for any other purpose, is likely, by 
reason of its being constructed without a plinth or upon a plinth of insufficient  height or without proper 
means of drainage or on account of the impracticability of scavenging and cleansing it or owing to the 
manner in which it and other huts or sheds are crowded together, to cause risk of disease to the inmates 
thereof or to the inha bitants of the neighbourhood, or is for any reason likely to endanger public health or 
safety, he may by notice in writing require the owner or occupier of the hut or shed or the owner or 
occupier of the land on which the hut or shed stands to remove or al ter the hut or shed or carry out such 
improvement thereof as the Chairperson may deem necessary within such time as may be specified in the 
notice.  
Regulation of washing by washermen  
281. Prohibition agai nst washing by washerman .—(1) The Chairperson may by public notice 
prohibit the washing of clothes by washermen in the exercise of their callings except at such places as he 
may appoint for the purpose.  
(2) When any such prohibition has been made, no person who is by calling a washerman shall in 
contravention of such prohibition wash clothes except for himself or for personal and family service or for 
hire on or within the premises of the hirer, at any place other than a place appointed under sub-section  (1). 
Prevention of Dangerous Diseases  
282. Obligation to give information of dangerous disease .—Any person being in charge of, or in 
attendance, whether as a medical practitioner or otherwise, upon any person whom he knows or has 
reason to believe to be suffering from a dangerous disease, or being the owner, lessee, or occupier of any 
building in which h e knows that any such person is so suffering shall forthwith give information 
respecting the existence of such disease to the officer specified by the Chairperson for the said purpose.  
283. Removal to hos pital of patients, suffering from dangerous disease .—(1) When any person 
suffering from any da ngerous disease is found to be — 
(a) without  proper lodging or accommodation; or  
(b) living in a room or house which he neither owns or pays rent for nor occupies as the guest or 
relative of any person who owns, or pays rent for it; or  
(c) living in a sarai, dharamshala, hotel, boarding house, hostel, guest house, lodging house, club; 
or 
(d) lodged in premises occupied by members of two or more f amilies,  
the Chairperson or any person authorised by him in this behalf, may on the advice of any medical officer 
of the rank not inferior to that of a general duty medical officer remove the patient to any hospital or place 
at which persons suffering from  such diseases are received for medical treatment and may do anything 
necessary for such removal.  90 
 (2) The Council shall if required by the Central Government erect an infectious disease hospital of 
such type and dimension as that Government may direct.  
284. Disinfection of buildings and articles .—Where the Chairperson is of opinion that the cleansing 
and disinfection of any building or part of a building  or of any articles in such building or part which are 
likely to retain infection, or the renewal of flooring of any building or part of such building, and the 
renewal of plastering of the walls thereof, would tend to prevent or check the spread of any dan gerous 
disease; he may, by notice in writing, require the owner or occupier to cleanse and disinfect the said 
building, part or articles, as the case may be, or to renew the said flooring and if necessary, the said 
plastering also within such time as may b e specified in the notice:  
Provided that where in the opinion of the Chairperson the owner or occupier is from poverty or any 
other cause unable effectually to carry out any such requisition, the Chairperson may at the expense of the 
New Delhi Municipal Fund cleanse and disinfect the building, part or articles, or, as the case may be, 
renew the flooring and if necessary, the plastering also.  
285. Destruction of infectious huts or sheds .—(1) Where the destruction of any hut or shed is in the 
opinion of the Chairperson necessary to prevent the spread of any dangerous disease, the Chairperson 
may by notice in writing require the owner to destroy the hut or  shed and the materials thereof within 
such time as may be specified in the notice.  
(2) Where the Chairperson is satisfied that the destruction of any hut or shed is immediately necessary 
for the purpose  of preventing the spread of any dangerous disease, he may order the owner or occupier of 
the hut or shed to destroy the same forthwith or may himself cause it to be destroyed after  giving not less 
than six hours‟  notice to the owner or occupier.  
(3) Compensation may be paid by the Chairperson, in any case which he thinks fit, to any person who 
sustains substantial loss by the destruction of any such hut or shed, but, except as so allowed by the 
Chairpers on, no claim for compensation shall lie for any loss or damage caused by any exercise of the 
power conferred by this section.  
286. Means of disinfection .—(1) The Chairperson shall — 
(a) provide proper places with necessary attendants and apparatus for the disinfection of 
conveyances, clothing, bedding and other articles which have been exposed to infect ion; 
(b) cause conveyances, clothing and other articles brought for disinfection to be disinfected either 
free of charge or on payment of such charges as he may fix.  
(2) The Chairperson may notify places at which articles of clothing, bedding and the conveyances or 
other articles which have been exposed to infection shall be washed and if he does so, no person shall 
wash any such thing at any place not s o notified without having previously disinfected such thing.  
(3) The Chairperson may direct the destruction of any clothing, bedding or other article likely to 
retain infection and may give such compensa tion as he thinks fit for any article so destroyed.  
287. Special measures in case of out -break of dangerous or epidemic diseases .—(1) In the event 
of New Delhi or any part thereof being visited or threatened by an outbreak of any dangerous disease 
among the inhabitants thereof or any epidemic disease among any animals therein, the Chairperson, if he 
thinks that the other provisions of this Act and the p rovisions of any other law for the time being in force 
are insufficient for the purpose, may, with the pr evious sanction of the Council — 
(a) take such special measures; and  
(b) by public notice, give such directions to be observed by the public or by any class or section 
of the public,  
as he thinks necessary to prevent the outbreak or spread of the disease:  
Provided that where in the opinion of the Chair person immediate measures are necessary, he may 
take action, without such sanction as aforesaid and if he does so, shall forthwith report such action to the 
Council.  
(2) No person shall commit a breach of  any direction given under sub-section  (1) and if he does so he 
shall be deemed to have committed an offence under section 188 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  91 
 288. Infected clothes not to be sent to washerman or to laundry .—(1) A person shall not send or 
take to any washerman or to any laundry or place set apart for the exercise by washerman  of their calling, 
for the purpose of being washed or to any place for the purpose of being cleansed, any cloth or other 
article which he knows to have been exposed to infection from a dangerous disease unless that cloth or 
article has been disinfected by or to the satisfaction of the officer authorised in this behalf.  
(2) The occupier of any building in which a person is suffering from a dangerous disease shall, if 
required by the officer authorised by th e Chairperson, furnish to him the address of any washerman to 
whom or any laundry or other place to which clothes and other articles from the building have been, or 
will be, sent during the continuance of the disease, for the purpose of being washed or cle aned.  
289. Contamination and disinfection of public conveyance .—(1) Whoever— 
(a) uses a public con veyance while suffering from a dangerous disease; or  
(b) uses a public conveyance for the carriage of a person who is suffering from any dangerous 
disease; or  
(c) uses a public conveyance for the carriage of the corpse of a person who has died from any 
such disease,  
shall be bound to take proper precautions against the communication of the disease to other persons using 
or who may thereafter use the conveyance and to notify such use to the owner, driver, or person in charge 
of the conveyance, and further report without delay to the Chairperson the number of the conveyance and 
the name of the person so notifi ed. 
(2) Where any person suffering from, or the corpse of any person who has died from, a dangerous 
disease has been carried in public conveyance which ordinarily plies in New Delhi or any part thereof, the 
driver thereof shall forthwith report the fact to the Chairperson who shall forthwith cause the conveyance 
to be disinfected if that has not already been done.  
(3) No such conveyance shall be again b rought into use until the officer authorised by the 
Chairperson has granted a certificate stating that it can be used without causing risk of infection.  
(4) Whoever fails to make to the Chairperson any r eport which he is required to make under this 
section shall be guilty of an offence.  
290. Driver of conveyance not bound to carry persons suffering from dangerous disease .—
Notwithstanding anything containe d in any law for the time being in force no owner, driver or person in 
charge of a public conveyance shall be bound to convey or to allow to be conveyed in such conveyance in 
or in the vicinity of New Delhi any person suffering from a dangerous disease or the corpse of any person 
who has died from such disease unless and until such person pays or tenders a sum sufficient to cover any 
loss and expense which would ordinarily be incurred in disinfecting the conveyance.  
291. Disinfection of buildings before letting the same .—(1) Where any building or part of a 
building is intended to be let in which any person has, within six weeks immediately preceding, bee n 
suffering from a dangerous disease, the person letting the building or part shall, before doing so, disinfect 
the same in such manner as the Chairperson may by general or special notice direct together with all 
articles therein liable to retain infection . 
(2) For the purposes of this section the keeper of a hostel, lodging house, dharamshala, sarai, boarding 
house, guest house, hotel or club shall be deemed to have let to any person who is admitted as a guest 
therein that part of the building in which such person is permitted to reside.  
292. Disposal of infected articles without disinfection .—No person shall, without previous 
disinfection of the same, gi ve, lend, sell, transmit or otherwise dispose of to another person any article or 
thing which he knows or has reason to believe has been exposed to contamination by any dangerous 
disease and is likely to be used in or taken into New Delhi or any part there of. 
293. Prohibition of making or selling of food, etc., or washing of clothes by infected persons .—
No person while suffering from, or in circumstances in which he is likely to spread, any dangerous 
disease, shall — 
(a) make, carry or offer for sale or take any part in the business of making, carrying or offering 
for sale, any article of food or drink or any medicine or drug for human consumption, or a ny article of 
clothing or bedding for personal use or wear; or  92 
 (b) take any part in the business of the washing or carrying of clothes.  
294. Power to re strict or prohibit sale of food or drink .—When New Delhi or any part thereof is 
visited or threatened by an outbreak of any dangerous disease the Chairperson may, by public notice, 
restrict in such manner or prohibit for such period as may be specified in the notice, the sale or 
preparation of any article of food or drink for human consumption specified in the notice or the sale of 
any flesh of any description of animal so specified.  
295. Control over wel ls and tanks, etc .—(1) If the Chairperson is of opinion that the water in any 
well, tank or other place, is likely, if used for drinking, to endanger, or cause the spread of, any disease, 
he may— 
(a) by public notice, prohibit the removal or use of such water for drinking; or  
(b) by notice in writing require the owner or person having control of such well, tank or place to 
take such steps as may be directed by the notice to prevent the public from having access to or using 
such water; or  
(c) take such other steps as he may consider expedient to preve nt the outbreak or spread of any 
such disease.  
(2) In the event of New Delhi or any part thereof being visited or threatened by an outbreak or a 
dangerous disease the officer authorised by the Chairperson  in this behalf may, without notice and at any 
time, inspect and disinfect any well, tank or other place from which water is, or is likely to be, taken for 
the purposes of drinking and may further take such steps as he may think fit to ensure the purity of  the 
water or to prevent the use of the same for drinking purposes.  
296. Duty of persons suffering from dangerous disease .—No person shall — 
(a) knowing that he is suffering from a dangerous disease expose other persons to the risk of 
infection by his presence or conduct in any public street or public place;  
(b) having the care of a person whom he knows to be suffering from a dangerous disease, cause 
or permit that person to expose other persons to the risk of infection by his presence or conduct in any 
such street or place as aforesaid;  
(c) place or cau se to be placed in a dustbin or other receptacle for the deposit of rubbish, any 
matter which he knows to have been exposed to infection from a dangerous disease and which has not 
been disinfected properly;  
(d) throw or cause to be thrown into any latrine or urinal any matter which he knows to have been 
exposed to infection from a dangerous disease and which has not been disinfected properly.  
297. Dispos al of infectious corpses where any person has died from any dangerous disease .—
Where any person has died from any dangerous disease the Chairper son may, by notice in writing, — 
(a) require any person havi ng charge of the corpse to convey the same to mortuary thereafter to 
be disposed of in accordance with law, or  
(b) prohibit the removal of corpses from the place where death occurred except for the purpo se of 
being burnt, buried or for being conveyed to a mortuary.  
Special conditions regarding essential services  
298. Conditions of service of sweepers and certain other class of persons employed in municipal 
service .—(1) No person being a sweeper employed by the Council shall in the absence of any contract 
authorising him so to do and without reasonable cause, resign his employment or absent himsel f from his 
duty without having given one month‟ s notice to the Chairperson or shall neglect or without reasonable 
cause refuse to perform his duties.  
(2) The Council may by resolution direct that on or f rom such date as may be specified in the 
resolution, the provisions of this section shall apply in the case of any specified class of persons employed 
by the Council whose functions are intimately concerned with public health or safety.  93 
 299. Conditions of service of sweepers employed for doing house scavenging .—No sweeper, 
being employed for doing house scavenging of any building shall discontinue to  do such house 
scavenging without reasonable cause or wi thout having fourteen days‟  notice to his employer.  
Burning and burial grounds  
300. Power to call for information regarding burning and burial grounds .—The Chairperson 
may, by notice in writing, require the owner or person in charge of any burning or burial ground to supply 
such information as may be specified in the notice concerning the condition, management or position of 
such ground.  
301. Permission for use of new burning or burial ground .—(1) No place which has not been used 
as a burning or burial ground before the commencement of this Act shall be so used without the 
permission in writing of the C hairperson.  
(2) Such permission may be granted subject to any conditions which the Chairperson may think fit to 
impose for the purpose of preventing any annoyance to, or danger to the health of, any person residing in 
the neighbourhood.  
302. Power to require closing of burning and burial grounds .—(1) Where the Chairperson, after 
making or causing to be made local inquiry is of opinion that any burning or burial ground ha s become 
offensive to, or dangerous to the health of, persons residing in the neighbourhood, he may, with the 
previous sanction of the Council, by notice in writing, require the owner or person in charge of such 
ground to close the same from such date as m ay be specified in the notice.  
(2) No corpse shall be burnt or buried at the burning or burial ground in respect of which a notice has 
been issued under this section.  
303. Removal of corpses .—The Chairperson may by public notice prescribe routes by which alone 
corpses may be remov ed to burning or burial ground.  
Disposal of dead animals  
304. Disposal of  dead animals .—Whenever any animal in the charge of any person dies, the person 
in char ge thereof shall within twenty -four hours either — 
(a) convey the carcass to a place provided or appointed under secti on 263 for the final disposal of 
the carcasses of dead animals, or  
(b) give notice of the death to the Chairperson whereupon he shall cause the carcass to be 
disposed of on such fee as may be prescribed  by the Council.  
CHAPTER XVI  
VITAL STATISTICS  
305. Appoi ntment of Chief Registrar, etc .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Registration of B irths and Deaths Act, 1969 (18 of 1969), but subject to the provisions to this Act and to 
any directions that the Central Government may give in this behalf, the officer specified in the Official 
Gazette by the Chairperson, shall be the Chief Registrar of Births and Deaths for New Delhi and shall 
keep in such form as may be prescribed by bye-laws a register of all births and deaths occurring in New 
Delhi.  
(2) The Chairperson shall for the purposes of this Chapter appoint an additional chief registrar and 
such number of persons to be registrars of births and deaths for New Delhi as he deems necessary and 
define the respective areas which shall be under the charge of such registrars.  
306. Duties of registrar .—The registrar shall keep himself informed of every birth or death 
occurring within the area under his charge and shall ascertain and register as soon as conveniently may be 
after the event, and without fee or reward such particulars in respect of every birth or death as may be 
prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf.  94 
 307. Information of births and deaths .—(1) It shall be the duty of the father or mother of every 
child born in New Delhi and in default of the father or mother, of any relation of the child living in the 
same premises, and in default of such re lation, of the person having charge of the child, to give to the best 
of his knowledge and belief to the registrar of the area concerned within eight days after such birth, 
information containing such particulars as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in th is behalf.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the nearest relation present at the time of the death or in attendance during 
the last illness of any person dying in New Delhi and in default of such relation, of any person present or 
in attendance at the time of the death and of the occupier of the premises in which to his knowledge the 
death took place and in default of the person hereinbefore mentioned, of each inmate of such premises 
and of the undertaker or ot her person causing the corpse of the deceased person to be disposed of, to give 
to the best of his knowledge and belief to the registrar of the area within which the death place 
information containing such particulars as may be prescribed by bye-laws made in this behalf.  
(3) If a birth or death occurs in the hospital, none of the persons mentioned in sub-section  (1) or, as 
the case may be, in sub-section  (2) shall be bound to give information required by t hat sub-section , but it 
shall be the duty of the medical officer in charge of the hospital within twenty -four hours after the birth or 
death, to send to the officer authorised by the Chairperson, a notice containing such particulars as may be 
prescribed by  bye-laws made in this behalf.  
CHAPTER XVII  
PUBLIC SAFETY AND SUPPRESSION OF NUISANCES  
Nuisances  
308. Prohibition of nuisances .—(1) No person shall — 
(a) in any  public street or public place — 
(i) ease himself; or  
(ii) carry  meat exposed to public view; or  
(iii) picket animals or collect carts; or  
(iv) being engaged in the removal of rubbish, filth or other polluted and o bnoxious matter 
wilfully or negligent ly permit any portion thereof to spill or fall, or neglect to sweep away or 
otherwise effectually to remove any portion thereof which may spill or fall in such street or place; 
or 
(v) without proper authority affix, upon any building, monument, post, wall, fence, tree or 
other thing, any bill, notice or other document; or  
(vi) without  proper authority deface or write upon or otherwise mark any building, 
monument, post, wall, fence, tree or other thing; or  
(vii) without proper authority remove, destroy, deface or otherwise obliterate a ny notice or 
other document put up or exhibited under this Act or the rules or bye-laws made thereunder; or  
(viii) without proper authority displace, damage, make any alteration in, or otherwise interfere  
with, the pavement, gutter, storm, water -drain, flags or other materials of any such street, or any 
lamp bracket, direction -post, hydrant or water -pipe maintained by the Council in any such street 
or place or extinguish a public light; or  
(ix) carry rubbish, filth or other polluted and obnoxious matter at any hour prohibited by the 
Chairperson by public notice, or in any pattern of cart or receptacle which has not been approved 
for the purpose by the Cha irperson, or fail to close such cart or receptacle when in use; or  
(b) carry rubbish, filth or other polluted and obnoxious matter along any route in contravention of 
any prohibition made in this behalf b y the Chairperson by public notice; or  95 
 (c) deposit or cause or permit to be deposited, earth or materials of any description or any rubbish 
or polluted and obnoxious matter in any place not intended for the purpose in any public street or 
public place or waste or unoccupied land under the control and management of the Council; or  
(d) make any grave or burn or bury any corpse at any place not set apart fo r such purpose; or  
(e) at any time or place at which the same has been prohibited by the Chairperson by public or 
special notice, beat a drum or tom -tom, or blow a horn or trumpet, or beat any utensil, o r sound any 
brass or other instrument, or play any music; or  
(f) disturb the public peace or order by singing, screaming or shouting, or by using any apparatus 
for amplifying or reproducing the human voi ce, such as a megaphone or a loudspeaker; or  
(g) let loose any animal so as to cause, or negligently allow any animal to cause injury, danger, 
alarm or annoyance to any person; or  
(h) save with the written permission of the Chairperson and in such manner as he may authorise, 
store or use night -soil, cowdung, manure, rubbish or any other substance emitting an offensive smell; 
or 
(i) use or permit to be used as a latrine or urinal any place not intended for that purpose.  
(2) Every person shall take all reasonable means to prevent every  child under the age of twelve years 
being in his charge from e asing himself in any public street or public place.  
(3) The owner or keeper of any animal shall not allow it straying in a public street or p ublic place 
without a keeper.  
(4) Any animal found straying as aforesaid may be removed by an officer or employee of the Council 
or by any police officer to a pound.  
(5) Swine found straying in a public street or public place shall be liable to be destroyed by any 
officer or other employee of the Council appointed in this behalf.  
309. Power of Chairpe rson to require removal or abatement of nuisance .—Where the 
Chairperson is of opinion that there is a nuisance on any land or building, he may, by notice in writing, 
require the person by whose act, default or sufferance the nuisance arises or continues or  the power, 
lessee or occupier of the land or building, or any or more or these persons, to remove or abate the 
nuisance by taking such measures in such manner and within such period as may be specified in the 
notice.  
Dogs  
310. Registration and control of dogs .—(1) The Council may, by bye-laws made in this behalf, — 
(a) require the registration, by the registration authority appointed by the Chairperson in this 
behalf of  all dogs kept within New Delh i; 
(b) require that every registered dog shall wear a collar to which shal l be attached a metal token to 
be issued by the registration authority, and fix and fee payable for the issue thereof;  
(c) require that any dog which has not been registered or which is not wearing such token shall, if 
found in any public place, be detained at a place set apart for the purpose; and  
(d) fix the fee which shall be charged for such detention and provide that any such dog shall be 
liable to  be destroyed or otherwise disposed of unless it is claimed and the fee in respect thereof is 
paid within one week.  
(2) The Chairperson may — 
(a) cause  to be destroyed, or to be confined for such period as he may direct, any dog or other 
animal which is, or is reasonably suspected to be, suffering from rabies, or which has been bitten by 
any dog or other animal suffering or suspected to be suffering from  rabies;  
(b) by public notice direct that, after such date as may be specified in the notice, dogs which are 
without collars or without marks distinguishing them as private property and are found strayin g on the 96 
 streets or beyond the enclosures of the houses of their owners, if any, may be destroyed and cause 
them to be destroyed accordingly.  
(3) No damages shall be payable in respect of any dog or other  animal destroyed or otherwise 
disposed of under this section.  
(4) No one, being the owner or person in charge of any dog, shall allow it to be at large in any public 
street or public place without being  muzzled and without being secured by a c hain lead in any case in 
which— 
(a) he knows that the dog is likely to annoy or intimidate any person, or  
(b) the Chairperson has, by public notice during the prevalence of rabies, directed that dogs shall 
not be at large without muzzles and chain leads.  
(5) No one shall — 
(a) allow any ferocious dog which belongs to him or is in his charge to be at large without being 
muzzled; or  
(b) set on or urge any dog or other animal  to attack, worry or intimidate any person; or  
(c) knowing or having reason to believe that any dog or animal belonging to him or in his charge 
has been bitten by an animal suffering or reasonably suspec ted to be suffering from rabies, fail or 
neglect to give immediate information of the fact to the Chairperson or g ive information which is 
false.  
Prevention of fire, etc.  
311. Stacking or collecting inflammable materials .—The Chairperson may, by public notice, 
prohibit in any case where such prohibition appears to him to be necessary for the prevention of danger to 
life or property, the stacking or collecting of wood, dry grass, straw or other inflamm able materials, or the 
placing of mats or thatched huts or the lighting of fires in any place which may be specified in the notice.  
312. Care of naked lights .—No person shall set a naked light on or near any building in any public 
street or other public place in such manner as to cause danger of fire:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the use of lights for the purposes of 
illumination on the occasion of a festival or public or private entertainment.  
313. Discharging fireworks, fire -arms, etc .—No one shall discharge any fire -arm or let off             
fire-works or fire -baloons, or engage in any game in such manner as to cause  or to be likely to cause 
danger to persons passing by or dwelling or working in the neighbourhood or risk of injury to property.  
314. Power to require buildings, wells, etc., to be rendered safe .—Where any building, or wall, or 
anything affixed thereto, or any well, tank, reservoir, pool, depression, or excavation, or any bank or tree, 
is in the opinion of the Chairperson, in a ruinous state, for want of sufficient repairs, protection or 
enclosure,  a nuisance or dangerous to persons passing by or dwelling or working in the neighbourhood, 
the Chairperson may by notice in writing require the owner or part -owner or person claiming to be the 
owner or part -owner thereof or failing any of them the occupie r thereof to remove the same or may 
require him to repair, protect or enclose the same in such manner as he thinks necessary; and if the danger 
is, in the opinion of the Chairperson, imminent, he shall forthwith take such steps as he thinks necessary 
to av ert the same.  
315. Enclosure of waste land used for improper purpose .—The Chairperson may, by notice in 
writing, require the owner or part -owner, or person claiming to be the owner or part -owner of any la nd or 
building, or the lessee, or the person claiming to be the lessee of any such land which, by reason of disuse 
or disputed ownership or other cause, has remained unoccupied and has become the resort of idle and 
disorderly persons or of persons who have  no ostensible means of subsiste nce or cannot give a 
satisfactory account of themselves or is used for gaming or immoral purposes or otherwise occasions or is 
likely to occasion a nuisance, to secure and enclose the same within such time as may be specifie d in the 
notice.  
 97 
 CHAPTER XVIII  
MARKETS, TRADES AND OCCUPATIONS  
Maintenance and regulations of markets  
316. Provision of municipal market .—(1) The Chairperson, when authorised by the Council in this 
behalf, may provide and maintain municipal markets and slaughter houses in such number as he thinks fit 
together with stalls, shops, sheds, pens, and other buildings and conveniences for the use of p ersons 
carrying on trade or business in, or frequenting such markets or slaughter house, and may provide and 
maintain in any such markets buildings and places, machines, weights, scales and measures for the 
weighment or measurement of goods sold therein.  
(2) Municipal markets and slaughter houses shall be under the control of the Chairperson who may, at 
any time, by public notice, close any municipal market, slaughter house or any part thereof.  
317. Use of municipal markets and slaughter house .—(1) No person shall, without the general or 
special permission in writing of the Chairperson, sell or expose f or sale any animal or article in any 
municipal market.  
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section  (1), and any animal or article exposed for 
sale by such person, may be summarily removed fr om the market by or under the orders of the 
Chairperson or any officer or employee of the Council authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf.  
318. Private markets .—(1) No place other than a municipal market shall be used as a market unless 
such place has been licensed as a market by the Council.  
(2) No place other than a municipal slaughter house shall be used as a slaughter house:  
Provided that nothing in this sub-section  shall be deemed — 
(i) to restrict the slaughter of any animal in any place on the occasion of any religious festival or 
ceremony, subject to such conditions (non -compliance with which shall be punishable under this Act) 
as the Chairperson may, by public or special notice, impose in this behalf, or  
(ii) to prevent the Chair person, with the sanction of the Council, from setting apart place for the 
slaughter of animal in accordance with religious custom.  
319. Conditions of grant of licence for private market .—(1) The Chairperson may charge such 
fees as the Council may prescribe in this behalf for the grant of a licence to any person to open a private 
market and may grant such licence subject to such conditions, consistent wit h this Act and any bye-laws 
made thereunder.  
(2) When the Council refuses to grant any licence, it shall record a brief statement of the reasons for 
such refusal.  
(3) The Chairperson may, for reasons to be recorded, suspend a licence in respect of a private market 
for such period as he thinks fit, or cancel his licence.  
(4) A private market of which the licence has been suspended or cancelled as aforesaid shall be closed 
with effect from such date as may be specified in the order of suspension or cancellation.  
320. Prohibiti on of keeping market open without licence, etc .—(1) No person shall keep open for 
public use any market in respect of which a licence is required by or under this Act without obtaining a 
licence therefor,  or while the licence therefor is suspended or after the same has been cancelled.  
(2) When a licence to open a private market is granted or refused or is suspended or cancelled the 
Chairperson shall cause  a notice of the grant, refusal, suspension or cancellation to be posted in such 
language or languages as he thinks necessary in some conspicuous place by or near the entrance to the 
place to which the notice relates.  
321. Prohibition of use of unlicensed markets .—No person knowing that market has been opened 
to the public without a licence having been obtained therefor when such licence is required by or under 
this Act or that the licence granted therefor  is for the time being suspended or that it has been cancelled, 
shall sell or expose for sale any animal or article in such market.  98 
 322. Prohibition of business and trade near a market .—(1) No animal or article shall be sold or 
exposed for sale within a distance of one hundred metres of any municipal market or licensed private 
market without the permission of the Chairperson.  
(2) Any person contravening the provisions of sub-section  (1) and any animal or article exposed for 
sale by such person may be summarily removed by or under the orders of the Chairperson or any officer 
or employee of the Council appointed by him in this behalf.  
323. Levy of stallages, rents and fees .—(1) The Chairperson, with the previo us approval of the 
Council may — 
(a) charge such stallages, rents and fees as may from time to time be fixed by him in this behalf — 
(i) for the occupation or use of any stall, shop, stand, shed or pen in a municipal market or 
municipal slaughter house;  
(ii) for the right to expose articles for sale in a municipal market;  
(iii) for the use of machines, weights, scales and measures  provided for in any municipal 
market; and  
(iv) for the right to slaughter animals in any municipal slaughter house, and for the feed of 
such animals before they are ready for slaughter; or  
(b) farm the stallages, rents and fees chargeable as aforesaid or  any portion thereof for such 
period as he thinks fit; or  
(c) put up to public auction or dispose by the private sale the privilege of occupying or using any 
stall, shop, shed or pen in a municipal market  or municipal slaughter house for such period and on 
such conditions as he may think fit.  
(2) A copy of the table of stallages and fees, if any, chargeable in any municipal market in New Delhi 
and of the bye-laws made under this Act for the purpose of regulating the use of such market printed in 
such language or languages as the Chairperson may direct, shall be affixed in some conspicuous place in 
the market.  
324. Power to expel disturbers, etc., from markets .—The Chairperson may prevent the entry in any 
market and shall expel therefrom, any person suffering from any dangerous disease, who sells or exposes 
for sale therein any article or who, not having pu rchased the same handles any article exposed for sale 
therein; and he may expel therefrom any person who is creating a disturbance therein.  
325. Butcher’s fish -monger’s and poulter’s licence .—(1) No person shall without or otherwise than 
in conformity with a licence from the Chairperson carry on the trade of a butcher, fish -monger, poulterer 
or importer of flesh intended for human consumption or  use any place for the sale of flesh, fish or poultry 
intended for human consumption:  
Provided that no licence shall be required for any place used for the sale or storage for sale of 
preserved flesh or fish contained in air -tight or hermetically sealed re ceptacles.  
(2) The Chairperson may order and subject to such conditions as to supervision and inspection as he 
thinks fit to impose grant a licence or may by order refuse for reasons to be recorded, to gr ant the same.  
(3) Every such licence shall expire at the end of the year for which it is granted or at such earlier date 
as the Chairperson may, for special reasons, specify in the licence.  
(4) If any place is used for the sale of flesh, fish or poultry in contravention of the provisions of this 
section, the Chairperson may stop the use thereof by such means as he may consider necessary.  
(5) (i) If the Chairperson or any person authorised by him in this behalf has reason to believe that any 
animal intended for human consumption is being slaughtered or that the flesh of any such animals is 
being sold or e xposed for sale, in any place or manner not duly authorised under this Act, he may at any 
time by day or night without notice inspect such place for the purpose of satisfying himself as to whether 
any provision of this Act or of any bye -law under this Act at the time in force is being contravened thereat 
and may seize any such animal or the carcass of such animal or such flesh found therein.  99 
 (ii) The Chairperson may remove and sell by auction or otherwise dispose of any animal or carcass of 
any animal or any flesh seized under clause ( i) of this sub-section . 
(iii) If within one month of such seizure the owner of the animal, carcass or flesh fails to appear  and 
prove his claim to the satisfaction of the Chairperson or if the owner is convicted of an offence under this 
Act in respect of such animal, carcass or flesh, the proceeds of any sale under clause ( i) of this sub-section  
shall vest in the Council.  
(iv) Any person slaughtering any animal or selling or exposing for sale the flesh of any such animal in 
any place or manner not duly authorised under the provisions of this Act may be arrested by any police 
officer without a warrant.  
(v) No claim shall lie against any person for compensation for any damage necessarily caused by any 
such entry or by the use of any force necessary for affecting such entry.  
Trades and occupations  
326. Factory, etc., not to be established without permission of the Chairperson .—(1) No person 
shall, without the previous permissi on in writing of the Chairperson, establish in any premises, or 
materially alter, enlarge or extend, any factory, workshop or trade premises in which it is intended to 
employ steam, electricity, water or other mechanical power.  
(2) The Chairperson may refuse to give such permission, if he is of the opinion that the establishment, 
alteration, enlargement or extension of such factory, workshop or trade premises, in the proposed position 
would be objectionable  by reason of the density of the population in the neighbourhood thereof, or would 
be a nuisance to the inhabitants of the neighbourhood.  
327. Premises not to be used for certain purposes without licence .—(1) No person shall use or 
permit to be used any premises for any of the following purposes without or otherwise than in conformity 
with the terms of a licence granted by the Chairperson in this behalf,  namely:— 
(a) any of the purposes specified in Part I of the Ninth Schedule;  
(b) any purpose which is, in the opinion of the Chairperson dangerous to life, health or property 
or likely to create a nuisance;  
(c) keeping horses, cattle or other quadruped animals or birds for transportation , sale or hire or for 
sale of the produce thereof; or  
(d) storing any of the articles specified in Part II of the Ninth Schedule except for domestic use of 
any of those articles:  
Provided that the Counci l may declare that premises in which the aggregate quantity of articles stored 
for sale does not exceed such quantity as may be prescribed by bye-laws in respect of any such articles 
shall be exempted from the operation of clause ( d). 
(2) In prescribing the terms of a licence granted under this section for the use of premises as mil ls or 
iron yards or for similar purposes the Chairperson may, when he thinks fit, require the licensee to p rovide 
a space or passage within the premises for carts for loading and unloading purposes.  
(3) The Council shall fix a scale of fees to be paid in respect of premises licensed under                 
sub-section  (1): 
Provided that no such fee shall exceed five hundred rupees.  
328. Seizure of certain animals .—(1) If any horses, cattle or other quardruped animals or birds are 
kept on any premises in contravention of the provisions of section 327, or are found abandoned and 
roaming or tethered on any street or public place or on any land belonging to the Council, the Chairperson 
or any officer empowered by him may seize them and may cause them to be impounded or removed to 
such place as may be appointed by the Government or the Council for this purpose and the cost of seizure 
of these animals or birds and of impounding or removing them and of feeding and wat ering them shall be 
recoverable by sale by auction of these animals or birds:  
Provided that anyone claiming such animal or bird may, within seven days of the seizure get them 
released on his paying all expenses incurred by the Chairperson in seizing, impou nding or removing and 100 
 in feeding and watering such animal or bird, and on his producing a licence for keeping these animals and 
birds issued under the provisions of section 327.  
(2) Whenever the Chairpers on is of opinion that the user or any premises for any of the purposes 
referred to in sub-section  (1) of section 327 is causing a nuisance and such nuisance should be 
immediately stopped, the Chairperson may order the owner or the occupier of the premises to stop such 
nuisance within such time as may be specified in the order and in the event of the failure of the owner or 
occupier to comply with such order, the Chairperson may himself or by an officer subordinate to him 
cause such user to be stopped.  
(3) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section any person by whom or at whose 
instance any horses, cattle or other quadruped animals or birds are so kept, abandoned or tethered, shall 
also b e punishable under this Act.  
329. Power of Chairperson to prevent use of premises in particular areas for purposes referred 
to in section 327 .—(1) The Chairperson may give public notice of his intention to declare that in any area 
specified in the notice no person shall use any premises for any of the purposes referred to in                      
sub-section  (1) of section 327, which may be specified in such notice.  
(2) No objections to any such declaration shall be received after a period of one month from the 
publication of the notice.  
(3) The Chairperson shall consider all objections received within the said period, giving any person 
affected by the notice an opportunity of being heard during such consideration, and may thereupon make 
a declaration in accordance with the notice published u nder sub-section  (1), with such modifications, if 
any, as he may think but not so as to extend its application.  
(4) Every such declaration shall be published in the Official Gazette and in such other mann er as the 
Chairperson may determine, and shall take effect from the date of its publication in the Official Gazette.  
(5) No person shall, in any area specified in any declaration published under sub-section (4) use any 
premises for any of the purposes referred to in section 327 specified in the declaration and the 
Chairperson shall have the power to stop the use of any such premises by such means as he considers 
necessary.  
330. Licences for hawking articles, etc .—No person shall, without or otherwise than in conformity 
with the terms of a licence granted by t he Chairperson in this behalf, — 
(a) hawk or expose for sale in any place any article whatsoever whether it be for human 
consumption or not;  
(b) use in any place his skill in any handicraft or for rendering services to and for the convenience 
of the public for the purposes of gain or making a living.  
331. Eating houses, etc., not to be used without licence from the Chairperson .—(1) No person 
shall, without or otherwise than in conformity with the terms of a licence granted by the Chairperson in 
this behalf, keep any eating house, lodging house, hote l, boarding house, tea shop, coffee house, cafe, 
restaurant, refreshment room or any place where the public are admitted for repose or for the consumption 
of any food or drink or any place, where food is sold or prepared for sale.  
(2) The Chairperson may at any time cancel or suspend any licence granted under sub-section  (1) if 
he is of the opinion that the premises covered thereby are not kept in conformity with the conditions of 
such licence or with the  provisions of any bye -law made in  this behalf, whether the licens ee is prosecuted 
under this Act or not.  
332. Licensing and control of theatres, circuses and places of public amusement .—No person 
shall,  without or otherwise than in conformity with the terms of a licence granted by the Chairperson in 
this behalf, keep open any theatre, circus, cinema house, dancing hall or other similar place of public 
resort, recreation or amusement:  
Provided that nothin g in this section shall apply to private performances in any such place.  
333. Power of Chairperson to stop use of premises used in contravention of licences .—If the 
Chairperson is of opinion that any eati ng house, lodging house, hotel, boarding house, tea shop, coffee 101 
 house, cafe, restaurant, refreshment room or other place where the public are admitted for repose or for 
consumption of any food or drink or where food is sold or prepared for sale or any the atre, circus, cinema 
house, dancing hall or similar other place of public resort, recreation or amusement is kept open without a 
licence or otherwise than in conformity with the terms of a licence granted in respect thereof, he may stop 
the use of any such  premises for any such purpose for a specified period by such means as he may 
consi der necessary.  
CHAPTER XIX  
IMPROVEMENT  
334. Improvement scheme .—Where the Chairperson upon information in his possession is satisfied 
as respects any area — 
(a) that the buildings in that area are by reason of disrepair or sanitary defects unfit for human 
habitation o r are by reason of their bad arrangement, or the narrowness or bad arrangement of the 
streets or the want of light, air, ventilation or proper conveniences, dangerous or injurious to the 
health of the inhabitants of the area; and  
(b) that the most satisfactory method of dealing with th e conditions in the area is the                         
re-arrangement and reconstruction of the streets and buildings in the area in accordance with an 
improvement scheme,  
he may frame an improvement scheme in respect of the area in accordance with the bye-laws made in this 
behalf.  
335. Matters to be provided for in an improvement scheme .—(1) An improvement scheme may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the acquisition by agreement or under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894), of any 
property necessary for or affected by the execution of the scheme;  
(b) the relaying out of any land comprised in the scheme;  
(c) the redistribution of sites belonging to owners of property comprised in the scheme;  
(d) the closure or demolition of buildings or portions of buildings unfit for human habitation;  
(e) the demolition of obstructive buildings or portions thereof;  
(f) the construction and reconstruction of buildings;  
(g) the construction and alteration of streets;  
(h) the water supply, street lighting, electric supply, drainage and other conveniences;  
(i) the provision of open spaces for the benefit of any area comprised in the scheme;  
(j) the sanitary arrang ements required for the area comprised in the scheme;  
(k) the provision of accommodation for any class of the inhabitants;  
(l) the provision of facilities for communication;  
(m) the sale, letting or exchange of any property comprised in the scheme;  
(n) any other matter for which, in the opinion of the Chairperson it is expedient to make provision 
with a view to the improvement of the area to which the scheme relates.  
(2) Where any land is designated in an improvement scheme as sub ject to acquisition or is required by 
the scheme to be kept as an open space, then, if at the expiration of ten years from the date of sanction of 
the scheme by the Central Government under sub-section  (2) of section 336 the land is not acquired by 
the Cha irperson, the owner of the land may serve on the Chairperson a notice requiring his interest in the 
land to be so acquired.  
(3) If the Chairperson fails to acquire the land within a period of six months from the receipt of the 
notice, the improvement scheme shall have effect after the expiration of the said six months as if the land 
were not designated as subject to acquisition by the Chairperson or were not required to be kept as an 
open space.  102 
 336. Submission of improvement scheme to the Council for approval and to the Central 
Government for sanction .—(1) Every improvement scheme shall, as soon as may  be after it has been 
framed, be submitted by the Chairperson for approval to the Council and the Council may either approve 
the scheme without modifications or with such modifications as it may consider necessary or reject the 
scheme with directions to th e Chairperson to have a fresh scheme framed according to such directions.  
(2) No improvement scheme approved by the Council under sub-section  (1) shall be valid unless it 
has been sanctioned by the Central Government.  
337. Rehousing scheme .—The Chairperson while framing an improvement scheme under this 
Chapter for any area may also frame a scheme (hereafter in this Act referred to as the rehousing scheme) 
for the construction, maintenance and management of such area and so many buildings as he may 
consider necessary for providing accommodation for persons who are likely to be displaced by the 
execution of the improvement scheme.  
338. Improvement scheme and rehousing scheme to comply with the master plan and zonal 
development plan .—No improvement scheme or rehousing scheme framed under this Chapter shall be 
valid unless such scheme is in conformity wi th the provisions of the master plan for Delhi or a zonal 
development plan for New Delhi or any part thereof.  
CHAPTER XX  
POWERS, PROCEDURE, OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
Licences and written permissions  
339. Signature, conditions, duration, suspension, revocation, etc., of licences and written 
permissions .—(1) Whenever it is provided in this Act or any bye -law made thereunder that a licence or a 
written perm ission may be granted for any purpose, such licence or written permission shall be signed by 
the Chairperson or by the officer empowered to grant the same under this Act or the bye-laws made 
thereunder or by any officer authorised by the Chairperson or suc h officer in this behalf and shall specify 
in addition to any other matter required to be specified under any other provision of this Act or any 
provision o f any bye -law made thereunder — 
(a) the date of t he grant thereof;  
(b) the purpose and the period (if any) for which it is granted;  
(c) restrictions  or conditions, if any, subject to which it is granted;  
(d) the name and address of the person to whom it is granted; and  
(e) the fee, if any, paid for the licence or written permission.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act or any bye -law made thereunder, for every such licence 
or written permission a fee may be charged at such rate as may from t ime to time be fixed by the 
Chairperson with the sanction of the Council and such fee shall be payable by the person to whom the 
licence or written permission is granted.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided i n this Act or any bye-law made thereunder any licence or written 
permission granted under this Act any bye -law made thereunder may at any time be suspended or revoked 
by the Chairperson or by the officer by whom it was granted, if he is satisfied that it h as been secured by 
the grantee through misrepresentation or fraud or if any of its restrictions or conditions have been 
infringed or evaded by the grantee, or if the grantee has been convicted for the contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or a ny bye-law made thereunder relating to any matter for which the licence or 
permission has been granted:  
Provided that — 
(a) before making any order of suspension or revocation reasonable opportunity shall be accorded 
to the grantee of the licence or the written permission to show cause why it should not be suspended 
or revoked;  103 
 (b) every such order shall contain a brief statement of the reasons for the susp ension or revocation 
of the licence or the written permission.  
(4) When any such licence or written permission is suspended or revoked, or when the period for 
which the same was granted has expired, the g rantee shall, for all purposes of this Act or any bye-law 
made thereunder, be deemed to be without a licence or written permission until such time as the order 
suspending or revoking the licence or written permission is rescinded or until the licence or wr itten 
permission is renewed.  
(5) Every grantee of any licence or written permission granted under this Act shall at all reasonable 
times, while such licence  or written permission remains in force, if so required by the Chairperson or the 
authority by whom it was granted, produce such  licence or written permission.  
Entry and inspection  
340. Powers of entry an d inspection .—The Chairperson or any officer or other employee authorised 
in this behalf by him or empowered in this behalf by or under any provision of this Act, rules, regulations 
or bye-laws made thereunder, may enter into or upon any land or building w ith or without assistants and 
workmen — 
(a) for the purpose of ascertaining whether there is or has been on or in connection with the land 
or building any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules , regulations or any bye-law made 
there -under;  
(b) for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not circumstances exist which would authorise  or 
require the Chairperson or any municipal officer or employee authorised or empowered in this behalf 
to take any action or execute any work under this Act, rules, regulations or any bye-law made 
thereunder;  
(c) for the purpose of taking any action or executing any work authorised or required by this Act, 
rules, regulations or bye-laws made thereunder;  
(d) to make any inquiry, inspection, examination, measurement, valuation or survey authorised or 
required by or under this Act, rules, regulations or bye-laws made thereunder or necessary for the 
proper administration of this Act;  
(e) generally for the purpose of efficient discharge of the functions by the Council under this Act, 
rules, regulations or any bye-law made thereunder.  
341. Power to enter land a djoining land in relation to any work .—(1) The Chairperson or any 
person authorised in this behalf by him or empowered in this behalf by or under any provision of this Act, 
rules, regulations or bye-laws made thereunder, may enter on any land within fifty metres of any work 
authorised by or under this Act, rules, regulations or bye-laws made thereunder with or without assistants 
and workmen for the purpose of depositing thereon any soil, gravel, stone or other materials or for 
obtaining access to such work or for any other purposes connected with the execution of the same.  
(2) The person so authorised shall, before entering on any such land, state the pur pose thereof, and 
shall, if so required by the owner or occupier thereof, fence off so much of the land as may be required for 
such purpose.  
(3) The person so authorised shall, in exercising any power co nferred by  this section, do as little 
damage as may be and compensation shall be payable by the Council in accordance with bye-laws made 
in this behalf to the owner or occupier of such land or to both for any such damage, whether permanent or 
temporary.  
342. Breaking into building .—(1) It shall be lawful for the Chairperson or any person authorised in 
this behalf by him or empowered in this behalf by or , under any provision of this Act, rules, regulations or 
bye-laws made thereunder to make any entry into any place, and to open or cause to be opened a ny door, 
gate or other barrier — 
(a) if he considers the opening thereof necessary for the purpose of such entry; and  
(b) if the owner or occupier is absent or being present refuses to open such door, gate or barrier.  
(2) Before making any entry into any such place, or opening or causing to be opened any such door, 
gate or other barrier, the Chairperson or the person authorised or empowered in this behalf, shall call upon 104 
 two or more respectable inhabitant s of the locality in which the place to be entered into is situate, to 
witness the entry or opening and may issue an order in writing to them or any of them so to do.  
343. Time of making entry .—Save as o therwise provided in this Act, rules, regulations or any     
bye-law made thereunder, no entry authorised by or under this Act shall be made except between the 
hours of sunrise and sunset.  
344. Consent o rdinarily to be obtained .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, rules, regulations 
or any bye-law made thereunder, no land or building shall be entered without the consent of the occupier, 
or if there is no occupier, of the owner thereof and no such entry shall be made without giving the said 
owner or occupier, as the case may be, not less than twenty -four hours‟  written notice of the intention to 
make such entry:  
Provided that no such notice shall be necessary if the place to be inspected is a factory or workshop or 
trade premises or a place used for any of the purposes specified in section 327 or a s table for horses or a 
shed for cattle or a latrine or urinal or a work under construction, or for the purpose of ascertaining 
whether any animal intended for human consumption is slaughtered in that place in contravention of this 
Act or any bye-law made th ereunder.  
345. Regard to be had to social or religious usages .—When any place used as a human dwelling is 
entered under this Act, due regard shall be paid to the social and religious customs and usages of  the 
occupants of the place entered, and no apartment in the actual occupancy of a female shall be entered or 
broken open until she has been informed that she is at liberty to withdraw and every reasonable facility 
has been afforded to her withdrawing.  
346. Prohibition of obstruction or molestation in execution of work .—No person shall obstruct or 
molest any person authorised or empowered by or under this Act or any person with whom the Council 
has lawfull y contracted, in the execution of his duty or of anything which he is authorised or empowered 
or required to do by virtue or in consequence of any of the provisions of this Act, rules, regulations or any 
bye-law made thereunder, or in fulfilment of his con tract, as the case may be.  
Public notices and advertisements  
347. Public notices how to be made known .—Every public notice given under this Act, rules, 
regulations or any bye-law made thereunder shall be in writing under the signature of the Chairperson or 
of any officer authorised in this behalf by him and shall be widely made known in the locality to be 
affected thereby, by affixing copies thereof in conspicuous public places wi thin the said locality or by 
publishing the same by beat of drum or by advertisement in local newspapers or by any two or more of 
these means and by any other means that the Chairperson may think fit.  
348. Newspapers in which advertisements or notices to be published .—Whenever it is provided 
by this Act or any bye-law made thereunder that notice shall be given by advertisement in local 
newspapers, or that a notification or information shall be published  in local newspapers, such notice, 
notification or information shall be inserted, if practicable, in at least three newspapers in such languages 
as the Council may from time to time specify in this behalf:  
Provided that if the Council publishes a municipal  journal, a publication in that journal shall be 
deemed to be a publication in a newspaper of the language in which the said journal may be published.  
Evidence  
349. Proof of consent, etc., of Chairperson .—Whenever, under this Act or any rule, regulation or 
bye-law made thereunder, the doing of, or the omission to do, anything or the validity of anything 
depends upon the approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion or satisfaction of the 
Chairperson or of any municipal officer, a written document signed by the Chairperson or officer 
purporting to convey or set forth such approval, sanction, consent, concurrence, declaration, opinion or 
satisfaction shall be sufficient evidence thereof.  
 105 
 Notices, etc.  
350. Notices, etc., to fix reasonable time .—Where any notice, bill, order or requisition issued or 
made under this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder requires anything to be done for 
the doing of which no time is fixed in this Act or the rule, regulation or bye-law, the notice bill, order or 
requisition shall specify a reasonable time for doing the same.  
351. Signature on notices, etc., may be stamped .—(1) Every licence, written permission, notice, 
bill, summons or other document which is required by this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made 
thereunder to bear the signature of the Chairperson or of any officer, shall be deemed to be properly 
signed if it bears a facsimile of the signature of the Chairperson or Officer, as the case may be, stamped 
thereupon.  
(2) Noth ing in sub-section  (1) shall be deemed to apply to a cheque drawn upon the New Delhi 
Municipal Fund under section 46.  
352. Notices, etc., by whom to be served or issued .—All notices, bills, summons and ot her 
documents required by this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder to be served upon, or 
issued to, any person, shall be served or issued by Municipal officers or other Municipal employees or by 
other persons authorised by the Chairperso n. 
353. Services of notices, etc .—(1) Every notice, bill, summons order, requisition or other document 
required or authorised by this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder to be served or 
issued by or on behalf of the Council, or by the Chairperson or any officer, of any pers on shall, save as 
otherwise provided in this Act or such rule, regulation or bye-law, be deemed to be duly served — 
(a) where the person to be served is a company, if the document is addressed to the secre tary of 
the company at its registered office or at its principal office or place  of the business and is either — 
(i) sent by registered post, or  
(ii) delivered at the registered office or at the principal office or place of business of the 
company;  
(b) where the person to be served is a partnership firm, if the document is addressed to the 
partnership f irm at its principal place of business, identifying it by the name or style under which its 
busines s is carried on, and is either — 
(i) sent by registered post, or  
(ii) delivered at the said place of business;  
(c) where the person to be served is a public body, or a corporation, society or other body, if the 
documen t is addressed to the secretary, treasurer or other head officer of that body, corporation or 
society as its p rincipal office, and is either — 
(i) sent by registered post, or  
(ii) delivered at that office;  
(d) in any other case, if the document is addressed to the person to be served and — 
(i) is given or tendered to him, or  
(ii) if such person cannot be found, is affixed on some conspicuous part of his last known 
place of residence or business, if within the National Capital  Territory of Delhi, or is given or 
tendered to some adult member of his family or is affixed on some conspicuous part of the land or 
building, if any, to which it relates, or  
(iii) is sent by registered  post to that person.  
(2) Any document which is required or authorised to be served on the owner or occupier of any land 
or building may be addressed “the owner ” or “the occupier ”, as the case may be, of  that land or building 
(naming that land or building) without further name or description, and sha ll be deemed to be duly 
served— 
(a) if the document so addressed is sent or delivered in accordance with clause ( d) of               
sub-section  (1); or 106 
 (b) if the document so addressed or a copy thereof so addressed, is delivered to some person on 
the land or building or, where there is no person on the la nd or building to whom it can be delivered, 
is affixed to some conspicuous part of the land or building.  
(3) Where a document is served on a partnership firm in accordance with this section, the document  
shall be deemed to be served on each partner.  
(4) For the purpose of enabling any document to be served on the owner of any premises the 
Chairperson may by notice in writing require the occupier of the p remises to state the name and address 
of the owner thereof.  
(5) Where the person on whom a document is to be served is a minor, the service upon his guardian or 
any adult member of his family shall be deemed to be service upon the minor.  
(6) Nothing in sections 351 and 352 and in this section shall apply to any summons issued under this 
Act by a court.  
(7) A servant is not a member of the family within the meaning of this section.  
354. Service of bills for tax or notice of demand by ordinary post .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sections 352 and 353 a bill for any tax or a notice of demand may be served by sending it by 
ordinary post with a prepaid letter under a certificate of posting addressed to the appropriate person 
specified in section 353 at his last known place of residence or business  and in proving the service of 
every bill or notice so sent it shall be sufficient to prove that the letter was properly addressed and posted 
under a certificate of posting.  
355. Powers in case of non -compliance with notice, etc .—In the event of non -compliance with the 
terms of any notice, order or requisition issued to any person under this Act or any rule, regulation or    
bye-law made thereunder; requiring such person to execute any work or to do any a ct it shall be lawful for 
the authority or officer at whose instance the notice, order or requisition has been issued, whether or not 
the person in default is liable to punishment for such default or has been prosecuted or sentenced to any 
punishment there for, after giving notice in writing to such person, to take such action or such steps as may 
be necessary for the completion of the act or the work required to be done or executed by such person and 
all the expenses incurred on such account shall be payabl e to the Chairperson on demand and if not paid 
within ten days after such demand, shall be recoverable as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
Recovery of expenses  
356. Liability of occupier to pay in defaul t of owner .—(1) If any notice, order or requisition has 
been issued to any person in respect of property of which he is the owner, the authority or the officer at 
whose instance such notice, order or requ isition has been issued, may require the occupier of such 
property or of any part thereof to pay to him, instead of to the owner, any rent payable by him in respect 
of su ch property, as it falls due up to the amount recoverable from the owner under section 355:  
Provided that if the occupier refuses to disclose the correct amount of the rent payable by him or the 
name or address of the person to whom it is payable, the officer may recover from the occupier the whole 
amount recoverable under section 355 as an arrear of tax under this Act.  
(2) Any amount recovered from an occupier instead of from an owner under sub-section  (1), shall, in 
the absence of any co ntract between the owner and the occupier to the contrary, be deemed to have been 
paid to the owner.  
357. Execution of work by occupier in default of owner and deduction of expenses from rent .—
Whenever th e owner of any land or building fails to execute any work which he is required to execute 
under this Act, or any bye-law made thereunder, the occupier, if any, of such land or building may, with 
the approval of the Chairperson, execute the said work and he  shall, subject to any contract, between the 
owner and occupier to the contrary, be entitled to recover from the owner the reasonable expenses 
incurred by him in the execution of the work and may deduct the amount thereof from the rent payable by 
him to th e owner.  
358. Relief to agents and trustees .—(1) Where any person, by reason of his receiving rent of 
immovable property as a receiver, agent or trustee , or of his being as a receiver, agent or trustee the 107 
 person who would receive the rent if the property were let to a tenant, would under this Act, or any       
bye-law made thereunder, be bound to discharge any obligation imposed on the owner of the prope rty for 
the discharge of which money is required, he shall not be bound to discharge the obligation unless he has, 
or but for his own improper act or default might have had funds in his hands belonging to the owner 
sufficient for the purpose.  
(2) The burden of proving any fact entitling a receiver , agent or trustee to relief under sub-section  (1) 
shall lie upon him.  
(3) Where any receiver, agent or trustee has claimed and established his right to relief under this 
section, the Chairperson may, by notice in writing require him, to apply to the discharge of his obligation 
as aforesaid the first moneys which may come to his hands on behalf, or for the u se, of the owner and on 
failure to comply with the notice, he shall be deemed to be personally liable to discharge the obligation.  
Payment of compensation  
359. General power to compensation .—In any case not otherwise provided for in this Act or in any 
bye-law made thereunder, the Chairperson with the previous approval of the Council, may pay 
compensation to any person who sustains damage by reason of the exercise of any of the powers vested 
by this Act or  any bye-law in the Chairperson or in any municipal officer or other municipal employee.  
360. Compensation to be paid by offenders for damage caused by them .—(1) Any person who 
has been convicted of an offence against this Act or any bye-law made thereunder shall, notwithstanding 
any punishment to which he may have been sentenced for the said offence, be liable to pay such 
compensation for any damage to the property of the Council resulting from the said offence as the 
Chairperson may consider reasonable.  
(2) In the event of a dispute regarding the amount of compensation payable under sub-section  (1) 
such amount shall, on application made to him, be determined by the magistrate before whom the said 
person was convicted of the said offence; and on non -payment of the amount of compensation so 
determined the same shall be recovered under a warrant issued by the said magistrate as if it were a fine 
imposed by him on the person liable therefor.  
Recovery of expenses or compensation in case of dispute  
361. Reference to the court of the district judge in cert ain cases .—(1) If, when the Chairperson 
demands payment of any expenses referred to in section 355, his right to demand the same or the amount 
of the demand is disputed within ten days after such demand, the Chairperson shall re fer the case for 
determination — 
(a) to the Appellate Tribunal, if such demand relates to the expenses incurred in taking necessary 
action or steps for the completion of any act or  work required to be done o r executed in the event of 
non-compliance with any notice, order or requisition under sections 221, 229, 247, 248 and 249;  
(b) to the court of the district judge of Delhi, in any other case.  
(2) The Chairperson shall, pending the decision on any such reference, defer further proceedings for 
the recovery of the sum claimed by him, a nd shall, after the decision, proceed to recover only such 
amount, if any, as is thereby declared to be due in the manner referred to in section 355.  
362. Application to the court of the district judge in  other cases .—(1) Where, in any case not 
provided for by section 361, the Council or the Chairperson or any officer or other employee is required 
by this Act or by any bye-law made thereunder to pay any e xpenses or any compensation, the amount to 
be so paid and if necessary, the apportionment of the same, shall, in case of dispute, be determined by the 
court of the district judge of Delhi on an application having been made to it for this purpose at any tim e 
within one year from the date when such expenses or compensation first became claimable.  
(2) If the amount of any expenses or compensation ascertained in accordance with sub-section  (1) is 
not paid by t he person liable therefor on demand, it shall be recoverable as if the same were due under a 
decree passed by the court of the district judge in an original suit tried by it.  108 
 (3) Instead of proceeding in  the manner aforesaid for the recovery of any expenses or compensation 
of which the amount due has been ascertained as hereinbefore provided, or after such proceedings have 
been taken unsuccessfully or with only partial success, the sum due or the balance of the sum due, as the 
case may be, may be recovered by a suit brought against the person liable for same in any court of 
competent jurisdiction.  
Recovery of certain dues  
363. Mode of recovery of certain  dues .—In any case not expressly provided for in this Act or any 
bye-law made thereunder any sum due to the Council on account of any charge, costs, expenses, fees, 
rates or rent or on any other account under this Act or any such bye-law may be recoverable  from any 
person from whom such  sum is due as an arrear of tax under this Act:  
Provided that no proceedings for the recovery of any sum under this section shall be commenced after 
the expiry of three years from the date on which such sum becomes due.  
Obstruction of owner by occupier  
364. Right of owner to apply to the court of the district judge in case of obstruction by 
occupier .—(1) The owner of an y land or building may, if he is prevented by the occupi er thereof from 
complying with — 
(a) the provisions of section 221, section 229, section 247, section 248, section 249, or          
section 252, or a ny bye-law made thereunder or with any notice or order issued under any such 
provision apply to the Appellate Tribunal; and  
(b) any other provision or any bye-law made thereunder or with any  notice, orde r or requisition 
issued under such provision, apply to the court of the district judge of Delhi and where such 
application is made within any time that may be fixed for the compliance with such provision or 
notice, order or requisition the owner shall not be liable for his failure to comply with the provision, 
or notice, order or requisition within the time so fixed.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal or the court, as the case may be, on receipt of such application, may make 
a written order requiring the occupier of the land or building to afford all reasonable facilities to the 
owner for complying with the said provision or notice, order or requisition and may also, if it thinks fit 
direct that the costs  of such application and order be paid by the occupier.  
(3) After eight days from the date of the order referred to in sub-section  (2), the occupier shall afford 
all such reasonable facilities to the owne r for the purpose aforesaid as may be specified in the order; and 
in the event of his continued refusal to do so, the owner shall be discharged during the continuance of 
such refusal, from any liability which may have been otherwise incurred by reason of h is failure to 
comply with the said provision or notice, order or requisition.  
Proceedings before the court of the district judge  
365. General powers and procedure of the court of the district judge .—The procedure provided 
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in regard to suits shall be followed, as far as it can be 
made applicable, in the disposal of applications, appeals or references that may be made to the court of 
the district judge of De lhi under this Act or any bye-law made thereunder.  
366. Fees in proceedings before the court of the district judge .—(1) The Government may, by 
notifica tion in the Official Gazette, pr escribe what fee shall be paid — 
(a) on any application, appeal or reference under this Act or any bye-law made thereunder to the 
court of the district judge of Delhi; and  
(b) for the issue, in connection with any inquiry or proceedings before that court under this Act or 
such bye-law, of any summons or other process:  
Provided that the fee, if any, prescribed under clause ( a) shall not, in cases in which the value of the 
claim or subject matter is capable of being  estimate d in money , exceed the fees  leviable for the time being  
under the provisions of the Court -fees Act, 1870 (7 of 1870), in cases in which the amount of the cl aim or 
subject matter is of a like amount.  109 
 (2) The Government may, by like notification, determine the person by whom the fee, if any, 
prescribed under clause ( a) of sub-section  (1), shall be payable.  
(3) No application, appeal or reference shall be received by the court of the district judge until the fee, 
if any, prescribed therefor under clause ( a) of sub-section  (1) has been paid:  
Provided that the court may, in any case in which it thinks  fit so to do, — 
(i) receive an application, appeal or reference made by or on behalf of a poor person, and  
(ii) issue process on behalf of any such person,  
without payment or on part payment of the fees prescribed under this section.  
367. Repayment of half fees on settlement before hearing .—Whenever any applic ation, appeal or 
reference made under this Act or any bye-law made thereunder to the court of the district judge is settled 
by agreement between the parties before the hearing, half the amount of all fees paid up to that time shall 
be repaid by the court t o the parties by whom the same have respectively been paid.  
368. Power of the court of the district judge to delegate certain powers and to make rules .—The 
court of t he district judge of Delhi may — 
(a) delegate, either generally or specially, to the court of an additional district judge, power to 
receive applications, appeals and references under this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made 
thereund er, and to hear and determine such applications, appeals and references;  
(b) with the approval of the Government, make rules not inconsistent with this Act or any rule, 
regulation or bye-law made thereunder, providing for any matter connected with the exercise of the 
jurisdiction conferred upon the court by this Act which is not he rein specifically provided for.  
Offences and penalties  
369. Punishment for certain offences .—(1) Whoever— 
(a) contravenes any provision of any of the sections, sub-section s, clauses, provisos or other 
provisions of this Act mentioned in the first column of the Table in the Tenth Schedule; or  
(b) fails to comply with any order or direction lawfully given to him or any requisition lawfully 
made upon him under any of the said sections, sub-section s, clauses, provisos or other p rovisions,  
shall be punishable — 
(i) with fine which may extend to the amount or with imprisonment for a term which may extend 
to the period, specified in that behalf in third column of the said Table or with both; and  
(ii) in the case of a continuing contravention or failure, with an additional fine which may extend 
to the amount specified in the fourth column of that Table for every day during which such 
contravention or failure continues after conviction for the first such  contravention or failure.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  (1), whoever contravenes the provisions of 
sub-section  (1) of section 221, or sub-section  (1) of section 224, or sub-sectio n (1) of section 225 or    
sub-section  (1) of section 229 or section 244, in relation to any street which is a public street, shall be 
punishable with simple imprisonment which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend to 
five thousand rupees or with both.  
(3) Any member, referred to in clauses ( b) and ( d) of sub-section  (1) of section 4, who knowingly 
acquires, directly or indirectly, any share or interest in any contract made with, or any work done for the 
Council, shall be deemed to have committed offence made punishable under section 168 of th e Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860 ). 
370. General penalty .—Whoever, in any case in which a penalty is not expressly provided by this 
Act, fails to comply with any notice, order or requisition issued under any provision thereof, or otherwise 
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one 
hundred rupee s, and in the case of a continuing failure or contravention, with an additional fine which 
may extend to twenty rupees for every day after the first during which he has persisted in the failure or 
contravention.  110 
 371. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to,  the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against an d punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section  shall  render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he proves that the offence has been committed without his knowledge 
or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section  (1) where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been commit ted with the consent or 
connivance of or is attributable to any n eglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished according ly. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ” in relation to a firm means a partner in the firm.  
372. Certain offences to be cognizable .—The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974 ) shall 
apply to,— 
(a) an offence under sub-section  (5) of section 217 or section 237 or sub-section  (1) of section 
238 or sub-section  (1) of section 239 or section 247 or section 248 or section 249 or section 252;  
(b) an offence under sub-section  (1) of section 221 or sub-section  (1) of section 224 or             
sub-section  (1) of section 225 or sub-section  (1) of section 229 or section 244 in relation to any s treet 
which is a public street.  
as if it were a cognizable offence — 
(i) for the purposes of investigation of such offence; and  
(ii) for the purp oses of all ma tters other than — 
(1) matters referred to in section 42 of that Code, and  
(2) arrest  of a person, except on the complaint of, or upon information received from, such 
officer of the Council, not being below the rank of a Secretary as may be appointed by the 
Chairperson:  
Provided that no offence of the contravention of any condition subject  to which sanction was 
accorded for the erection of any building or the execution of any work shall be cognizable, if such 
contravention relates to any deviation from any plan of such erection or execution sanctioned by the 
Chairperson which is compoundabl e on payment of any amount under the bye-laws relating to buildings 
made under this Act.  
373. Prosecutions .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no court shall procee d to the trial of any 
offence,— 
(a) under sub-section  (5) of section 217 or section 237 or sub-section  (1) of section 238 or       
sub-section  (1) of section 239 or section 247 or section 248 or section 249 or section 252 except on 
the complai nt of or upon information received from, such officer of the Council, not being below the 
rank of a Secretary as may be appointed by the Chairperson.  
(b) under sub-section  (1) of section 221 or sub-section  (1) of section 224 or sub-section  (1) of 
section 225 or sub-section  (1) of section 229 or section 244, if any such offence was committed in 
relation to any street which is a public street, except on the complaint of, or upon information  
receive d from, such officer of the Council, not being below the rank of a Secretary as may be 
appointed by the Chairperson;  111 
 (c) other than those specified in clauses ( a) and ( b) except on the complaint of, or u pon 
information received from the Chairperson or a person authorised by him by a general or special 
order in this behalf.  
374. Composition of offences .—(1) The Chairperson or any person authorised by him by general or 
special order in this behalf may, either before or after the institution of the proceedings, compound any 
offence made punishable by or under this Act:  
Provided that no offence shall be co mpoundable which is committed by failure to comply with a 
notice, order or requisition issued by or on behalf of the Council or of the Chairperson unless and until the 
same has been complied with so far as the compliance is possible.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded, the offender, if in custody shall be discharged, and no 
further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect to the offence so compounded.  
Magistrates and proceedings before magistrates  
375. Municipal magistrates .—(1) The Government may appoint one or more metropolitan 
magistrates for the trial of offences against this Act and against any rule, regulation or bye-law made 
thereunder and may prescribe the time and place at which such magistrate or magistrates shall sit f or the 
despatch of business.  
(2) Such magistrates shall be called municipal magistrates and shall besides the trial of offences as 
aforesaid, exercise all other powers and discharge all other functions o f a magistrate as provided in this 
Act or any rule, regulation of bye-law made thereunder.  
(3) Such magistrates and the members of their staff shall be paid such salary, pension, leave and other 
allowanc es as may, from to time, be fixed by the Government.  
(4) The Council shall, out of the New Delhi Municipal Fund, pay to the Government the amounts of 
the salary, pension, leave and other allowances as fi xed under sub-section  (3) together with all other 
incidental charges in connection with the establishments of the said magistrates.  
(5) Each such magistrate shall have jurisdiction over the whole of New Delhi.  
(6) For the purpose of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973 (2 of 1974), all municipal magistrates 
appointed under this Act shall be deemed to be magistrates appointed under section 16 of the said  Code.  
(7) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to preclude any magistrate appointed hereunder from 
trying any offence under any other law.  
376. Cogn izance of offences .—All offences against this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made 
thereunder, whether committed within or without the limits of New Delhi, shall be cognizable by a 
municipal magistrate and such magistrate shall not be deemed to be i ncapable of taking cognizance of any 
such offence or of any offence under any enactment which is repealed by, or which ceases to have effect 
under this Act by reason only of his being liable to pay any municipal tax or rate or benefited out of the 
New Delh i Municipal Fund.  
377. Limitation of time for prosecution. —No person shall be liable to punishment for any offence 
against this Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder, unless complaint of such offence is 
made before a municipal magistrate within six months next after — 
(a) the date of the commission of the offence; or  
(b) the date on whic h the commission or existence of such offence was first brought to the notice 
of the complainant.  
378. Power of magistrate to hear cases in absence of accused when summoned to appear .—If 
any person summoned to appear before a magistrate to answer a charge of an offence against this Act or 
any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder fails to appear at the time and place mentioned in the 
summons, or on any date to which the hearing of  the case is adjourned, the magistrate may hear and 
determine the case i n his absence, if — 
(a) service of the summons is proved to his satisfaction, and  112 
 (b) no sufficient cause is shown, for the non -appearance of such person.  
379. Complaints concerning nuisances .—The Chairperson or any municipal officer or other 
municipal employee authorised by him in thi s behalf or any person who resides or owns property in New 
Delhi, may complain to a municipal magistrate of the existence of any nuisance.  
380. Procedure to be followed by magistrate regarding complaints  concerning nuisances. —
(1) Upon the receipt of any complaint under section 379, the magistrate, after making such inquiry as he 
thinks necessary, may by written order direct the person responsible for th e nuisance or the owner of the 
land or building on which the nuisance has taken place, to take such measures as to such magistrate may 
seem practicable and reasonable, and within such period as may be specified in the order for abating, 
preventing, removin g or remedying such nuisance and may direct the Chairperson to put into force any of 
the provisions of this Act or any bye-law made thereunder.  
(2) The magistrate may further direct the person found respo nsible for the nuisance to pay to the 
complainant such reasonable costs of and relating to the said complaint as he shall determine, inclusive of 
compensation for the complainant ‟s loss of time in prosecuting such complaint.  
(3) Where in the opinion of the magistrate immediate action to prevent the nuisance is necessary he 
may dispense with the inquiry as required by sub-section  (1) and make such order as he considers 
necessar y forthwith.  
(4) If the person directed to take action by an order under sub-section  (1) or sub-section  (2) fails to do 
so within the period specified in the order, the Chairperson may on the expiry of th e said period proceed 
to take action as directed in the order or may take such other measures to abate, prevent, remove or 
remedy the nuisance as he considers necessary, and all expenses incurred in that connection shall be 
recoverable from the person agai nst whom the magistrate has made the order as an arrear of tax under this 
Act.  
Powers and duties of police officers  
381. Arrest of offenders. —(1) Any police officer, may arrest any person who commits in his view 
any offence against this Act or against any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder if — 
(a) the name and address of such person be unknown to him, and  
(b) such person on demand declines to give his name and address or gives a name and address 
which such officer has reason to believe to be false.  
(2) No person so arrested shall be detained in custody after his true name and address are ascertained 
or, without the order of the nearest magistrate f or a period longer than twenty -four hours from the ti me of 
arrest exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of such 
magistrate.  
382. Duties of police officers .—It shall be the duty of all police officers, to give immediate 
information to the Chairperson of the commission of, or the attempt to commit any offence against this 
Act or any rule, regulation or bye-law made thereunder and to assist all municipal officers and other 
municipal employees in the exercise of th eir lawful authority.  
Legal proceedings  
383. Power to institute, etc., legal proceedings and obtain legal advice .—(1) The Chairperson 
may— 
(a) take, or withdraw from, proceedings against any person who is charged with — 
(i) any offence against this Act or any rules, regulation or bye-law made thereunder; or  
(ii) any offence which affects or is likely to affect any property or interest of the Council or 
the due administration of this Act; or  
(iii) committing any nuisance whatsoever;  
(b) contest or compromise any appeal against rateable value or assessment of any tax or rate;  113 
 (c) take, or withdraw from, compromise proceedings under sections 360, 361 a nd 362 for 
recovery of expenses or compensation claimed to be due to the Council;  
(d) withdraw or compromise any claim for a sum not exceeding one thousand rupees against any 
person;  
(e) defend any suit or other legal proceeding brought against the Council or against the 
Chairperson or a municipal officer or municipal employee in respect of anything done or omitted to 
be done by any one of them in his official capacity;  
(f) with the approval of the Council admit or compromise any claim, suit or other legal 
proceeding brought against the Council or against the Chairperson or any offi cer or other employee in 
respect of anything done or omitted to be done as aforesaid;  
(g) withdraw or compromise any claim against any person in respect of a penalty payable under a 
contract entered into with such person by the Chairperson on behalf of the Council;  
(h) institute and prosecute any suit or other legal proceeding, or with the approval of the Council 
withdraw from or compromise any suit or an y claim for any sum not exceeding five hundred rupees 
which has been instituted or made in the name of the Council or the Chairperson;  
(i) obtain such legal advice and assistance as he from time to time thinks necessary or expedient 
to obtain or as he may be required by the Council to obtain for any of the purposes mentioned in the 
foregoing clauses or for securing lawful exercise or discharge of any power or duty vesting in or 
imposed upon any municipal officer or other municipal employee.  
384. Protection of action of the Council, etc .—No suit or prosecution shall be entertained in any 
court against the Council or against any municipal officer or other mu nicipal employee or against any 
person acting under the order or direction of the Chairperson or any municipal officer or other municipal 
employee, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done, under this Act or any rule, 
regulation or bye-law made thereunder.  
385. Notice to be given of suits. —(1) No suit shall be instituted against the Council or against the 
Chairperson or against any municipal officer or other municipal employee or against any person acting 
under the order or direction of the Chairperson or any municipal officer or other municipal employee, in 
respect of any act done, or purporting to have been done, in pursuance of th is Act or any rule, regulation 
or bye-law made thereunder until the expiration of two months after notice in writing has been delivered 
at the municipal office and, in the case of such officer, employee or person, unless notice in writing has 
also been delivered to him at his office or place of r esidence, and unless such notice states explicitly the 
cause of action, the nature of the relief sought, the amount of compensation claimed, and the name and 
place of residence of the intending plaintiff, and unless the plaint contains a statement that suc h notice has 
been so left or delivered.  
(2) No suit, such as is described in sub-section  (1), shall unless it is a suit for the recovery of 
immovable property or for a declaration of title thereto, be ins tituted after the expiry of six months from 
the date on which the cause of action arises.  
(3) Nothing in sub-section  (1) shall be deemed to apply to a suit in which the only relief claimed is an 
injunctio n of which the object would be defeated by the giving of the notice or the postponement of the 
institution of the suit.  
CHAPTER XXI  
RULES, REGULATIONS AND BYE -LAWS  
386. Supplemental provisions respecting  rules.—(1) Any rule which the Central Government is 
empowered to make under this Act may provide that any contravention thereof shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act and bye-laws made by the Central Government under section 260 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session fo r 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 114 
 aforesaid , both Houses agree in making any mo dification in the rule or bye-laws or both Houses agree 
that the rule or bye-laws, should not be made, the rule or by e-laws, shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modifica tion or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or              
bye-laws. 
387. Supplemental provisions respecting regulations .—(1) Any regulation which may be made by 
the Council under this Act may be made by the Central Government within one year of the establishment 
of the Council; and any regulation so made may be altered or rescinded by the Cou ncil in the exercise of 
its powers under this Act.  
(2) No regulation made by the Council under this Act shall have effect until it has been approved by 
the Central Government and published in the Officia l Gazette.  
388. Power to make bye-laws .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Council may, in 
addition to any bye-laws which it is empowered to make by any other provision of this Act, make       
bye-laws to provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: —  
A. Bye-laws relating to taxation  
(1) the maintenance o f tax books and registers by the Chairperson and the particulars which such 
books and registers should contain;  
(2) the inspection of and the obtaining of copies and extracts from such books and register s and fees, 
if any, to be charged for the same;  
(3) the publication of rates of taxes as determined by the Council from time to time;  
(4) the requisition by the Chairperson of information and returns from persons liable to pay taxes;  
(5) the notice to be given to the Chairperson by any person who becomes the owner or possessor of a 
vehicle or animal in respect of which any tax is payable under this Act;  
(6) the wearing of badge by the driver of any such vehicle and the display of number plate on such 
vehicle;  
(7) the submission of returns by persons liable to pay any tax under this Act;  
(8) the collection by the registrar or sub -registrar of Delhi appointed under the Registration Act, 1908 
(16 of 1908) of the additional stamp duty payable to the Council under this Act, the periodical payment of 
such duty to the Council and the maintenance by such registrar or sub -registrar of separate accounts in 
relation thereto;  
(9) any other matter relating to the levy, assessment, collection, refund or remission of taxes under 
this Act.  
B. Bye-laws relating to water supply, drainage and sewage collection  
(1) the power of the Chairperson to close water works for the supply of water, whether for domestic 
purposes or not, or for gratuit ous use and to prohibit the sale and use of water for purpose of business;  
(2) the connection of supply pipes for conveying to any premises a supply of water from a municipal 
water works;  
(3) the making and renewing connections with municipal water works;  
(4) the power of the Chairperson to take charge of private connections;  
(5) the power of the Chairperson to alter the position of connections;  
(6) the equitable distribution of water supplied to occupiers;  
(7) the size, material, quality, description and position of the pipes and fittings to be used for  the 
purpose of any connection with or any communication from any municipal water works and the stamping 
of pipes and fittings and fees for such stamping;  115 
 (8) the size, material, quality and description of  pipes, cisterns and fittings which are found on an 
examination under the provisions of this Act to be so defective that they cannot be effectively repaired;  
(9) the provision and maintenance of meters wh en water is supplied by measurement;  
(10) the prohibition of fraudulent and unauthorised use of water and the prohibition of fraud in 
connection with meters;  
(11) the maintenance of pipes; cisterns and other water works;  
(12) the regulation or prohibition of the discharge or deposit of offensive or obstructive matter, 
polluted water or other polluted a nd obnoxious matter into sewers;  
(13) the regulation in any manner not specifically provided for in this Act of the construction, 
alteration, maintenance, preservation, cleaning and repairs of drains, ve ntilation shafts, pipes, latrines, 
urinals, cesspools and other drainage works;  
(14) the cleansing of drains;  
(15) the prohibition of erection of build ings over drains without the permission of the Chairperson;  
(16) the connection of private drains with municipal drains;  
(17) the location and construction of cesspools;  
(18) the covering and ventilation of cesspools;  
(19) the period or periods of the day during which trade efflue nt may  be discharged from any trade 
premises into municipal drains;  
(20) the exclusion from trade effluent of all condensing water;  
(21) the eliminatio n from trade effluent, before it enters a municipal drain, of any constituent which in 
the opinion of the Council would either alone or in combination with any matter with which it is likely to 
come into contact while passing through municipal drains injur e or obstruct those drains or make 
specially difficult or expensive the treatment or disposal of the sewage from those drains;  
(22) the maximum quantity of trade effluent which may without any consent or permission, be 
discharged from any trade premises into municipal drains on any one day and the highest rate at which 
trade effluent may, without such consent or permission, be discharged from any trade premises into 
municipal drains;  
(23) the regulation of the temperature of trade effluent at the time of its discharge into municipal 
drains and the securing of the neutrality of trade effluent (that is to say, that it is neither acid nor alkaline ) 
at the tim e of such discharge;  
(24) the charges to be paid to the Council by occupiers of trade premises for the reception of trade 
effluent into municipal drains and disposal thereof;  
(25) the provision and maintenance of such an inspection chamber or mainhole as will enable a 
person readily to take at any time samples of what is passing into municipal drains from trade premises;  
(26) the provision and maintenance of such meters as may be required to measure the volume of any 
trade effluent being discharged from any trade premises into municipal drains and the testing of such 
meters.  
C. Bye-laws relating to electric supply  
(1) all matters relating to the conduct and management in respect of electricity supply;  
(2) the provisions for electric sub -stations in New Delhi.  
D. Bye-laws relating to streets  
(1) the closure of streets when any work is in progress and alternative passage during the progress 
of such work;  116 
 (2) the erections of a temporary nature during festivals;  
(3) the setting up of hoards on buildings adjacent to streets during their construction or repai r; 
(4) the precautions to be taken when permission is granted to any private individual for opening 
or breaking up any public street and the fees to be paid for the restoration of a street in its origina l 
condition;  
(5) the permission, regulation or prohibition or use or occupation of any street or place by it, 
itinerant vendors or hawkers or by any person for the sale of articles or the exercise of any calling or 
the setting up of any booth or stall and the fees chargeable for such occupation;  
(6) any other matter in connection with the construction, repair, maintenance, naming, numbering 
and lighting of streets for which provision is necessary or should be made.  
E. Bye-laws relating to sanitation and public health  
(1) the position of latrines and urinals;  
(2) the provision of air spaces between latrines and buildings or places used for various purposes;  
(3) the white -washing of buildings;  
(4) the regulation or prohibition of the stabling or herding of animals or any class of animals so as 
to prevent danger to public health;  
(5) the seizure of ownerless animals straying within the limits of New Delhi and the regulation 
and control of pounds;  
(6) the fixing and regulation of the use of public ba thing and washing places;  
(7) the prevention of the spread of dangerous disease;  
(8) the segregation in or the removal or exclusion from any part of New  Delhi or the destruction 
of animals suffering or reasonably suspected to be suffering from any infectious or contagious 
disease;  
(9) the supervision, regulation, conservation and protection from injury, contamination or 
trespass, of sources and means of public water supply and of appliances for the distribution of water;  
(10) the enforcement of compulsory vaccination and inoculation;  
(11) the proper disposal of corpses, the regulation and management of burning and burial places 
and other places for the disposal of corpses and the fees chargeable for the use of such places where 
the same  are provided or maintained at the expense of the New Delhi Municipal Fund;  
(12) the provision of living accommodation for sweepers in buildings newly erected  requiring ten 
or more latrines.   
F. Bye-laws relating to vital statistics  
(1) the prescribing of qualifications of persons to be appointed as chief registrar, additional chief 
registrar and registrar under Chapter XVI;  
(2) the registration of births and deaths and marriages and takin g of a census.  
G. Bye-laws relating to public safety and suppression of nuisances  
The regulation or prohibition for the purpose of sanitation or the prevention of dis ease or the 
promotion of public safety or convenience, of any act which occasions or is likely to occasion a 
nuisance and for the regulation or prohibition of which no provision is made elsewhere by this Act.  
H. Bye-laws relating to markets, slaughter hous es, trades and occupations  
(1) the days on, and hours during which any market or slaughter house may be kept open for use;  
(2) the regulation of the design, ventilation and drainage of markets and slaughter house the 
materials to be used in the construction thereof;  117 
 (3) the keeping of markets and the slaughter house and the lands a nd buildings appertaining 
thereto in a clean and sanitary condition, the removal of filth, rubbish and other polluted and 
obnoxious matter therefrom and the supply therein of pure water and of a sufficient number of 
latrines and urinals for the use of pers ons using or frequenting the same;  
(4) the provision of passages of sufficient width between the stalls in market buildings and market 
places for the convenient use of the public and the prevention of en croachment of such passages;  
(5) the setting apart of separate areas for different classes of article in market buildings and 
market places;  
(6) the proper custody and care of animals for the keeping of which licences are granted under 
section 327;  
(7) the regulation of the import of animals and flesh within New Delhi;  
(8) the rendering necessary of licences for the use of premises within New Delhi as stables or 
cow-houses or as an accommodation for sheep,  goat or buffalo and the fees payable, for  such 
licences and the conditions subject to which su ch licences may be granted, refused, suspended or 
revoked;  
(9) the regulation of sarais, hotels, hostels, guest houses, dak bungalows, lodging houses, 
boarding houses, buildings, let -in-tenements, residen tial clubs, restaurants, eating houses, cafes, 
refreshment rooms and places of public recreation, entertainment or resort;  
(10) the control and supervision of places where dangerous or offensive trades a re carried on so 
as to secure cleanliness therein or to minimise injurious, offensive or dangerous effects arising or 
likely to arise therefrom;  
(11) the regulation of the posting of bills and advertiseme nts and of the position, size, shade or 
style of the name boards, sign boards, hoarding and sign -posts;  
(12) the fixation of a method for the sale of articles whether by measure, weight, piece or any 
other method;  
(13) the procedure regarding the grant of permit to establish a factory, workshop or trade 
premises;  
(14) the regulation of smoke in factories, workshops and trade premises;  
(15) the regulation of sanitary conditions in factories, workshops, and trade premises;  
(16) the regulation of the use in any factory, workshop or trade premises of whistle, trumpet, 
siren, or horn worked by steam, compressed air, electricity or other mechanical means;  
(17) the prevention o f nuisance in any market building, market place, or any factory, workshop or 
trade premises.  
I. Bye-laws relating to improvement  
(1) the form and content of an improvement scheme or a rehousing scheme;  
(2) the procedure to be followed in connection with the framing, submission, approval and 
sanction of such schemes;  
(3) the local enquiries and other h earings that may be held before a scheme is framed, approved 
or sanctioned;  
(4) the alteration of an improvement scheme or a rehousing scheme after approval and sanction.  
J. Bye-laws relating to miscellaneous matters  
(1) the circumstances and the manner in which owners of land or building in New Delhi 
temporarily absent therefrom or not resident therein may be required to appoint as  their agents for all 
or any of the purposes of this Act or of any bye-laws made thereunder, persons residing within or near 
New Delhi;  
(2) the maintenance of schools and the furtherance of education gen erally;  
(3) the regulation and control of municipal dispensaries;  118 
 (4) the rendering necessary of licences — 
(a) for the proprietors or drivers of hackney -carriages; cycle -rickshaws, thelas and rehries 
kept or plying for hire or used for hawking articles;  
(b) for persons working as job -porters for the conveyance of goods;  
(5) the classification of cinema theatres for the purpose of the Third Schedule;  
(6) any other matter which is to be or may be prescribed by bye-laws made under this Act or in 
respect of which this Act makes no provisions or makes insufficient provision and provision is, in the 
opinion of the Council necessary for the efficient municipal gove rnment of New Delhi.  
(2) Any bye-law which may be made under sub-section  (1) may be made by the Central Government 
within one year of the establishment of the Council, and any bye-law so made may be alte red or rescinded 
by the Council in exercise of its powers under sub-section  (1). 
389. Regulations and bye-laws  to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government shall 
cause every regulation made under  this Act and every bye-law made under section 388 to be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive  sessions, and if, before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the regulation or bye-law or both Houses agree that the 
regulation or bye-law should not be made, the regulation or bye-law shall thereafter have effect only in 
such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previ ously done under that regulation or 
bye-law. 
390. Penalty for breaches of bye-laws .—(1) Any bye-law made under this Act may provide that a 
contraventi on thereof shall be punishable — 
(a) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees; and  
(b) with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and in the case of a continuing 
contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every day during which 
such contravention continues after conviction for the first such contravention;  
(c) with fine which may extend to twenty rupees for every day during which the contravention 
continues, after the receipt of a notice from the Chairperson or any municipal officer duly authorised 
in that behalf, by the person contravening the bye-law requiring such person to discontinue such 
contravention:  
Provided that a contravention of any bye-law relating to the road transport services may be 
punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to 
fifteen hundred rupees, or with both.  
(2) Any such bye-law may also provide that a person contravening the same shall be required to 
remedy so far as lies in his power, the mischief, if any, caused by such contravention.  
391. Supplemental provisions respecting bye-laws .—(1) Any power to make bye-laws conferred 
by this Act is conferred subject to the condition of the bye-laws being made after previous publication and 
in the case of such bye-laws being made by the  Council of their not taking effect until they have been 
approved by the Government and published in the Official Gazette.  
(2) The Government in approving a bye-law may make any change therein which appe ars to it to be 
necessary.  
(3) The Government may, after previous publication of its intention, cancel any bye-law which it has 
approved, and thereupon the bye-law shall cease to have effect.  
392. Bye-laws  to be available for inspection and purchase .—(1) A copy of all bye-laws made 
under this Act shall be kept at the municipal office and shall, during office hours, be open free of charge 
to inspection by any inhabitant of New Delhi.  
(2) Copies of all such bye-laws shall be kep t at the municipal office and shall be sold to the public at 
cost price either singly or in collections at the option of the purchaser.  119 
 CHAPTER XXII  
CONTROL  
393. Government to require production of docu ments .—The Central Government may at any time 
require the Chairperson — 
(a) to produce any record, correspondence, plan or other document in his possession or under his 
control;  
(b) to furnish any return, plan, estimate, statement, account or statistics relating to the 
proceedings, duties or works of the Council;  
(c) to furnish or obtain and furnish any report.  
394. Inspection .—The Central Government may depute any person in the service of that Government 
to inspect or examine any municipal department or office or any service or work undertaken by the 
Council or any property belonging to the Council and to report thereon and the Council, the Chairperson 
and all municipal officers and other municipal employees shall be bound to afford the person so deputed 
access at all reasonable time to the premises and properties of the Council and to all records, accounts and 
other documents the inspection of which he may consider necessary to enable him to discharge his duties.  
395. Directions by Central Government .—If, whether on receipt of a report or on receipt of any 
information or report obtained under section 393 or section 394 or otherwise, the Central Government is 
of opinion ,— 
(a) that any duty imposed on the Council by or under this Act has not been performed or has been 
performed in an imperfect, insufficient or unsuitable manner; or  
(b) that adequate financial provisio n has not been made for th e performance of any such duty,  
it may direct the Council within such period as it thinks fit, to make arrangements to its satisfaction for 
the proper performance of the duty, or as the case may be, to make financial provision, to  its satisfaction 
for the performance of the duty and the Council shall comply with such d irection:  
Provided that unless in the opinion of the Central Government the immediate execution of such order 
is necessary, it shall before making any direction under  this section give the Council an opportunity of 
showing cause why such direction should not be made.  
396. Power to provide for enforcement of direction under section 395 .—If, within the period fixed 
by a direction made under section 395, any action the taking of which has been directed under that section 
has not been duly taken, the Central Government may make arrangements for the taking of such action 
and may direct that all expenses connected therewith  shall be defrayed out of the New Delhi Municipal 
Fund.  
397. Power of Central Government to give directions in relation to primary schools, etc .—
(1) The Central Government may give the Council all such directions as it considers necessary in respect 
of subjects, curricula, text books, standards and methods of teaching in primary schools vested in the 
Council or maintained wholly or partly by grants paid o ut of the New Delhi Municipal Fund and in 
respect of such other matters as that Government considers necessary and the Council shall comply with 
all such directions.  
(2) It shall be lawful for any office r appointed by the Central Government in this behalf to inspect any 
such school; and all reasonable facilities shall be given to such officer in connection with the inspection.  
(3) The Central Government , after considering the report of inspection made  by such officer, may 
give the Council such directions as it considers necessary and the Council shall comply with such 
directions.  
398. Dissolution of th e Council .—(1) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Council is 
not competent to perform, or persistently makes default — 
(a) in the perform ance of, the duties imposed on it by or under this Act or any other law, or 
exceeds or abuses its power; or  
(b) fails to deliver efficient service to the public and generally in regard to the municipal 
administration ; or 120 
 (c) to comply with the directions given to the Council by the Central Government in regard to 
matters relating to clauses ( a) and ( b),  
the Central Government may by an order published, together with a statement of the reasons therefor, in 
the Official Gazette, dissolve the  Council:  
Provided that the Council shall be given reasonable opportunity of being heard before its dissolution.  
(2) When the Council is dissolved by an order under sub-section  (1)— 
(a) all members shall, on the date of dissolution, vacate their offices as such members;  
(b) during the period of dissolution of the Council, all powers and duties conferred and imposed 
upon the Council by or under this Act or any other law, shall be exercised and performed by such 
officer or authority as the Central Government may appoint in that behalf; and  
(c) all property vested in the Council shall, until it is reconstituted, vest in the Central 
Government.  
(3) An order of dissolution made under this section together with a statement of the reasons therefor 
shall be laid before each House of Parliament and the Legislative Assembly of the National Capital 
Territory of Delhi as soon as may be, after it has been made.  
CHAPTER XXIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
399. Delegation of power by the Central Government. —The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act shall, subject to 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification be exercisable by the Government or any of 
its officers or by the Chairperson or  any other authority.  
400. Power to delegate functions of Chairperson .—The Chairperson may by order direct that any 
power conferred or any duty imposed on him by or under this Act shall, in such circumst ances and under 
such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the order, be exercised and performed also by any 
municipal officer or other municipal employee specified in the order.  
401. Validity of no tices and other documents .—No notice, order, requisition, licence, permission in 
writing or any other document issued under this Act shall be invalid merely by reason of defect of form.  
402. Admissibilit y of document or entry as evidence .—A copy of any receipt, application, plan, 
notice, order or other document or of any entry in a register in the possession of the Council or the 
Chairperson shall, if duly certified by the legal keeper thereof or other pe rson authorised by the 
Chairperson in this behalf, be admissible in evidence of the existence of the document or entry, and shall 
be admitted as evidence of the matters and transactions therein recorded in every case where, and to the 
same extent to which,  the original document or entry would, if produced, have been admissible to prove 
such matters and transactions.  
403. Evidence of Municipal officer or employee .—No municipal officer or other municipal 
employee shall, in any legal proceedings to which the Council is not a party, be required to produce any 
register or document the contents of which can be proved under section 402 by a certified copy, or to 
appear as a witness to prove any matter or transact ion recorded therein save by order of the court made 
for special cause.  
404. Prohibition against obstruction of any municipal authority .—No person shall obstruct or 
molest the Council or the Chairperson or the Vice -Chairperson or any member or any person employed 
by the Council or any person with whom the Chairperson has entered into a contract on behalf of the 
Council in the performance of their duty or of anything which they are empowered or required to  do by 
virtue or in consequence of any provision of this Act or of any rule, regulation or bye-law made 
thereunder.  
405. Prohibition against removal of mark .—No person shall remove any mark set up for the 
purpose of indicating any level or direction incidental to the execution of any work authorised by this Act 
or of any rule or bye-law made thereunder.  
406. Prohibition against removal or obliteration of notice .—No person shall, without authority in 
that behalf, remove, destroy, deface or otherwise obliterate any notice exhibited by or under orders of the 121 
 Council or the Chairperson or any municipal officer or  other municipal employee specified by the 
Chairperson in this behalf.  
407. Prohibition against unauthorised dealings with public place or materials .—No person shall, 
without authority in that behalf, re move earth, sand or other material or deposit any matter or make any 
encroachment from, in or on any land vested in the Council or in any way obstruct the same.  
408. Liability of Chairperson, etc., for l oss, waste or misapplication of New Delhi Municipal 
Fund or property .—(1) Every member, Chairperson, and every municipal officer and other municipal 
employee shall be liable for the loss, waste, or misapp lication of any money or other property owned by 
or vested in the Council, if such loss, waste o r misapplication is a direct con sequence of his neglect or 
misconduct and a suit for compensation may be instituted ag ainst him by the Council with the previous  
sanction of the Central Government or by the Government.  
(2) Every such suit shall be instituted within three years after the date on which the cause of action 
arose.  
409. Members and municipal officers and employees to be public servants .—Every member, the 
Chairperson, and every municipal officer and other municipal employee shall be deemed to be a public 
servant within  the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860 ), and in the definition of 
“legal remuneration ” in section 161 of that Code the word  “Government ” shall, for the purpose of this 
section, be deemed to include the C ouncil . 
410. Annual administration report .—(1) As soon as may be after the first day of April in every 
year and not later than such date as may be fixed by the Central Government  in this behalf, the Council 
shall submit to that Government a detailed report of the municipal government of New Delhi during the 
preceding year in such form as that Government may direct.  
(2) The Chair person shall prepare such report and the Council shall consider it and forward the same 
to the Central Government with its resolution thereon, if any.  
(3) Copies of the report shall be kept for sale at t he municipal office.  
411. Other laws not to be disregarded .—Save as provided in this Act nothing contained in this Act 
shall be construed as authorising the disregard by the Council or the Chairperson or any municipal officer 
or other municipal employee of any laws for the time being in force.  
412. Exemption of diplomatic or consular missions from payment of tax, etc .—The Central 
Government may, by order  in the Official Gazette, exempt from the payment of any tax, rate, fee or other 
charge payable under the provisions of  this Act, any diplomatic or consular  mission of a foreign State or 
the High Commission of a Commonwealth country and any official of suc h mission or High Commission.  
413. Construction of references .—After the establishment of the Council any reference in any 
enactment, rule, bye-law, order, scheme, notification or other instrument having the force of law, to New 
Delhi Municipal Committee shall, unless the context or subject otherwise requires, be construed as a 
reference to the Council.  
414. Council to undertake work on agency basis .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other provision of this Act, the Council may on such terms and conditions as may be determined by 
agreement between the Council and any other authority, body or person, carry out any work which is not 
connected with i ts functions on agency basis.  
415. Power to remove difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in relation to the transition from the 
provisions of any of the laws repealed by this Act, or in giving effect to  the provisions of this Act, the 
Central Government may, by order as occasion requires, do anything which appears to it to be necessary 
for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the date of 
establishment of the Council.  
416. Repeal and savings .—(1) As from the date of the establishment of the Cou ncil, the Punjab 
Municipal A ct, 1911 (Punjab Act 3 of 1911) , as applicable to New Delhi, shall cease to have effect within 
New Delhi.  122 
 (2) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section  (1) of this section, — 
(a) any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form, notice or bye-law made or issued, 
and any licence or permission granted under the Act referred to in sub-section  (1) of this section and 
in forc e immediately before the establishment of the Council, shall, in so far as it is not inconsistent 
with the provisions of this Act continue in force and be deemed to have been made, issued or granted, 
under the provisions of this Act, unless and until it is  superseded by any appointment, notification, 
order, scheme, rule, form, notice or bye-law made or issued or any licence or permission granted 
under the said provisions;  
(b) all debts, obligations and li abilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be done by, with or for the New Delhi Municipal Committee before the 
establishment of the Council shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be 
done  by, with or for the Council under this Act;  
(c) all budget estimates, assessments, valuations, measurements or divisions made by the New 
Delhi Municipal Committee shall in so far as they are not inconsis tent with the provisions of this Act, 
continue in force and be deemed to have been made under the provisions of this Act unless and until 
they are superseded by any budget estimate, assessment, valuation, measurement or division made by 
the Council under t he said provisions;  
(d) all properties, movable and immovable and all interests of whatsoever nature and kind therein, 
vested in the New Delhi Municipal Committee immediately before the establishment of the Council 
shall with all rights of whatsoever description, use, enjoyed or possessed by New Delhi Municipal 
Committee vest in the Council;  
(e) all rates, taxes, fees, rents and other sums of money due to the New Delhi Municipal 
Committee immediately before the establishment of the Council shall be deemed to be due to the 
Council;  
(f) all rates, taxes, fees, rents, fares and other charges shall, until an d unless they are varied by the 
Council continue to be levied at the same rate at which they were being levied by the New Delhi 
Municipal Committee immediately before the commencement of this Act;  
(g) all suits, prosecutions and other legal proceedings instituted or which might have been 
instituted by or against the New Delhi Municipal Committee may be continued or instituted by or 
against the Council.  
417. Expenditure in connection with the Council from the commencement of this Act to the 
adoption of the budget by the Council .—(1) Any expenditure incurred during the period between the 
commencement of this Act and establishment of the Council under any of the provisions of this Act shall 
be borne by the Central Government and the amount of the expenditure so incurred shall on such 
establishment be recoverable by that Government  from  out of the New Delhi  Municipal Fund.  
(2) If in respect of the period between the establishment of the Council and the adoption of the first 
budget by the Council further expenditure from the New Delhi Municipal Fund becomes  necessary over 
and above the expenditure thereto authorised for that year by the sanctioned budget estimate, the Council 
shall adopt a supplementary statement showing the estimated amount of that expenditure.  
(3) Every item of expenditure shown in the supplementary statements adopted by the Council shall be 
deemed to be expenditure covered by a current budget -grant within the meaning of section 47.  
(4) The supplementary statement shall be prepared, presented, and adopted in such manner and shall 
provide for such matter as may be determined by the Council.  
418. Transitory provision .—Notwithst anding anyt hing contained in this  Act, the Central 
Government may, if necessary, appoint a person to be called the Special Officer, to exercise the powers 
and discharge the functions of the Council until the day on which the first meeting of the Council is held 
after the commencement of this Act.  
419. Repeal of Ordinance 8 of 1994 .—(1) The New Delhi Mu nicipal Council Ordinance , 1994  
(Ordinance 8 of 1994) , is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act.   123 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( 27)] 
BOUNDARIES OF NEW DELHI 
The area bounded by — 
The junction of the Pusa Road and Upper Ridge Road towards east along the New Link Road, the 
Panchkuian Road upto  its junction with the Old Gurgaon Road; thence towards north -east along the Old 
Gurgaon Road and Chelmsford Road ; upto the New Delhi Railway Station; thence towards south and 
south east along the railway line upto  its junction with the Harding Bridge; thence towards south along 
the Mathura Road upto its junction with Lodi Road; thence towards south along the Lodi Road upto its 
junction with the first road leading to Lodi Colony; thence towards south along the first  road leading to 
Lodi Colony upto its junction with the Ring Railway; thence towards west along the railway line upto its 
junction with Qutab Road; thence towards south along the Qutab Road upto to its junction with Kaushak 
Nulla; thence towards east along  the Kaushak Nulla up to its junction with the Boundary of the 
Corporation; thence towards south and thence towards west along the boundary of the Corporation and 
along the south boundary of the Medical Enclave upto its junction with the Ring Road near Gwa lior 
Potteries; thence towards north -west along the Ring Road upto its junction with Kitchner Road, thence 
towards north along the Upper Ridge Road up to the starting point.  
___________  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 82)  
RATES OF TAXES LEVIABLE ON VEHICL ES AND ANIMALS  
 Maximum amount of tax per annum  
 for vehicles 
with pneumatic 
tyres.  for vehicles without 
pneumatic tyres.  
 Rs. Rs. 
1. Each four wheeled vehicle drawn by camels,  horses, ponies, 
mules, donkeys bullocks or buffaloes —   
(a) Labour carts  12 24 
(b) Other vehicles in this class  32 48 
2. Each two wheeled vehicle drawn by camels,  horses, ponies, 
mules don keys, bullocks or  buffaloes—   
(a) Labour carts  8 16 
(b) Other vehicles in this class  16 24 
3. Each vehicle drawn or impelled otherwise than by camels,  
horses, ponies , mules , donkey s, buffaloes or machinery . 8 12 
 Maximum amount of tax per annum  
4. Each cycle rickshaw   6 
5. Each bicy cle  3 
6. Each camel   10 
7. Each horse, pony or mule of a height of 12 hand or upwards   20 
8. Each horse, pony or mule of a height of less than 12 hands   10 
9. Each bullock or buffalo kept for draught or pack  purposes   8 
10. Each donkey /ass kept for draught or pack purposes or for ri ding  6 
11. Each pig    4 
12. Each dog   5 
13. Each she -buffalo kept for milking   50 
14. Each cow kept for milking   30 124 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 86)  
THEATRE -TAX  
 
Type of entertainment  Maximum amount of tax  
1. Class I cinema theatre   Rs. 10 per show.  
2. Class II cinema theatre  Rs. 7  per show.  
3. Drama, concert, circus, variety  entertainment or 
tamasha  Rs. 7  per show.  
4. Carnival or fete  Rs. 10 per day . 
5. Any other entertainment  Rs. 7 per show or if there are no separate shows  
Rs. 7 per day.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Schedule Class I cinema theatres and Class II cinema theatres 
mean theatres classified respectively as Class I cinema the atres and Class II cinema theatres by bye -laws 
made in this behalf.  
______________  
 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 88( 1)] 
TAX ON ADVERTISEMENTS OTHER THAN ADVERTISEMENTS PUBLISHED IN THE NEWSPAPERS  
 
S. 
No.  Particulars  Maximum amount of tax 
per annum  
  Rs. 
1. Non-illuminated advertisements on land, building, wall, hoardings, 
frame post, structures, etc .:—  
 (a)   For a space upto 10 sq. ft.   18 
 (b)   For a space over 10 sq. ft.  and upto 25  sq. ft . 30 
 (c)   For every additional 25 sq. ft. or less  30 
2. Non-illuminated advertisements carried on vehicles, drawn by bullocks, 
horses or other animal , human beings, cycle or any oth er device, ca rried 
on any vehicle or tramcar —  
 (a)   For space upto 50 sq. ft.  120 
 (b)   For every additional 50 sq. ft. or less  120 
3. Illuminated advertise ment boards carried on vehicles —  
 (a)   For a space upto 50 sq. ft.  240 
 (b)   For every additional 50 sq. ft. or less  240 
4. Non-illuminated advertisement boards, carried by sandwich 
boardmen —  
 (a)   For each board not exceeding 10 sq. ft.  24 
 (b)   For each board exceeding 10 sq. ft. and upto 35 sq. ft.   48 
 (c)   For each additiona l 10 sq. ft. in area or less  24 125 
 S. 
No.  Particulars  Maximum amount of tax 
per annum  
  Rs. 
5. Illuminated advertisement boards, carried by sandwich boardmen —  
 (a)   For each board not exceeding 10 sq. ft . 48 
 (b)   For each boa rd exceeding 10 sq. ft. and upto 25 sq. ft.  96 
 (c)   For each additional 10 sq. ft. or less . 48 
6. Illuminated advertisements on land, building, wall or hoarding , frame, 
post, structure s, etc.—  
 (a)   For a space over 2 sq. ft.  24 
 (b)   For a space over 2 sq. ft. and upto 5 s q. ft. 48 
 (c)   For a space over 5 sq. ft. and upto 25 sq. ft . 60 
 (d)   For every additional 25 sq. ft. or less.  60 
7. Advertisements exhibited on screen in cinema houses and other public 
places by means of lantern slides or similar devices —  
 (a)   For a space upto 5 sq. ft.  96 
 (b)   For a space over 5 sq. ft.  and upto 25 sq. ft.  120 
 (c)   For every additional 25 sq. ft. or less  120 
8. Non-illuminated advertisements suspended across streets —  
 (a)   For a space upto 10 sq. ft . 18 
 (b)   For a space over 10 sq. ft. and upto 25 sq. ft.  30 
 (c)   For every additional 25 sq. ft. or less  30 
N.B.  The tax for item 8 will be in addition to the  space will be chargeable 
according to the  scale to be determined by the Chairperson.   
9. Non-illuminated advertisements hoarding  standing blank but bearing 
the name of the  advertiser or with the announcement “To be let”  
displayed thereon —  
 (a)   For a space upto 10 sq. ft.  9 
 (b)   For a space over 10 sq. ft. and upto 25 sq. ft.  15 
 (c)   For every additional 25 sq. ft. or less  15 
10. Permission to auctioneers to put up not more  than two boards or 
reasonable size advertising  each auction sale, other than those in 
premises  where the auction is held, one on a prominent  site in the 
locality and one on municipal lamp post . 200 including the rent  
for exhibiting the board  
on a municipal lamp  
post.  
 
________________  
 
 
 
 
 126 
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 95( 1)] 
TAX ON BUILDING APPLICATIONS  
S. No.  Area  For the first storey  For the second storey  
or any subsequent 
storey  
  Rs.  Rs. per storey  
1. For a ground area up  to 100 sq. yds.  20 40 
2. For a ground area of more than 100  sq. yds. but 
not exceeding 250 sq. yds . 60 120 
3. For a ground area of more than 250 sq.  yds. but  
not exceeding 500 sq. yds.  150 300 
4. For a ground area of more than 500 sq . yds. but 
not exceeding 1,000 sq. yds.  300 600 
5. For a ground area of more than 1,000  sq. yds . 600 1500  
N.B. 1 .—For purposes of assessment and calculation of the tax, ground area shall mean the area of the 
portion which is proposed to be built upon including the internal courtyard.  
N.B. 2 .—For purposes of the above Schedule, the basement where provided will be regarded  as the 
first storey, the ground floor over the basement as the second storey and so on.  
N.B. 3 .—In cases where an application is deemed to have been sanctioned under the provisions of 
section 282 the tax shall become payable in the same manner as in cases where an application is 
sanctioned.  
N.B. 4 .—In case an application is rejected 5 per cent. of the tax due shall be retained and the balance 
shall be refunded to the applicant, under the orders of the Chairperson.  
_____________  
 
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 100( 1)] 
NOTICE OF DEMAND  
To 
Shri/Shrimati  
residing at   
Please take notice that the Chairperson, New Delhi Municipal Council                 demands              from  
            the                  sum of Rs.                  due from                        on account of                           (here 
describe   the  property,   occupation,  circumstance  or  thing  in  respect  of  which   the  sum is payable)  
              leviable  under                            for the period of                             commencing on the  day of  
19           ,  and ending on the day of  19          ,  and that if, within thirty days from the service of this 
notice, the said sum is not paid to the C hairperson at or sufficient cau se for non -payment is not shown to 
the satisfaction of the Chairperson a warrant of distress or attachment will be issued for the r ecovery of 
the same with costs.  
Date d this                  day of                        19 
 
(Signed)  
Chairperson  
New Delhi Municipal Council  
  127 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 102 (1)] 
FORM OF WARRANT  
(Here   insert   the  name   of  the  Officer  charged   with  the  execution   of  the  warrant)  
WHERE AS A.B. of                         has not paid, and has not shown satisfactory cause for the             
non-payment of, the sum of                                due on account of                              (here describe the 
liability) for the period of commencing                    on the               day of                    19                        , 
and ending with                         day of                        19                     ,                     which sum is leviable 
under                        ; 
AND  WHEREAS    thirty  days have  elapsed  since the service on him of notice of demand for the same.  
This is to direct you to distrain/attach the movable/immovable property (described below) of the said 
A.B. of a value approximately equal to the said sum of Rs.                            subject to the provisions of the 
New Delhi Municipal Council Act, 1994, and the bye -laws made thereunder and forthwith to certify to 
me, together with t his warrant, all par ticulars of the property seized /attached by you thereunder.  
Dated this                     day of                19                 
 
 
(Signed)  
Chairperson  
New Delhi Municipal Council  
Description of immovable property . 
 
_______________  
 
 
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 103 (2)] 
FORM OF INVENTORY OF PROPERTY DISTRAINED AND NOTICE OF SALE  
To 
Shri / Shrimati  
residing at                          . 
Please take notice that I have this day seized the property specified in the inventory annexed her eto 
for the value of                due for the liability* (Here describe liability*) mentioned in the margin for the 
period commencing on the            day of                        , 19             , and ending with the                      day 
of                            19                    , together with Rs.                         due for service of notice of demand, 
and that unless within ten days from the date of the service of this notice you pay to the Chairperson the 
said amount, together with the costs of recovery, the said property will be sold by public auction.  
Dated this                        day of                         , 19 
(Signature of Officer executing the warrant)  
Inventory  
*Here state particulars of property seized.  
 
 128 
 THE NINTH SCHE DULE  
[See section 327 (1)] 
PURPOSES FOR WHICH PREMISES MAY NOT BE USED WITHOUT A LICENCE  
Carrying out any of the following trades or operations connected with trades :— 
1. Baking 
2. Cinematograph films, Shooting of — 
3. Cinematograph films by any process whatsoever. Treating of — 
4. Chillies or masala or corn or seeds. Grinding of by mechanical means — 
5. Cloth, yarn or leather in indigo or in other colours. Dyeing or printing of — 
6. Cloth or yarn Bleaching — 
7. Eating house or a catering establishment. Keeping of an — 
8. Grain. Parchin g— 
9. Ground -nut-seeds, tamarind seeds or any other seeds. Parching — 
10. Hair dressing saloon or a barber's shop. Keeping of a — 
11. Hides or skins, whether raw or dried. Tanning, pressing or packing — 
12. Laundry shop. Keeping a — 
13. Leather goods. Manufacturing of by mechani cal means — 
14. Litho press. Keeping a — 
15. Lodging house. Keeping of a — 
16. Metal. Casting — 
17. Precious metals. Refining of or recovering of them from embroideries — 
18. Printing press. Keeping a — 
19. Sweetmeat shop except in premises already licensed as an eating house. Keeping — 
20. Carrying on the trade or business of or any operation connected with the trade of — 
(i) Autocar or autocycle servicing or repairing.  
(ii) Blacksmit hy. 
(iii) Coppersmithy.  
(iv) Electroplating . 
(v) Glass beveling.  
(vi) Glass cutting . 
(vii) Glass polishing.  
(viii) Goldsmithy.  
(ix) Marble cutting, grinding, dressing or polishing.  
(x) Metal (ferrous or non -ferrous or antimony but excluding previous metal) cutting or 
treating  metal by hammering, drilling, pressing, filling, polishing, heating or by any 
other process whatever or assembling parts of metal.  
(xi) Photography -studio.  
(xii) Radio (wireless receiving set) selling, repairing, servicing or manufacturing.  
(xiii) Silversmithy.  
(xiv) Spinning or weaving cotton, silk, art silk, or jute or wool with the aid of power.  
(xv) Stone grinding, cutting, dressing or polishing.  
(xvi) Timber or wo od sawing or cutting by mechanical or electrical power.  
(xvii)  Tinsmithy.  
(xviii)  Wash erman‟ s trade.  
(xix) Welding or metal by electric, gas or any process whatsoever.  
21. Manufacturing, parching, packing, pressing, cleaning, cleansing, boiling, melting, grinding or 
preparing by any process whatever any of the following articles — 
(i) Aerated waters.  
(ii) Bakelite goods.  
(iii) Bidis (indigenous cigarettes), snuff, cigars or cigarettes.  
(iv) Bitumen.  
(v) Blasting powder.  
(vi) Bones.  129 
 (vii) Bricks or tiles by hand power.  
(viii) Bricks or tiles by mechanical power.  
(ix) Brushes.  
(x) Candles.  
(xi) Catgut.  
(xii) Celluloid or celluloid goods . 
(xiii) Cement concrete designs or models.  
(xiv) Charcoal.  
(xv) Chemicals.  
(xvi) Cinematograph films stripping in connection with any trade.  
(xvii)  Cosmetics or toilet goods.  
(xviii)  Cotton, cotton refuse, cotton waste, cotton yarn, silk, silk yarn, s ilk inclusive of waste 
yarn, art silk, art silk waste, art silk yarn, wool or woollen refuse or waste.  
(xix) Cotton seeds.  
(xx) Dammar.  
(xxi) Dynamite.  
(xxii)  Fat. 
(xxiii)  Fireworks.  
(xxiv)  Flax.  
(xxv) Ink for printing, writing, stamping, etc.  
(xxvi)  Gas. 
(xxvii)  Ghee.  
(xxviii)  Glass or glass articles.  
(xxix)  Gunpowder.  
(xxx) Hemp.  
(xxxi)  Ice (including dry ice).  
(xxxii)  Insecticide or disinfectants.  
(xxxiii)  Leather cloth or rexine cloth or water proof cloth.  
(xxxiv)  Lime.  
(xxxv)  Linseed oil.  
(xxxvi)  Matches for lighting (including Bengal matches).  
(xxxvii)  Mattresses and pillows.  
(xxxviii)  Offal.  
(xxxix)  Oil-cloth.  
(xl) Oil other than petroleum (either by mechani cal power or by hand power or ghani 
driven  by bullock or  any other animal).  
(xli) Pharmaceutical or medical products.  
(xlii) Rubbers or rubber goods.  
(xliii)  Paints.  
(xliv)  Paper or cardboard.  
(xlv) Pickers from hides.  
(xlvi)  Pitch.  
(xlvii)  Plastic goods.  
(xlviii)  Pottery by hand power.  
(xlix)  Pottery by mechanical or any power other than hand power.  
(l) Sanitary -ware or china -ware.  
(li) Soap.  
(lii) Sugar.  
(liii) Sweetmeat and confectionery goods.  
(liv) Tallow.  
(lv) Tar. 
(lvi) Varnishes.  
(lvii) Wooden furniture, boxes, barrels, khokas, or other articles of wood or of plywood or 
sandalwood.  
 130 
 PART II  
ARTICLES WHICH MAY NOT BE STORED IN  ANY PREMISES WITHOUT A LICENCE  
1. Asafoetida.  
2. Ashses.  
3. Bamboos.  
4. Bidi leaves.  
5. Blasting powder.  
6. Blood.  
7. Bones, bone meal or bone powder.  
8. Champhor.  
9. Carbide of calcium.  
10. Cardboard.  
11. Celluloid or celluloid goods.  
12. Charcoal.  
13. Chemicals, liquid.  
14. Chemicals, non -liquid . 
15. Chillies.  
16. Chlorate mixture.  
17. Cinematograph films -non-inflammable or ac cetate or safety base.  
18. Cloth in pressed bales or boras.  
19. Cloth or clothes of cotton, wool silk, art silk, etc.  
20. Coal.  
21. Coconut fibre.  
22. Coke.  
23. Compound gas, such as oxyge n gas, hydrogen gas, nitrogen gas, carbon dioxide gas, sulphur 
dioxide gas, chlorine gas, acetylene gas, etc.  
24. Copra.  
25. Cotton including Kahok, su rgical cotton and sil ky cotton.  
26. Cotton refuse or waste or cotton yarn refuse or waste.  
27. Cotton seed.  
28. Detonators.  
29. Dry leaves.  
30. Dynamite.  
31. Explosive paint such as nitro -cellulose paint, lacquer paint, enamel paint , etc. 
32. Fat. 
33. Felt. 
34. Fines.  
35. Firewood.  
36. Fireworks.  
37. Fish (dried).  
38. Flax.  
39. Fulminate.  
40. Fulminate of mercury.  
41. Fulminate of silver.  
42. Gelatine.  
43. Gelignite.  
44. Grass.  
45. Gun-cotton.  
46. Gunpowder.  
47. Gunny Bags.  
48. Hair.  
49. Hay or fodder.  
50. Hemp.  
51. Hessain cloth (gunny -bag cloth).  
52. Hides (dried).  
53. Hides (raw) . 131 
 54. Hoofs.  
55. Horns.  
56. Incense or esas.  
57. Jute. 
58. Khokas, boxes barrels, furniture or any other article of wood.  
59. Lacquer.  
60. Lether.  
61. Matches for lighting (including Bengal matches).  
62. Methylated spirit, denatured spirit or French polish.  
63. Netro -cellulose.  
64. Netro -compound.  
65. Netro -glycerine.  
66. Netro -mixture.  
67. Offal.  
68. Oil, other than petroleum.  
69. Oilseeds including almonds, but excluding cotton seeds.  
70. Old paper or waste  paper  including old newspaper, periodicals, magazines, etc . 
71. Packing stuff (paper cuttings, husk, saw dust, etc.) . 
72. Paints.  
73. Paper other than old paper in pressed bales or loose or in reams.  
74. Petroleum, other than dangerous petroleum, as defined in the Petrol eum Act, 1934.  
75. Phosphorus.  
76. Plastic or plastic goods.  
77. Plywood.  
78. Rags, including small pieces or cuttings of cloth, hessian cloth, gunny -bag cloth, silk, art silk or 
woollen cloth . 
79. Rosin or dammar Battar otherwise known as Ral.  
80. Safety fuses, fog signals, cartridges, etc.  
81. Saltpetre.  
82. Sandalwood.  
83. Silk waste, or silk yarn waste, art silk waste, or art silk yarn waste.  
84. Sisal fibre.  
85. Skins (raw or dried).  
86. Straw.  
87. Sulphur.  
88. Tallow.  
89. Tar, pitch, dammar or bitumen.  
90. Tarpauline.  
91. Thinner.  
92. Timber.  
93. Turpentine.  
94. Varnish.  
95. Wool  (raw) . 
96. Yarn other than waste yarn.  
    132 
 THE TENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 369 ( 1)] 
PENALTIES  
Explanation .—The entries in the second column of the following table headed “Subject ” are not 
intended as definitions of the offences prescribed in the provisions mentioned in the first column or even 
as abstracts of those provisions, but are inserted merely as reference to the subject thereof: — 
Table  
Section,             
sub-section,    
clause or  
proviso  Subject  Fine or 
imprisonment which 
may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may be 
imposed  
1 2 3 4 
  Rs. Rs. 
Section 74,  
sub-sections  (1) 
and ( 2) Failur e to give notice of transfer or  
devolution of land or building  50 — 
Section 74,  
sub-section  (3) Failure to produce instrument of  transfer  50 — 
Section 75  Failure to give notic e of erection  of new 
building, etc.  50 — 
Section 76  Failure to give notice of demolition  or 
removal of building  50 — 
Section 77  Failure to comply with requisition  to furnish 
information, etc . 50 — 
Section 81 , 
sub-section  (2) Wilful delay or obstruction of  valuers  50 — 
Section 89  Prohibition of advertisement  without 
permission  200 5 
Section 114  Failure to give notice of vacant  land or 
building  50 5 
Section 119 , 
sub-section  (2) Non-compliance with the  requisition of 
attendance before  the Chairperson  50 — 
Section 122  Failure to disclose liability  100 — 
Section 148  Use for non -domestic purposes of  water 
supplied for domestic  purposes  100 5 
Section 152,      
sub-section  (1) Non-compliance with the  requisition to take 
water supply   200 20 
Section 153 Prohibition to occupy new premises  without 
arrangement for water  supply  200 20 
Section 164 Waste or misuse of water  50 — 
Section 165 Refusal of admittance,  etc. 100 — 
Section 168, 
sub-section  (1) Laying of wate r pipes, etc.,  in a position 
wher e pipes may be  injured or water therein 
polluted  100 10 133 
 Section,             
sub-section,    
clause or  
proviso  Subject  Fine or 
imprisonment which 
may be imposed  Daily  fine 
which may be 
imposed  
1 2 3 4 
Section 168, 
sub-section  (2) Construction of latrines, etc., in a  position 
where pipes may be  injured or water therein 
polluted  100 — 
Section 173 Injury to, or interference with free  flow of 
contents of municipal drain  of drains 
communicating with  municipal drain  50 — 
Section 174, 
sub-section (2) Private drain not to be connected  with 
municipal drain without notice  50 — 
Section 175 Non-compliance with requisition  for 
drainage of undrained premises  100 25 
Section 176 Erection of new premises without  drain 1000  — 
Section 177 Non-compliance with requisition of  
maintenance of drainage works for  any group 
or block of premises  50 5 
Section 178 Non-compliance with directions to  close or 
limit the use of private drains in  certain cases  50 5 
Section 179 Non-compliance with Chairperson‟ s orders 
regarding the use of a drain by  a person other 
than the owne r thereof  50 — 
Section 180 Non-compliance with requisition  for keeping 
sewage and rain water  drains distinct  50 — 
Section 181 Non-compliance with requisition  for the 
pavement of courtyard, etc.  50 — 
Section 183 Connection with municipal water  works or 
drains without written  permission  200 50 
Section 186, 
sub-section  (4) Non-compliance with requisition to  close, 
remove or divert a pipe or  drain  50 5 
Section 193, 
sub-section  (1) Execution of work by a person  other than a 
licens ed plumber  200 — 
Section 193, 
sub-section  (2) Failure to furnish when  required, name of 
licensed  plumber employed  100 — 
Section 193, 
sub-section  (6) Licensed plumbers not to demand more than 
the charges prescribed  100 — 
Section 193, 
sub-section  (8) Licensed plumbers not to contravene  bye-
laws or execute work  carelessly or 
negligently, etc.  100 — 
Section 194 Prohibition of wilful  or neglectful  acts 
relating to water or sewage  works  100 — 
Section 209, 
sub-section  (3) Construction of building within the  regular 
line of street without  permission  1000  10 134 
 Section,             
sub-section,    
clause or  
proviso  Subject  Fine or 
imprisonment which 
may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may be 
imposed  
1 2 3 4 
Section 211 Failure to comply with requisition  to set back 
buildings to regular  line of street  200 50 
Section 214 Failure to comply with requisition  to set 
forward buildings to regular  line of street  200 10 
Section 217, 
sub-sections  (5) Utilising, selling or otherwise  dealing with 
any land or laying  out a private street 
otherwise  than in con formity with orders  of 
the Council  Rigorous 
imprisonment which 
may extend to three 
years  — 
Section 218, 
sub-section  (1), 
clauses ( a) and 
(b)  Failure to comply with requisition  to show 
cause for alteration of  street or for a 
appearance before  the Chairperson  50 5 
Section 219, 
sub-section  (1) Failure to comply with requisition  on owner 
of pri vate street or owner  of adjoining land 
or building to level, etc., such street  100 10 
Section 221, 
sub-section  (1) Prohibition of projections upon  streets , etc. 200 — 
Section 221, 
sub-section  (2) Failure to comply with requisition  to remove 
projections from streets  200 — 
Section 222, 
sub-section  (2) Failure to comply with requisition  to remove 
a verandah, balcony,  etc., put up in 
accordance with  section 221( 1) 200 — 
Section 223 Failure to com ply with requis ition to have 
ground floor doors, etc.,  so altered as not to 
open outwards  50 — 
Section 224, 
sub-section  (1) Erection, etc., of structures of  fixtures which 
cause obstruction in  streets  200 10 
Section 225 Deposit, etc., of things in streets  100 — 
Section 227, 
sub-section s (1) 
and ( 2) Tethering of animals and milking  of cattle in 
public streets  100 5 
Section 228, 
sub-section ( 4) Unlawful removal of bar or  shorting timber , 
etc., or removal  or extinction of light  50 — 
Section 229, 
sub-section ( 1) Streets not to be opened or  broken  and 
building materials  not to be deposited 
thereon  without permission  200 10 
Section 231, 
sub-section ( 2) Name of street and number of  house not to 
be destroyed or  defaced, etc.  50 — 
Section 232, 
sub-section ( 1) Failure to com ply with requisition  to rep air, 
protect or enclose a  dangerous place  100 25 
Section 234, 
sub-section ( 1) Removal, etc., of lamps  100 — 135 
 Section,             
sub-section,    
clause or  
proviso  Subject  Fine or 
imprisonment which 
may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may be 
imposed  
1 2 3 4 
Section 234, 
sub-section ( 2) Wilfully and negligently extingu ishing lights 
in public streets, etc.  50 — 
Section 237, 
sub-section ( 1) Erection of a building without  the sanction of 
the Chairperson  Simple 
imprisonment which 
may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5000 or with 
both — 
Section 237, 
sub-section ( 2) Use of inflamm able materials  without 
permission  100 — 
Section 238, 
sub-section ( 1) Failure to give notice of intention  to erect a 
building  Simple 
imprisonment which 
may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5000 or with 
both — 
Section 239, 
sub-section ( 1) Failure to give notice of intention  to make 
additions, etc., to  building s Simple 
impriso nment which 
may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5000 or with 
both — 
Section 242, 
sub-section ( 4) Commencement to work without  notice, etc.  10000  500 
Section 244 Failure to comply with requisition  to round 
off buildings at corners  of streets  100 5 
Section 245, 
sub-section ( 1) Erection of buildings on new  streets without 
level ling 1000  — 
Section 245, 
sub-section ( 1) Erection of buildings or execution  of work 
within regular line of  street or in 
contravention of any  scheme or  plan 1000  — 
Section 247 Failure to demolish buildings  erected without 
sanction or  erection of buildings in 
contra vention of order  Simple 
imprisonment which 
may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5000 or with 
both — 
 
    136 
 Section,             
sub-section,    
clause or  
proviso  Subject  Fine or 
imprisonment which 
may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may be 
imposed  
1 2 3 4 
Section 248 Erection of buildings in contra vention of 
conditions of sanction,  etc. Simple 
imprisonment which 
may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5000 or with 
both — 
Section 249 Failure to carry out a alterations  Simple 
imprisonment which 
may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5000 or with  
both — 
Section 251, 
sub-section s (1) 
and (2) Non-compliance with provision  as to 
completion certificates,  occupation or use, 
etc., without  permission  200 10 
Section 252 Non-compliance with restrictions  on user of 
buildings  Simple 
imprisonment which 
may extend to six 
months or with fine 
which may extend to 
Rs. 5000 or with 
both — 
Section 258, 
sub-sections  (1) 
and ( 2) Failure to comply with requisition  to remove 
structures which are in  ruins or likely to fall  500 20 
Section 259, 
sub-section  (1) Failure to comply with requisition  to vacate 
buildings in dangerous  conditions, etc.  200 — 
Section 264 Failure to provide for collection,  removal and 
deposit of refuse and  provision of receptacles  50 — 
Section 265, 
sub-section  (1) Failure to collect and remove filth  and 
polluted matter  50 — 
Section 265, 
sub-section  (3) Scavenger ‟s duties in certain cases  not to be 
discharged by any person  without permission  25 — 
Section 266 Failure to comply with requisition  for 
removal of rubbish, etc., from  premises used 
as market, etc.  100 — 
Section 267, 
sub-section  (1) Keeping rubbish and filth for more  than 
twenty -four hours, etc.  50 10 
Section 267, 
sub-section  (2) Allowing filth to flow in streets  50 — 
Section 267, 
sub-section  (3) Depositing rubbish or filth, etc., in  street, etc.  50 — 137 
 Section,             
sub-section,    
clause or  
proviso  Subject  Fine or 
imprisonment which 
may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may be 
imposed  
1 2 3 4 
Section 271, 
sub-section  (1) Latrines and urinals not to be  constructed 
without permission or in  contravention of 
terms prescribed  200 — 
Section 272, 
sub-section  (1) Failure to provide buildings newly  erected or 
re-erected with latrine,  urinal and other 
accommodation  500 — 
Section 272, 
sub-section  (3) Failure to provide resident ial buildings 
composed of separate  tenements with latrine, 
bathing or  washing place for servants on the  
ground floor  500 — 
Section 273 Failure to provide latrines for  premises used 
by large number of  people and to keep them 
clean and  in proper order  100 20 
Section 274 Failure to comply with requisition  to provide 
latrines for market, cattle  shed, cart stand, 
etc., and to keep  them clean and in proper 
order  100 20 
Section 275, 
clauses ( a), (b), 
(c) and ( d) Failure to comply with  requisition  to enforce 
provision of latrine or  urinal accommodation, 
etc. 100 10 
Section 276, 
sub-section  (2) Failure to comply with requisition  for 
removal of congested buildings  1000  — 
Section 277 Failure to comply with requisition  to 
improve buildings unfit for  human habitation  1000  — 
Section 279, 
sub-sections 
(1), (2), (3) and 
(4) Failure to comply with order of  demolition 
of buildings unfit for human habitation  1000  — 
Section 280 Failure to comply with requisition  of the 
Chairperson to rem ove insanitary huts and 
sheds, etc.  100 15 
Section 281, 
sub-section  (1) Prohibition against washing by  washerman  25 — 
Section 282 Failure to give information of  dangerous 
disease  100 — 
Section 284 Failure to comply with requisition  to cleanse 
and disinfect buildings or  articles  50 — 
Section 285 Failure to comply with requisition  to destroy 
infectious huts or sheds  50 — 
Section 286 Washing of clothing, bedding, etc.,  at any 
place not notified by the  Chairperson  25 — 
    138 
 Section,             
sub-section,    
clause or  
proviso  Subject  Fine or 
imprisonment which 
may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may be 
imposed  
1 2 3 4 
Section 288, 
sub-section  (1) Sending infected clothes to  washerman or 
laundry  25 — 
Section 288, 
sub-section  (2) Failure to furnish address of  washerman or 
laundry to which  clothes have been sent  25 — 
Section 289, 
sub-sections 
(1), (2) and ( 3) Use of public conveyances by  persons 
suffering from a dangerous  disease, etc.  50 — 
Section 291 Failure to disinfect buildings  before l etting 
the same  100 — 
Section 292 Disposal of infected articles  without 
disinfection  50 — 
Section 293 Making or selling of food, etc., or  washing of 
clothes by infected  persons  50 — 
Section 294 Sale of food or drink in  contravention  of 
restriction  or prohibition of Chairperson  50 — 
Section 295 Removal or use of water from  wells and 
tanks in contravention of  prohibition of 
Chairperson  50 — 
Section 296 Exposure of persons to risk of  infection by 
the presence or  conduct of a person suffering 
from  a dangerous disease, etc.  100 — 
Section 297 Removal of infectious corpses in  
contravention of the provisions of  the section  50 — 
Section 298, 
sub-sections ( 1) 
and ( 2) Absence of sweepers, etc., from  duty without 
notice  Imprisonment which 
may extend to one 
month  — 
Section 299 A sweeper employed for doing  house 
scavenging not to discontinue  work without 
notice  10 — 
Section 300  Failure to supply information by  persons 
incharge of burning or  burial grounds  50 — 
Section 301  Use of new burning or burial  ground  without 
permission  50 — 
Section 302, 
sub-section ( 1) Failure to comply with requisition to close a 
burning or  burial ground  50 — 
Section 302, 
sub-section ( 2) Burning or burial of corpses in a  burning or 
burial ground after it  has been closed  50 — 
Section 303  Removal of corpses by other than  prescribed 
routes  25 — 
Section 304, 
clause ( b) Failure to give notice for removal  of 
carcasses of dead animals  10 — 139 
 Section,             
sub-section,    
clause or  
proviso  Subject  Fine or 
imprisonment which 
may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may be 
imposed  
1 2 3 4 
Section 307, 
sub-sections ( 1) 
and ( 2) Failure to give information of  births and 
deaths  50 — 
Section 308, 
sub-sections 
(1), (2) and ( 3) Commission of nuisances  50 — 
Section 309  Failure to comply with requisition  for 
removal or abatement of  nuisance  500 25 
Section 310, 
sub-section ( 4) Dogs not to be at large in a street  without 
being secured by a chain  lead 50 — 
Section 310, 
sub-section ( 5) Ferocio us dogs at large without being 
muzzled, etc.  100 — 
Section 311  Staking inflammable material in  
contravention of prohibition  50 — 
Section 312  Setting a naked light  50 — 
Section 313  Discharging fireworks, firearms,  etc., likely 
to cause danger  50 — 
Section 314  Failure to comply with requisition  to render 
buildings, wells, etc.,  safe 50 — 
Section 315  Failure to comply with requisition  to enclose 
land used for improper  purposes  50 — 
Section 317, 
sub-section ( 1) Sale in municipal markets  without 
permission  200 — 
Section 318, 
sub-sections ( 1) 
and ( 2) Use of  places as private markets  without a 
licen ce and use of places  other than a 
municipal slaughter  house as slaughter 
houses  500 25 
Section 318, 
sub-section ( 2) 
proviso ( a) Non-compliance with conditions  imposed by 
Chairperson  50 — 
Section 320  Keeping market open without  licence, etc.  2000  — 
Section 321  Sale in unlicensed market  50 — 
Section 322  Carrying on business or trade near  a market  50 — 
Section 324  Failure of person in charge of  markets to 
expel lepers and  disturbers from the market  50 — 
Section 325  Carrying on butcher‟ s, fishmonger ‟s or 
poluterer ‟s trade  without licence, etc.  100 10 
Section 326  Establishment of factory, etc.,  without 
permission  5000  50 
    140 
 Section,             
sub-section,    
clause or  
proviso  Subject  Fine or 
imprisonment which 
may be imposed  Daily fine 
which may be 
imposed  
1 2 3 4 
Section 327  Certain things not to be kept and  certain 
trades and operations not  to be carried on 
without a licence  1000  100 
Section 328, 
sub-section ( 3) Keeping, abandonment or tethering of 
animals, etc.  100 — 
Section 329, 
sub-section ( 5) Use of premises in contr avention  of 
declaration  500 — 
Section 330  Hawking articles for sale without a licence, 
etc. 100 — 
Section 331  Keeping a lodging house, eating house, tea 
shop,  etc., without  licence or contrary to 
licence  100 — 
Section 332  Keeping open theatre, circus or other place 
of public amusement  without licence or 
contrary to terms  of licence  500 50 
Section 339, 
sub-section ( 5) Failure to produce licence  or written 
permission  50 5 
Section 340  Preven ting the Chairperson or any person 
authorised in this behalf from exercising his 
powers of entry, etc.  50 — 
Section 341  Preventing the Chairperson or any person 
authorised in this behalf  from exercising his 
power of entry  upon any  adjoining land  50 — 
Section 346  Obstruction or molestation in execution of 
work  200 — 
Section 353, 
sub-section ( 4) Failure to compl y with requisition  to state  
the name and address of owner of premises  50 — 
Section 364, 
sub-section ( 3) Failur e of occupier of land or building to 
afford owner facilities for complying with  
provisions of  the Act, etc., after eight days 
from  issue of order by district judge  200 50 
Section 404  Obstru ction of Chairperson or a  member, etc.  200 — 
Section 405  Removal of any mark set up for indicating 
level, etc.  100 — 
Section 406  Removal, etc., of notice exhibited by or 
under orders of the Council,  Chairperson, 
etc. 50 — 
Section 407  Unlawful removal of earth, sand or other 
material or deposit of any  matter or making 
of any  encroachment from any land vested  in 
the Council.  50 — 
 
--------------------------The Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Power Transmission System) Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
 THE NEYVELI LIGNITE CORPORATION LIMITED (ACQUISITION  
AND TRANSFER OF POWER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM) ACT, 1994  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF POWER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM  
3. Acquisition of rights of company in relation to the power transmission system . 
4. General effect of vesting . 
5. Corporation to be liable for certain prior liabilities . 
6. Corporation to be lessee or tenant . 
7. Remov al of doubts . 
8. Payment of amount . 
CHAPTER III  
DELIVERY OF ASSETS, ETC.,  TO THE  CORPORATION  
9. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc., in their possession . 
CHAPTER IV  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSOCIATED PERSONNEL  
10. Continuance of associated personnel . 
11. Provident fund and other funds . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
12. Act to have overriding effect . 
13. Penalties . 
14. Offences by companies . 
15. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
16. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE NEYVELI LIGNIT E CORPORATION LIMITED (ACQUISITION  
AND TRANSFER OF  POWER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM) ACT , 1994  
 
ACT NO. 56 OF 1994  
[14th September , 1994.]  
An Act to provide in the public interest for the acquisition and transfer of the power transmission 
system of the Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited and the right,  title and  interest of the 
company in the power transmission system to the Power Grid Corporation of India Limited , 
with a view to developing the National Power Grid to ensure transmission of power, within 
and across the different regions of India, on a more scientific, efficient and economic basis 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short  title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Neyveli Lignite 
Corporation Limited (Acquisition and Transfer of Power Transmission System)  Act, 1994.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) The provisions of sections 8 to 11 and sections 13 to 16 shall come in to force at once and the 
remaining provisions of this Act shall be  deemed to have come int o force on the 1st day of April , 1992 
and any refere nce to the commencement of this Act in any provision of this Act shall be construed as a  
reference to the commencement of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context  otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day” means the 1st day of April, 1992;  
(b) “associated personnel”  means the employees of the company associated with its power 
transmission system;  
(c) “company” means the Neyveli Lignite Corporation Limited,  a company incorporated and 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) having its registered office at Neyveli -607801, 
South Arcot District,  Tamil Nadu;  
(d) “Corporation”  means the Power Grid Corporation of India Limited, being a company within 
the meaning of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and having its registered office at Hemkunt 
Chambers, 89,  Nehru  Place, New Delhi -110019;  
(e) “notification”  means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(f) “power  transmission  system” , in relation to the company , means the main transmission lines 
[including extra high voltage alternative current (EHVAC) lines and high voltage direct current 
(HVDC) lines] and su b-stations owned by the company;  
(g) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(h) words  and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Electricity (Supply) Act, 
1948 (54 of 1948) or, as the case may be, the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) shall have the 
meanings respectively, assigned to them in those Acts.  
  3 
 CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF POWER TRANSMISSION SYSTEM  
3. Acquisition of right s of company in relation to the power transmission system .—(1) On the 
appointed day, the power transmission system and the right, title and interest of the company in relation to 
its power transmission system shall, by virtue of this Act , be deemed to have been  transferred to, and 
vested in, the Central Government.  
(2) The power transmission system vested in the Central Government by virtue of sub -section ( 1) 
shall, immediately after it had so vested, be deemed to have been transferred to , and vested in , the 
Corporation.  
4. General effect of vesting .—(1) The power transmission system shall be deemed to include all 
assets, rights, leaseholds, powers, authorities and p rivileges and  all property, mov able and immovable , 
relating to such system including lands, buildings, workshops, projects (whether complete or at any  stage 
of completion or planning), stores, spares, instruments, machinery and  equipment, construction 
equipment, unutilised long -term and short -term loans and all other rights and interests in, or arising out 
of, such property as were , immediately before the appointed day, in the ownership, possession, power or 
control of the company and all books of account, registe rs and all other documents of whatever nature 
relating thereto but shall be deemed not to include — 
(a) book debts due to the company, immediately before the appointed day;  
(b) cash balances and bank balances as on the appointed day;  
(c) income and expendit ure on revenue account relating  to any period before the appointed day.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that rights in relation to the power 
transmission system of the company wh ich have been transferred to, and vested in, the  Corporation under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 3 and this sub -section shall include the right to collect transmission charges for 
transmission of power and any monies collected on or after the appointed day by the company as 
transmission charges (whether sh own separately or not) shall be payable by the company to the 
Corporation.  
(2) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all deeds, bonds, guarantees (other than 
guarantees given by the Government of India), agreements, powers of attorney, grants of  legal 
representation and other instruments of whatever nature in relation to the power transmission system of 
the company, subsisting or having e ffect immediately before the appointed day, and to which the 
company is a party or which are in favour of the said company shall be of as full force and effect against 
or in favour of the Corporation and may be enforced or acted upon as fully and effectually as if in the 
place of the company, the Corporatio n had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued i n favour of 
the Corporation.  
(3) If, on the date of commencement of this Act, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever 
nature , in relation to any property or assets which have been transferred to, and vested in, the Corporation 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, instituted or preferred by or against the company was pending, the 
same shall not abate , be discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of the transfer of 
the power transmission system of the company or of anything cont ained in this Act, but the suit, appeal or 
other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 5, by or against the Corporation.  
5. Corporation to be liable for certain prior  liabilities .—(1) Subject to the provisions of  
sub-section ( 2), every liability of the company in relation to its power transmission system , in respect of 
any period prior to the appointed day, which has been transferred to, and vested in , the Corporation under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 3, shall be the liability of the Corporation and shall be enforceable against the 
Corporation and not against the company:  4 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to — 
(a) the  income and expenditure on revenue account relating to any period before the appointed 
day and received or, as the case  may be, incurred by the company on or after the appointed day;  
(b) arrears of depreciation , regarding contingent liabilities on capital account relating to any 
period before the appointed day, arising on account of the decision of any court, tribunal or other 
authority.  
(2) Where any repayment of a loan or interest, or both, has been made, on or after the appointed day, 
by the company to a ny lending agency, such repayment shall be deemed to have been made by the 
Corporation and the amount of such repayment shall be reimbursed by the Corporation to the company on 
adjustment of transmission charges or any other amount due to the Corporation f rom the company.  
6. Corporation to be lessee or tenant .—(1) Where any property is held by the company in relation 
to its power transmission system under any lease or right of tenancy, the Corporation shall, on and from 
the appointed day , be deemed to have become the lessee or tenant, as the case may be, in respect of such 
property as if the lease or tenancy in relation to such property had been granted to the Corporation and 
thereupon all the rights under such lease or tenancy shall be de emed to have been transferred to , and 
vested in, the Corporation.  
(2) On the expiry of the term of any lease or tenancy referred to in sub -section ( 1), such lease or 
tenancy shall, if so desired by the Corporation, be renewed on the same terms and conditio ns on which the 
lease or tenancy was held by the company immediately before the appointed day.  
7. Removal of doubts .—(1) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of 
sections 3,4,5 and 6 shall apply to the extent to which any pro perty appertains to the business relating to 
the power transmission system carried on by the company and to the rights and powers acquired, and to 
debts, liabilities and obligations incurred, and to contracts, agreements, and other instruments made by the 
company and to legal proceedings relating to those matters pending in any court, tribunal or other 
authority in India.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any property appertained, on the appointed day, to any 
business of the company in relation to it s power transmission system , or whether any rights, power s, 
debts, liabilities or obligations were acquired or incurred or any contract, agreement or other instrument 
was made by the company for the purposes of its said business , or whether any document re lates to those 
purposes, the question shall be referred to the Central Government which shall, after giving a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard to the persons interested in the matter, decide it in such manner as it may think 
fit. 
8. Payment of amount .—(1) For the transfer to, and vesting in , the Central Government under 
sections 3 and 4 of the power transmission system and the right,  title and interest of the company in 
relation t o its power transmission system  there shall be paid , in the prescribed ma nner, by the Central 
Government to the company such amount as is equal to the book value of all the assets and properties 
after deduction of liabilities (other than contingent liabilities) given in the audited statement of accounts 
of the company as on the  31st day of March, 1992.  
(2) For the transfer to, and vesting in, the Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 of the power 
transmission system and the right, title and interest of the company in relation to its power transmission 
system, there shall be paid, in the prescribed manner, by the Corporation to the Central Government, the 
amount which is paid by that Government to the company under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) In case of any dispute relating to the nature of any asset,  property or liability o r the amount 
payable under sub -section ( 1), the dispute shall be referred by the Central Government to such authority 
as it may appoint and the decision of that authority in the matter shall be final.  
  5 
 CHAPTER III  
DELIVERY OF ASSETS, ETC.,TO THE  CORPORATION  
9. Duty of persons to account for assets, etc. , in their possession .—(1) Any person who has, on the 
date of commencement of this Act, in his possession or under his control, any assets, books and any other 
documents relating to the power transmission system which has been transferred to, and vested in, the 
Corporation under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, shall be liable to account for the said assets, books and 
documents to the Corporation and shall deliver them up to the Corporation or to such person or persons as 
the Corporation may specify in this behalf.  
(2) The Corporation may take or cause to be taken all necessary steps for securing possession of the 
power transmission system which has been transferred to, and vested in, the Corporati on under this Act.  
(3) The company shall, within such period as the Corporation may allow in this behalf, furnish to the 
Corporation a complete inventory of all its property and assets as on the appointed day pertained to its 
power transmission system whic h has been transferred to, and vested in, the Corporation under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 3.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO ASSOCIATED PERSONNEL  
10. Cont inuance of associated personnel .—(1) On the vesting of the power transmission system of 
the company in the Corporation, the associated personnel who have been, immediately on or before the 
1st day of December, 1992, employed in the company and have not already become employees of the 
Corpor ation shall become, on and from the date of commencement of this Act, employees of the 
Corporation and shall hold office or service under the Corporation on the terms and conditions which are 
not in any way less favourable than those which would have been admissible to them if there had been no 
such vesting and shall continue to do so unless and until their employment under the Corporation is duly 
terminated or until their remuneration and other conditions of se rvice are duly altered by the Corporation.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947) , or any 
other law for the time being in force, the tr ansfer of the ser vices of the associated personnel to the 
Corporation, shall not entitle such personnel to any compen sation under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
11. Provident fund and other funds .—(1) Where the company has established a provident fund or 
any other fun d for the benefit of the persons employed by it, the monies  relatable to the associated 
personnel who have already become employees of the Corporation or whose services have become 
transferred under this Act to the Corporation shall, out of the monies standing , on the date  of transfer of 
the associated personnel, to the credit of such provident fund or other fund, stand transferred to, and vest 
in, the Corporation.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) to the Corporation shall be dealt with by 
the Corporation in such manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
12. Act to have over riding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law, other than this Act, or in any decree or order of any court, tribunal or 
other authority.  
  6 
 13. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having  in his possession, custody or control any property  forming part of the power 
transmission system of the company wrongfully withholds such property from the Corporation; or  
(b) wrongfully obtain s possession o f, or retains , any property form ing part of the power 
transmission system of the company; or  
(c) wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Corporation or any person or body of persons 
speci fied by the Corporation , any docu ment or inventory relating to the power transmission system of 
the company, w hich may be in his possession, custody or control; or 
(d) fails to deliver to the Corporation or any person or body of persons specified by that 
Corporation, any assets, books of account, registers or other documents in his possession, custody or 
control re lating to the power tra nsmission system of the company,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and also with fine which 
may extend to ten thousand rupees.  
14. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence punishable under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to , the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be gui lty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his know ledge and that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has b een committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that off ence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director” , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
15. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Corporation or the company or any officer of that Government, 
Corporation or company or any other person authorised by that Government, Corporation or company for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
16. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  manner in which the amount is to be paid under sub -section( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of 
section 8;  
(b) the manner in which the monies in any provident fund or other fund, referred to in  
sub-section ( 2) of section 11, shall be dealt with;  
(c) any other matter  which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  7 
 (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days whic h 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session  immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both House s agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done 
under that rule.  
 
 
--------------------------The Pre-conception and Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
 THE PRE-CONCEPTION AND PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES ( PROHIBITION 
OF SEX SELECTION ) ACT, 1994  
_______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF GENETIC COUNSELLING CENTRES,  GENETIC LABORATORIES AND  GENETIC  
CLINICS  
3. Regulation of Genetic Counselling Centres, Genetic Laboratories and Genetic Clinics.  
3A. Prohibition of sex selection.  
3B. Prohibition on sale of ultrasound machine, etc., to persons, laboratories, etc., not registered under 
the Act.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF PRE -NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES  
4. Regulation of pre -natal diagnostic techniques.  
5. Written consent of pregnant woman and prohibition of communicating the sex of foetus.  
6. Determination of sex prohibited.  
CHAPTER IV  
CENTRAL SUPERVISORY BOARD  
7. Constitution of Central Supervisory Board.  
8. Term of office of members.  
9. Meetings of the Board.  
10. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board.  
11. Temporary association of persons wi th the Board for particular purposes.  
12. Appointment of officers and other employees of the Board.  
13. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Board.  
14. Disqualifications for appointment as member.  
15. Eligibility of member for re appointment.  
16. Functions of the Board.  
16A. Constitution of State Supervisory Board and Union territory Supervisory Board.  
CHAPTER V  
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY AND ADVISORY COMMITTEE  
17. Appropriate Authority and Advisory Committee.  
17A. Powers of Appropriate Authorities.  
CHAPTER VI  
REGISTRATION OF GENETIC COUNSELLING CENTRES,  GENETIC LABORATORIES AND  GENETIC  
CLINICS  
18. Registration of Genetic Counselling Centres, Genetic Laboratories or Genetic Clinics.  
19. Certificate of registration.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Cancellation or suspension of registration.  
21. Appeal. 
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
22. Prohibition of advertisement relating to pre-conception and pre-natal determination of sex and 
punishment for contravention.  
23. Offences and penalties.  
24. Presumption in the case of conduct of pre -natal diagnostic techniques.  
25. Penalty for contravention of the provisions of the Act or rules for which no specific punishment is 
provided.  
26. Offences by companies.  
27. Offence to be cognizable, non -bailable and non -compoundable.  
28. Cognizance of offences.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Maintenance of records.  
30. Power to search and seize records, etc.  
31. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
31A. Removal of difficulties.  
32. Power to make rules.  
33. Power to make regulations.  
34. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.   3 
 2[THE PRE-CONCEPTI ON AND PRE-NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES 
(PROHIBITION OF SEX SELECTION )] ACT, 1994  
ACT NO. 57 OF 1994  
[20th September,  1994 .] 
1[An Act to provide for the prohibition of sex selection, before or after concept ion, and for 
regulation of pre -natal diagnostic techniques for the purposes of detecting genetic 
abnormalities or metabolic disorders or ch romosomal abnormalities or certa in co ngenital 
malformations or sex -linked disorders and for the prevention of their misuse for sex 
determination leading to female foeticide and for matters connected therewith or incidental 
thereto .] 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called 2[the Pre-conception and 
Pre-natal Diagno stic Techniques (Prohibition of Sex Selection) ] Act, 19 94. 
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Appropriate Authority ” means the Appropriate Authority appointed under section 17;  
(b) “Board ” means  the Central Supervisory Board constituted under section 7;  
4[(ba) “conceptus ” means any product of conception at any stage of development from 
fertilisation until birth including extra embryonic membranes as well as the embryo or foetus;  
(bb) “embryo”  means a developing human organism after fertilisation till the end of eight weeks 
(fifty -six days);  
(bc) “foetus ” means a human organism du ring the period of its development beginning on the 
fifty-seventh day following fertilisation or creation (excluding any time in which its development has 
been suspe nded) and ending at the birth;]  
(c) “Genetic Counselling Centre ” means an institute, hospital, nursing home or any place, by 
whatever name called, which provides for genetic counselling to patients;  
(d) “Genetic Clinic ” means a clinic, institute, hospital, nursing home or any place, by whatever 
name called, which is us ed for conducting pre-natal diagnostic procedures.  
5[Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause,  “Genetic Clinic ” includes a vehicle, where 
ultrasound machine or imaging machine or scanner or other equipment capable of determining sex of 
the foetus  or a portable equipment which has the potential for dete ction of sex during pregnancy or 
selection of s ex before conception, is used;]  
(e) “Genetic Laboratory ” means a laboratory and includes a place where facilities are provided 
for conducting analysis o r tests of samples received from Genetic Clinic for pre -natal diag nostic test.  
5[Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “Genetic Laboratory ” includes a place where 
ultrasound machine or imaging machine or scanner or other equipment capable of determining sex of 
the foetus or a portable equipment  which has the potential for det ection of sex during pregnancy or 
selection of s ex before conception , is used;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 2, for the long title (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “the Pre -natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention of Misuse)” (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
3. 1st January, 1996, vide notification  No. S.O. 990, dated 21st December, 1995, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,   
sec. 3( ii). 
4. Ins. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 4 (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
5. Added by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  4 
 (f) “gynaecologist ” means a person who possesses a post -graduate qualification in gynaecology 
and obstetrics;  
1[(g) “medical geneticist ” includes a person who possesses a degree or diploma in genetic science 
in the fields of sex selection and pre -natal diagnostic techniques or has experience of not less than two 
years in any of these fields after obtaining — 
(i) any one of the medical qualifications recognised under the Indian Medical  Council Act, 
1956 (102 of 1956 ); or 
(ii) a post -graduate degree in biological sciences;]  
(h) “paediatrician ” means a person who possesses a post -graduate qualification in paediatrics;  
2[(i) “pre-natal diagnostic procedures”  means all gynaecological or obstetrical or medical 
procedures such as ultrasonography, foetoscopy, taking or removing samples of amniotic fluid, 
chorionic villi, embryo, blood or any other tissue or fluid of a man, or of a woman before or after 
conception, for being sent to a Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic for conducting any type of 
analysis or pre -natal diagnostic tests fo r selection of s ex before or after conception;]  
(j) “pre-natal diagnostic techniques ” includes all pre -natal diagnostic procedures and pre -natal 
diagnostic tests;  
3[(k) “pre-natal diagnostic test ” means ultrasonography or any test or analysis of amniotic fluid, 
chorionic villi, blood or any tissue or fluid of a pregnant woman or conceptus conducted to detect 
genetic or metabolic disorders or chromosomal abnormaliti es or congenital anomalies or 
haem oglobinopa thies or sex - linked diseases;]  
(l) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(m) “registered medical practitioner ” means a medical practitioner who possesses any recognised 
medical qualification as defined in clause ( h) of sect ion 2 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 
(102 of 1956) , and whose name has been entered in a State Medical Register;  
(n) “regulations ” means regulations fra med by the Board under this Act;  
4[(o) “sex selection ” includes any procedure, technique, test or administration or prescription or 
provision of anything for the purpose of ensuring or increasing the probability that an embryo will be 
of a particular sex;  
(p) “sonologist or imaging specialist ” means a person who possesses any one of the medical 
qualifications recognised under the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956 ) or who possesses 
a post -graduate qualification in  ultrasonography or imaging tech niques or radiology;  
(q) “State Board ” means a State Su pervisory Board or a Union territory Supervisory Board 
constituted under section 16A;  
(r) “State Government ” in relation to Union territory with Legislature means the Administrator of 
that Union territory  appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution.]  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF GENETIC COUNSELLING CENTRES , GENETIC LABORATORIES AND  GENETIC CLINICS  
3. Regulation of Genetic Counselling Centres, Genetic Laboratories and Genetic Clinics .—On 
and from the commencement of this Act, — 
(1) no Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic unless registered under 
this Act, shall conduct or associate with, or help in, conducting activities relating to pre -natal 
diagnostic techniques ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 4, for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause (k) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
4. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  5 
 1[(2) no Genetic Counselling Centre or Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic shall employ or 
cause to be employed or take services of any person, whether on honorary basis or on payment who 
does not possess the qualif ications as may be  prescribed; ] 
 (3) no medical geneticist, gynaecologist paediatrician registered medical practitioner or any other 
person shall conduct or cause to be conducted or aid in conducting by himself or through any other 
person, any pre -natal diagnostic techniques at a place other than a place registered under this Act.  
2[3A. Prohibition of sex selection .—No person, including a specialist or a team of specialists in the 
field of infertility, shall conduct or cause to be conducted or aid in conducting by himself or by any other 
person, sex selection on a woman or a man or on both or on any tissue, embryo, co nceptus, fluid or 
gametes derived from either or both of them.  
3B. Prohibition  on sale of ultrasound machine, etc., to persons, laboratories, clinics, etc., not 
registered under the Act .—No person shall sell any ultrasound machine or imaging machine or sca nner 
or any other equipment capable of detecting sex of the foe tus to any Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic 
Laboratory, Genetic Clinic or any other person  not registered under the Act.]  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF PRE -NATAL DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES  
4. Regulation of pre -natal diagnostic techniques .—On and from the c ommencement of this Act, — 
(1) no place including a registered Genetic Counselling Centre or Genetic Laboratory or Genetic 
Clinic shall be used or caused to be used by any person for conducting  pre-natal diagnostic techniques 
except for the purposes specified in clause ( 2) and after satisfying any of the conditions specified in 
clause ( 3); 
(2) no pre -natal diagnostic techniques shall be conducted except for the purposes of detection of 
any of th e following abnormalities, namely: — 
(i) chromosomal abnormalities;  
(ii) genetic metabolic diseases;  
(iii) haemoglobinopathies;  
(iv) sex -linked genetic diseases;  
(v) congenital anomalies;  
(vi) any other abnormalities or diseases as may be specified by  the C entral Supervisory 
Board;  
3[(3) no pre -natal diagnostic techniques shall be used or conducted unless the person qualified to 
do so is satisfied for reasons to be recorded in writing that any of the following conditions a re 
fulfilled, namely: — 
(i) age of the pregnant woman is above thirty -five years;  
(ii) the pregnant woman has undergone two or more spontaneous abortions or foetal loss;  
(iii) the pregnant woman had been exposed to potentially teratog enic agents such as drugs, 
radiation, infection or chemicals;  
(iv) the pregnant woman or her spouse has a family history of mental retardation or physical 
deformities such as, spasticity or any other genetic disease;  
(v) any other condition as may be speci fied by the Board:  
Provided that the person conducting ultrasonography on a pregnant woman shall keep complete 
record thereof in the clinic in such manner, as may be prescribed, and any deficiency or inaccuracy 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 5, for clause ( 2) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clauses ( 3) and ( 4) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  6 
 found therein shall amount to contravention o f the provisions of section 5 or section 6 unless contrary 
is proved by the person conducting such ultrasonography;  
(4) no person including a relative or husband of the pregnant woman shall seek or encourage the 
conduct of any pre -natal diagnostic techniques on her except for the purposes specified in clause ( 2); 
(5) no person including a relative or husband of a woman shall seek or encourage the conduct of 
any sex selection te chnique on her or him or both.]  
5. Written consent of pregnant woman and prohibition of communicating the sex of foetus .—(1) 
No person referred to in clause ( 2) of section 3 shall conduct the pre -natal d iagnostic procedur es unless— 
(a) he has explained all known side and after effects of such procedures to the pregnant woman 
concerned;  
(b) he has obtained in the prescribed form her written consent to undergo such procedures in the 
language which she understands; and  
(c) a copy of her written consent obtained under clause ( b) is given to the pregnant woman.  
1[(2) No person inclu ding the person conducting pre -natal diagnostic procedures shall communicate 
to the pregnant woman concerned or her relatives or any other person the sex of the foetus by words, 
signs, or in any other manner.]  
6. Determination of sex prohibited .—On and from the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) no Genetic Counselling Centre or Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic shall conduct or cause 
to be conducted in its Centre, Laboratory or Clinic, pre -natal diagnostic techniques including 
ultrasonography, for th e purpose of d etermining the sex of a foetus;  
(b) no person shall conduct or cause to be conducted any pre -natal diagnostic techniques 
including ultrasonography for the purpose of determining the sex of a foetus;  
2[(c) no person shall, by whatever means, cause or allow to be caused selection of s ex before or 
after conception.]  
CHAPTER IV  
CENTRAL SUPERVISORY BOARD  
7. Constitution of Central Supervisory Board .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a 
Board to be known as the Central Supervisory Board to exercise the powers and perform the functions 
conferred on the Board under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall consist of — 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department of Family Welfare, who shall be the 
Chairman, ex officio ; 
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India in charge of the Department of Family Welfare, who 
shall be the Vice -Chairman, ex officio ; 
3[(c) three members to be appointed by the Central Government to represent the Ministries of 
Central Government in charge of Women and Child Development, Department of Legal Affairs or 
Legislative Department in the Ministry of Law and Justice, and Indian System of Medicin e and 
Homoeopathy, ex officio ;] 
 (d) the Director General of Health Services of the Central Government, ex officio ; 
(e) ten members to be appointed by the Central Gove rnment, two each from amongst — 
(i) eminent medical geneticists;  
4[(ii) eminent gynaecologist and obstetrician or expert of stri-roga  or prasuti -tantra .] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 8, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
4. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for sub-clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  7 
  (iii) eminent paediatricians;  
(iv) eminent social scientists; and  
(v) representatives of women welfare organisations;  
(f) three women Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of the 
People and one by the Council of States;  
(g) four members to be appointed by the Central Government by rotation to represent the States 
and the Union territories, two in the alphabetical order and two in the reverse alphabetical  order:  
Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made except on the recommendation of 
the State Government or, as the case may be, the Union territory;  
(h) an officer, not below the rank of a Joint Secretary or equivalent of the Central Gove rnment, in 
charge of Family Welfare, who shall be the Member -Secretary, ex officio . 
8. Term of office of members .—(1) The term of office of a member, other than an ex officio  
member, shall be, — 
(a) in case of appointment under clause ( e) or clause ( f) of s ub-section ( 2) of section 7, three 
years:  1*** 
2[Provided that the term of office of a member elected under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 7 shall come to an end as soon as the member becomes a Minister or Minister of State or 
Deputy Minister, or  the Speaker or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, or the Deputy 
Chairman of the Council of States or ceases to be a member of the House from which she was 
elected; and]  
(b) in case of appointment under clause ( g) of the said sub -section, one y ear. 
(2) If a casual vacancy occurs in the office of any other members, whether by reason of his death, 
resignation or inability to discharge his functions owing to illness or other incapacity, such vacancy shall 
be filled by the Central Government by maki ng a fresh appointment and the member so appointed shall 
hold office for the remainder of the term of office of the person in whose place he is so appointed.  
(3) The Vice -Chairman shall perform such functions as may be assigned to him by the Chairman 
from time to time.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the members in the discharge of their functions shal l be such as 
may be prescribed.  
9. Meetings of the Board .—(1) The Board shall meet at such time and place, and shall observe such 
rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such 
meetings) as may be provided by regulations:  
Provided that the Board shall meet at least once in six months.  
(2) The Chairman and in his absence the Vice -Chairman shall pre side at the meetings of the Board.  
(3) If for any reason the Chairman or the Vice -Chairman is unable to attend any meeting of the Board, 
any other member chosen by the members present at the meeting shall preside at the meeting.  
(4) All questions which com e up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of 
the votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairman, or in 
his absence, the person presiding, shall have and exercise a second or casting  vote.  
(5) Members other than ex officio  members shall receive such allowances, if any, from the Board as 
may be prescribed.  
10. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board .—No act or proceeding of the 
Board shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board; or  
                                                           
1. The word “and” o mitted by Act 32 of 2001, s. 2 (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
2. Ins. by s. 2 , ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  8 
 (c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
11. Temporary association of persons with the Board for particular purposes .—(1) The Board 
may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined by regulations, any 
person whose assistance or advice it may desire in carrying ou t any of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) A person associated with it by the Board under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose shall have a right 
to take part in the discussions relevant to that purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of 
the Boar d and shall not be a member for any other purpose.  
12. Appointment of  officers and other employees of the Board .—(1) For the purpose of enabling it 
efficiently to discharge its functions under this Act, the Board may, subject to such regulations as may be 
made in this b ehalf, appoint (whether on deputation or otherwise) such number of officers and other 
employees as it may consider necessary:  
Provided that the appointment of such category of officers, as may be specified in such regulations, 
shall be subjec t to the approval of the Central Government.  
(2) Every officer or other employee appointed by the Board shall be subject to such conditions of 
service and shall be entitled to such remuneration as may be specified in the regulations.  
13. Authentication of orders and other instruments of the Board .—All orders and decisions of the 
Board shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairman or any other member authorised by the 
Board in this behalf, and all other instruments issued by the Board shall be authenticated by the signature 
of the Member -Secretary or any other officer of the Board authorised in like manner in this behalf.  
14. Disqualifications for appointment as member .—A person shall be disqualified for being 
appointed as a member if, he — 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which, in the opinion of the 
Central Government, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court; or  
(d) has  been removed or dismissed from the service of the Government or a Corporation owned 
or controlled by the Government; or  
(e) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, such financial or other interest in the Board as 
is likely to affect prejudicially t he discharge by him of his functions as a member; or  
1[(f) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, been associated with the use or promotion of 
pre-natal diagnostic technique for determination of sex or wit h any sex selection technique.]  
15. Eligibility of member for reappointment .—Subject to the other terms and conditions of service 
as may be prescribed, any person ceasing to be a member shall be eligible f or reappointment as such 
member:  
2[Provided that no member other than an ex officio  mem ber shall be appointed for mo re than two 
consecutive terms.]  
3[16. Functions of the Board .—The Board shall have the following functions, namely: — 
(i) to advise the Central Government on policy matters relating to use of pre -natal diagnostic 
techniques, sex selection techniques and against their misuse;  
(ii) to review and monitor implementation of the Act and rules made thereunder and recommend 
to the Central Government changes in the said Act and rules;  
(iii) to create public awareness against the practice of pre -conception sex selection and pre -natal 
determination of sex of foetus leading to female foeticide;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 11, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 -9-2001).  
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for section 16 (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  9 
 (iv) to lay down code of conduct to be obs erved by persons working at Genetic Counselling 
Centres, Genetic Laboratories and Genetic Clinics;  
(v) to oversee the performance of various bodies constituted under the Act and take appropriate 
steps to ensure its proper and effective implementation;  
(vi) any other functions as may be prescribed under th e Act.]  
1[16A. Constitution of State Supervisory Board and Union territory Supervisory              
Board .—(1) Each State and Union territory having Legislature shall constitute a Board to be known as 
the State Supervisory Board or the Union territory Supervisory Board, as th e case may be, which shal l 
have the following functions: — 
(i) to create public awareness against the practice of pre -conception sex selection and pre -natal 
determination of sex of the f oetus leading to female foeticide in the State;  
(ii) to review the activities of the Appropriate Authorities functioning in the State and recommend 
appropriate action against them;  
(iii) to monitor the implementation of provisions of the Act and the rules and make suitable 
recommendations relating thereto, to the Board;  
(iv) to send such consolidated reports as may be prescribed in respect of the various activities 
undertaken in the State under the Act to the Board and the Central Government; and  
(v) any other functions as may be prescribed under the Act.  
(2) The State Board shall consi st of,— 
(a) the Minister in charge of Health and Family Welfare in the State, who shall be the 
Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) Secretary in charge of the Department of Health and Family  Welfare who shall be the      
Vice -Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(c) Secretaries or Commissioners in charge of Departments of Women and Child Development, 
Social Welfare, Law and Indian System of Medicines and Homoeopathy, ex officio , or their 
repres entatives;  
(d) Director of Health and Family Welfare or Indian System of Medicines and Homoeopathy of 
the State Government, ex officio ; 
(e) three women members of Legislative Assembly or Legislative Council;  
(f) ten members to be appointed by the State Government out of which two each shall be  from the 
following categories, — 
(i) eminent social scientists and legal experts;  
(ii) eminent women activists from non - governmental organisations or otherwise;  
(iii) eminent gynaecologists and obstetricians or experts of stri-roga  or prasuti -tantra ; 
(iv) eminent paediatricians or medical geneticists;  
(v) eminent radiologists or sonologists;  
(g) an officer not below the rank of Joint Director in charge of Family Welfare, who shall be the 
Member Secretary, ex officio . 
(3) The State Board shall meet at least once in four months.  
(4) The term of office of a member, other than an ex officio  member, sh all be three years.  
(5) If a vacancy occurs in the office of any member other than an ex officio  member, it shall be filled 
by making fresh appointment.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 14 (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  10 
 (6) If a member of the Legislative Assembly or member of the Legislative Council who is a member 
of the  State Board, becomes Minister or Speaker or Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly or 
Chairperson or Deputy Chairperson of the Legislative Council , she shall cease to be a member of the 
State Board.  
(7) One-third of the total number of members of the State Board shall constitute the quorum.  
(8) The State Board may co -opt a member as and when required, provided that the number of           
co-opted members does not exceed one -third of the total strength of the State Board.  
(9) The co -opted members shall  have the same powers and functions as other members, except the 
right to vote and shall abide by the rules and regulations.  
(10) In respect of matters not specified in this section, the State Board shall follow procedures and 
conditions a s are applicable to the Board.]  
CHAPTER V  
APPROPRIATE AUTHORITY AND ADVISORY COMMITTEE  
17. Appropriate Authority and Advisory Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, one or more Appropriate Authorities for each of the Union 
territories for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The State Government shall appoint, by notification in the Official Gaz ette, one or more 
Appropriate Authorities for the whole or part of the State for the purposes of this Act having regard to the 
intensity of the problem of pre -natal sex determination leading to female foeticide.  
(3) The officers appointed as Appropriate Au thorities under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall 
be,— 
1[(a) when appointed for the whole of the State or the Union territory, consisting  of the following 
three members — 
(i) an officer of or above the rank of the Join t Director of Health and Family                   
Welfare —Chairperson;  
(ii) an eminent woman representing women ’s organisation; and  
(iii) an officer of Law Department of the State or the Union territory concerned:  
Provided that it shall be the duty of the State or the Union territory concerned to constitute   
multi -member State or Union territory level Appropriate Authority within three months of the coming 
into force of the Pre -natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulatio n and Prevention o f Misuse) Amendment 
Act, 2002  (14 of 2003) : 
Provided further that any vacancy occurring therein shall be filled within t hree months of the 
occurrence.]  
 (b) when  appointed for any part of the State or the Union territory, of such other rank as the State 
Government or the Central Government, as the case may be, may deem fit.  
(4) The Appropriate Authority shall have the following functions, namely: — 
(a) to grant, su spend or cancel registration of a Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory 
or Genetic Clinic;  
(b) to enforce standards prescribed for the Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory and 
Genetic Clinic;  
(c) to investigate complaints of breach of th e provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder 
and take immediate action; and  
(d) to seek and consider the advice of the Advisory Committee, constituted under sub -section ( 5), 
on application for registration and on complaints for suspension or cance llation of registration ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 15, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  11 
 1[(e) to take appropriate legal action against the use of any sex selection technique by any person 
at any place, suo motu  or brought to its notice and also to initiate independent investigations in such 
matter;  
(f) to create public awareness against the practice of sex selection or pre -natal determination of 
sex; 
(g) to supervise the implementation of the provisions of the Act and rules;  
(h) to recommend to the Board and State Boards modifications required in the rules in accordance 
with changes in technology or social conditions;  
(i) to take action on the recommendations of the Advisory Committee made after investigation of 
complaint for suspen sion or  cancellation of registration.]  
(5) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall constitute an 
Advisory Committee for each Appropriate Authority to aid and advise the Appropriate Authority in the 
discharge of its functio ns, and shall appoint one of the members of the Advisory Committee to be its 
Chairman.  
(6) The Advisory Committee shall consist of — 
(a) three medical experts from amongst gynaecologists, obstericians, paediatr icians and medical 
geneticists;  
(b) one  legal expert;  
(c) one officer to represent the department dealing with information and publicity of the State 
Government or the Union territory, as the case may be;  
(d) three eminent social workers of whom not less than one shall be from amongst represent atives 
of women ’s organisations.  
2[(7) No person who has been associated with the use or promotion of pre -natal diagnostic techniques 
for determination of sex or sex selection shall be appointed as a mem ber of the Advisory Committee.]  
 (8) The Advisory Committee may meet as and when it thinks fit or on the request of the Appropriate 
Authority for consideration of any application for registration or any complaint for suspension or 
cancellation of registration and to give advice thereon:  
Provided that the period intervening between any two meetings shall not exceed the prescribed 
period.  
(9) The terms and conditions subject to which a person may be appointed to the Advisory Committee 
and the procedure to be followed by such Committee in the discharge of its  functions shall be such as may 
be prescribed.  
3[17A. Powers of Appropriate Authorities .—The Appropriate Authority shall have the powers in 
respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning  of any person who is in possession of any information relating to violation of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder;  
(b) production of any document or material object relating to clause ( a); 
(c) issuing search warrant for any place susp ected to be indulging in s ex selection techniques or     
pre-natal sex determination; and  
(d) any other m atter which may be prescribed.]  
 
 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 15 (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for sub-section ( 7) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003). 
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  12 
 CHAPTER VI  
REGISTRATION OF GENETIC COUNSELLING CENTRES, GENETIC LABORATORIES AND GENETIC CLINICS  
18. Registration of Genetic Counselling Centres, Genetic Laboratories or Genetic                 
Clinics .—1[(1) No person shall open any Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic 
Clinic, including clinic, laboratory or centre  having ultrasound or imaging machine or scanner or any 
other technology capable of undertaking determination of sex o f foetus and sex selection, or render 
services to any of them, aft er the commencement of the Pre -natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation a nd 
Prevention of Misuse) Amendment Act, 2002 (14 of 2003) unless such Centre, Laboratory or Clinic is 
duly registered under the Ac t.] 
 (2) Every application for registration under sub -section ( 1), shall be made to the Appropriate 
Authority in such form and  in such manner and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic engaged, either partly or 
exclusively, in counselling or conducting pre -natal diagnostic techniques for a ny of the purposes 
mentioned in section 4, immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall apply for registration 
within sixty days from the date of such commencement.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 6, every Genetic Counselling Centre, Gen etic Laboratory or 
Genetic Clinic engaged in counselling or conducting pre -natal diagnostic techniques shall cease to 
conduct any such counselling or technique on the expiry of six months from the date of commencement 
of this Act unless such Centre, Labora tory or Clinic has applied for registration and is so registered 
separately or jointly or till such application is disposed of, whichever is earl ier. 
(5) No Genetic Counselling  Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic shall be registered under 
this Act unless the Appropriate Authority is satisfied that such Centre, Laboratory or Clinic is in a 
position to provide such facilities, maintain such equipment and standards as may be prescribed.  
19. Certificate of registration .—(1) The Appropriate Authority shall, after holding an inquiry and 
after satisfying itself that the applicant has complied with all the requirements of this Act and the rules 
made thereunder and having regard to the advice of the Advisory Committee in this behalf, grant a 
certificate of registration in the prescribed form jointly or separately to the Genetic Counselling Centre, 
Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic, as the case may be.  
(2) If, after the inquiry and after giving an opportunity of being heard to the applicant and having 
regard to the advice of the Advisory Committee, the Appropriate Authority is satisfied that the applicant 
has not complied with the requirements of this Act or the rules, it shall, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, reject the application for registration.  
(3) Every certificate of registration shall be renewed in such manner and after such period and on 
payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
(4) The certificate of registratio n shall be displayed by the registered Genetic Counselling Centre, 
Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic in a conspicuous place at its place of business.  
20. Cancellation or suspension of registration .—(1) The Appropriate Authority may suo mot u, or 
on complaint, issue a notice to the Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic to 
show cause why its registration should not be suspended or cancelled for the reasons mentioned in the 
notice.  
(2) If, after giving a reasonable opp ortunity of being heard to the Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic 
Laboratory or Genetic Clinic and having regard to the advice of the Advisory Committee, the Appropriate 
Authority is satisfied that there has been a breach of the provisions of this Act or the rules, it may, without 
prejudice to any criminal action that it may take against such Centre, Laboratory or Clinic, suspend its 
registration for such period as it may think fit or cancel its registration, as the case may be.  
(3) Notwithstanding anythin g contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), if the Appropriate Aut hority is  of 
the opinion that it is necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, suspend the registration of any Genetic Counselling  Centre, Genetic Laboratory or 
Genetic Clinic without issuing any such notice referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 17, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  13 
 21. Appeal .—The Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic may, within 
thirty days from the date of receipt of the order of suspension or cancellation of registration passed by the 
Appropriate Authority under section 20, prefer an appeal against such order to — 
(i) the Central Government, where the appeal is against the order of the Central Appropriate 
Authority; and  
(ii) the St ate Government, where the appeal is against the order of the State Appropriate 
Authority,  
in the prescribed manner.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
1[22. Prohibition of advertisement relating to pre-conception and pre-natal determination of sex 
and punishment for contravention .—(1) No person, organisation, Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic 
Laboratory or Genetic Clinic including clinic, laboratory or centre having ultrasound machine or imaging 
machine or scanner or any other technology capable of un dertaking determination of sex of the foetus or 
sex selection shall issue, publish, distribute, communicate or cause to be issued, published, distribu ted or 
communicated any advertisement, in any form, including internet, regarding facilities of pre -natal 
determination of sex or sex selection before conception available at such Centre, Laboratory, Clinic or at 
any other place.  
(2) No person or organisation including Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic 
Clinic shall issue, publish, distr ibute, communicate or cause to be issued, published, distributed or 
communicated any advertisement in any manner regarding pre -natal determination or pre -conception 
selection of sex by any means whatsoever, scientific or otherwise.  
(3) Any person who contr avenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this  section, “ advertisement ” includes any notice, circular, label, 
wrapper or any other document including advertisement through internet or any other media in electronic 
or print form an d also includes any visible repr esentation made by means of any hoarding, wall -painting, 
signa l, light, sound, smoke or gas.]  
23. Offences and penalties .—(1) Any medical geneticist, gynaecologist, registered medical 
practitioner or any person who owns a Genetic Counselling Centre, a Genetic Laboratory or a Genetic 
Clinic or is employed i n such a Centre, Laboratory or Clinic and renders his professional or technical 
services to or at such a Centre, Laboratory or Clinic, whether on an honorary basis or otherwise, and who 
contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or rules made thereunder  shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees and on any subsequent conviction, with imprisonment which may extend to five years and with 
fine which may extend to fif ty thousand rupees.  
2[(2) The name of the registered medical practitioner shall be reported by the Appropriate Authority 
to the State Medical Council concerned for taking necessary action including suspension of the 
registration if the charges  are framed by the court and til l the case is disposed of and on conviction for 
removal of his name from the register of the Council for a period of five years for the first offence and 
permanently for the subsequent offence.  
(3) Any person who seeks the a id of any Genetic Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory, Genetic 
Clinic or ultrasound clinic or imaging clinic or of a medical geneticist, gynaecologist, sonologist or 
imaging specialist or registered medical practitioner o r any other person for sex s election or for 
conducting pre -natal diagnostic techniques on any pregnant women for the purposes oth er than those 
specified in  sub -section ( 2) of section 4, he shall, be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years and with fine wh ich may extend to fifty thousand rupees for the first offence and for 
any subsequent offence with imprisonment which may extend to five years and with fine which may 
extend to one lakh rupees.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 18, for section 22  (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for sub-section s (2) and ( 3) (w.e.f.  14-2-2003).  14 
 (4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby provided that the p rovisions of sub -section ( 3) shall not 
apply to the woman who was compelled to undergo such diagnostic  techniques or such selection.]  
1[24. Presumption in the case of conduct of pre -natal diagnostic techniques .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the India n Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872 ), the court shall presume unless the 
contrary is proved that the pregnant woman was compelled by her husband or any other relative, as the 
case may be, to undergo pre -natal diagnostic technique for the purposes oth er th an those specified in    
sub-section ( 2) of section 4 and such person shall be liable for abetment of offence under sub -section ( 3) 
of sec tion 23 and shall be punishable for the offence  specified under that section.]  
25. Penalty for contravention of the pr ovisions of the Act or rules for which no specific 
punishment is provided .—Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of this Act or any rules made 
thereunder, for which no penalty has been elsewhere provided in this Act, shall be punishable with 
imprisonme nt for a term which may extend to three months or with fine, which may extend to one 
thousand rupees or with both and in the case of continuing contravention with an additional fine which 
may extend to five hundred rupees for every day during which such co ntravention continues after 
conviction for the first such contravention.  
26. Offences by companies .—(1) Where any offence, punishable under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed was in charge of,  and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained i n this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence punishable under this 
Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director,  manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of  this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals, 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
27. Offence to be cognizable, non -bailable and non -compoundable .—Every o ffence under this Act 
shall be cognizable, non -bailable and non -compoundable.  
28. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under this Act except 
on a complaint made by — 
(a) the Appropriate Authority concerned, or any officer  authorised in this behalf by the Central 
Government or State Government, as the case may be, or the Appropriate Authority; or  
(b) a person who has given notice of not less than 2[fifteen  days] in the manner prescribed, to the 
Appropriate Authority, of the alleged offence and of his intention to  make a complaint to the court.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, “person ” includes a social organisation.  
(2) No court other than that of a M etropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(3) Where a complaint has been made under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the court may, on demand 
by such person, direct the Appropriate Aut hority to make available copies of the relevant records in  its 
possession to such person.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 20, for section 24  (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “thirty days” (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  15 
 CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Maintenance of records .—(1) All records, charts, forms, reports, consent letters and all other 
documents required to be maintained under this Act and the rules shall be preserved for a period of two 
years or for such period as may be prescribed:  
Provided that, if any criminal or other proceedings are instituted against any Genetic Counselling 
Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clin ic, the records and all other documents of such Centre, 
Laboratory or Clinic shall be preserved till the final disposal of such proceedings.  
(2) All such records shall, at all reasonable times, be made available for inspection to the Appropriate 
Authority or to any other person authorised by the Appropriate Authority in this behalf.  
30. Power to search and seize records, etc .—1[(1) If the Appropriate Authority has reason to 
believe that an offence under this Act has been or is being committed at any Genetic  Counselling Centre, 
Genetic Laboratory, Genetic Clinic or any other place, such Authority o r any officer authorised in th is 
behalf may, subject to such rules as may be prescribed, enter and search at all reasonable times with such 
assistance, if any, as such Authority or officer considers necessary, such Genetic Counselling Centre, 
Genetic Laboratory, Genetic Clinic or any o ther place and examine any record, register, document, book, 
pamphlet, advertisement or any other material object found therein and seize and seal the same if such 
Authority or officer has reason to believe that it may furnish evidence of the commissio n of an offe nce 
punishable under this Act.]  
 (2) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) relating to searches and 
seizures shall, so far as may be, apply to every search or seizure made under this Act.  
31. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central or the State Government or the Appropriate Authority or any officer authorised by 
the Central or State Government or by the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended 
to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
2[31A. Removal of difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of the 
Pre-natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Preve ntion of Misuse) Amendment Act, 2002               
(14 of 2003) , the Central Government may, b y order published in the Officia l Gazette, make such 
provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of the said Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for removing the d ifficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of three years from 
the date of commencement of the Pre -natal Diagnostic Techniques (Regulation and Prevention  of Misuse) 
Amendment Act, 2002  (14 of 2003) . 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, be fore each 
House of Parliament.]  
32. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may make rules for carrying out the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for — 
3[(i) the minimum qualifications for persons employed at a registered Genetic Counselling 
Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic under clause ( 2) of section 3;  
(ia) the manner in which the person conducting ultrasonography on a pregnant woman shall keep 
record thereof in the c linic under the proviso to sub -section ( 3) of section 4;]  
 (ii) the form in which consent of a pregnant woman has to be obtained under secti on 5;  
(iii) the procedure to be followed by the members of the Central Supervisory Board in the 
discharge of their functions under sub -section ( 4) of section 8;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 22, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
3. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  16 
 (iv) allowances for members other than ex officio  members admissible under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 9;  
1[(iva) code of conduct to be observed by persons working at Genetic Counselling Centres, 
Genetic Laboratories and Genetic Clinics to be laid down by the Central Supervisory Board under 
clause ( iv) of section 16;  
(ivb) the manner in which reports  shall be furnished by the State and Union territory Supervisory 
Boards to the Board and the Central Government in respect of various activities undertaken in the 
State under the Act under clause ( iv) of sub -section ( 1) of section 16A;  
(ivc) empowering the  Appropriate Authority in any other matter under clause ( d) of section 17A; ] 
(v) the period intervening between any two meetings of the Advisory Committee under the 
proviso to sub -section ( 8) of section 17;  
(vi) the  terms and conditions subject to which a person may be appointed to the Advisory 
Committee and the procedure to be followed by such Committee under sub -section ( 9) of section 17;  
(vii) the form and manner in which an application shall be made for registrat ion and the fee 
payable t hereof under sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
(viii) the facilities to be provided, equipment and other standards to be maintained by the Genetic 
Counselling Centre, Genetic Laboratory or Genetic Clinic under sub -section ( 5) of secti on 18;  
(ix) the form in which a certificate of registration shall be issued under sub -section ( 1) of      
section 19;  
(x) the manner in which and the period after which a certificate of registration shall be renewed 
and the fee payable for such renewal und er sub -section ( 3) of section 19;  
(xi) the manner in which an appeal may  be preferred under section 21;  
(xii) the period up to which records, charts, etc., shall be preserved under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 29;  
(xiii) the manner in which the seizure of do cuments, records, objects, etc., shall be made and the 
manner in which seizure list shall be prepared and delivered to the person from whose custody such 
documents, records or objects were seized under sub -section ( 1) of section 30;  
(xiv) any other matter that is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
33. Power to make regulations .—The Board may, with the previous sanction of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions 
of this Act and the rules made there under to provide for — 
(a) the time and place of the meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed for the 
transaction of business at such meetings and the number of members which shall form the quorum 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(b) the manner in which a person may be temporarily associated with the Board under                
sub-section ( 1) of section 11;  
(c) the method of appointment, the conditions of service and the scales of pay and allowances of 
the officer and other employees of the Board appointed under section 12;  
(d) generally for the efficient condu ct of the affairs of the Board.  
34. Rules and regulation s to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that  the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validi ty of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulati on. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 14 of 2003, s. 24 (w.e.f. 14 -2-2003).  
--------------------------The Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993--------------------------
1 
 THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ACT, 1993  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE NATIONAL  HUMAN RIGHTS  COMMISSION  
3. Constitution of a National  Human  Rights Commission.  
4. Appointment of Chairperson  and other Members.  
5. Resignation and removal of Chairperson and Members .  
6. Term of office of Chairperson and Members.  
7. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances.  
8. Terms and  conditions of service of Chairperson and Members . 
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate the proceedings of the Commission.  
10. Procedure to be regulated by the Commission.  
11. Officers and other staff of the Commission.  
 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS  OF THE COMMI SSION  
12. Functions of the Commission . 
13. Powers relating to inquir ies. 
14. Investigation.  
15. Statement made by persons to the Commission.  
16. Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
17. Inquiry into complaints.  
18. Steps during and after inquiry.  
19. Procedure with respect to armed forces.  
20. Annual and special reports of the Commission.  
 
CHAPTER V  
STATE  HUMAN  RIGHTS COMMISSION S 
21. Constitution of State Human Rights Commission s. 
22. Appointment of Chairperson and other Members of State Commission.  
23. Resignation and Removal of a  Chairperson or a  Member of the State Commission.  
24. Term of office of Chairperson and Members of the State Commission . 2 
  SECTIONS  
25. Member to act as Chairperson or t o discharge his functions in certain circumstances.  
26. Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members of State Commission . 
27. Officers and other staff of the State Commission.  
28. Annual and special reports of State Commission.  
29. Application of certain provisions relating to National Human Rights Commission to State 
Commissions.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
HUMAN  RIGHTS  COURTS  
30. Human Rights Courts.  
31. Special Public Prosecutor.  
CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
32. Grants by the Central Government.  
33. Grants by the State Government.  
34. Accounts and audit.  
35. Accounts and audit of State Commission.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
36. Matters not subject to jurisdiction of the Commission.  
37. Constitution of special investigation teams.  
38. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
39. Members and officers to be public servants.  
40. Power of Central Government  to make rules.  
40A.  Power to make rules retrospectively.  
40B. Power of Commission  to make regulations . 
41. Power of State Government to make rules.  
42. Power to remove difficulties.  
43. Repeal and savings.  
 
 
  3 
 THE PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS ACT, 1993  
ACT NO. 10 OF 1994  
[8th January , 1994.]  
An  Act  to provide for the constitution of a  National  Human  Rights Commission, State Human 
Rights Commissions in States and Human  Rights Courts for better protection of human 
rights and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fourth Year of  the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 1. Short title, extent  and commencement .—(1) This Act may  be called the Protection of Human 
Rights Act, 1993.  
(2) It exten ds to the whole of India:  
Provided  that it shall apply to the St ate of Jammu  and  Kashmir only  in so far as it pertains to the 
matters relatable to any of  the  entries enumerated in List I or List III in the Seventh  Schedule  to   the 
Constitution as applicable to that State.  
(3)  It shall be deemed to ha ve come into force on the 28th day of September, 1993.  
      2.  Definition s.—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires,— 
(a) “armed forces”  means the naval, military and  air forces  and includes any other armed forces 
of the Union;  
(b) “Chairperson” means the Ch airperson of the Commission or of the State Commission, as the 
case may be;  
(c) “Commission”  mean s the National Human Rights Commi ssion constituted under section 3;       
(d) “Human R ights”  means the rights relating to life,  liberty,  equality and dignity of the 
individual guarantee d by the Constitution  or embodied in the International Covenants and          
enforceable by courts in India;  
(e)  “Human Rights Court” means the Human Rights Court  specified under section 30;  
1[(f)  “International Covenants” means the International Covenant on Civil and Political Ri ghts 
and the International   Covenant  on Economic, Social and Cultural Right s adopt ed  by  the  General  
Assembly of the United  Nations  on the 16th December, 1966 and such other Covenant or Convention 
adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify;]  
2[(g) “Member”  means a Member of the Commission or of the State Comm ission, as the case 
may be;] 
(h) “National Commission for Minorities”  means the National Commission for Minorities 
constituted under section 3 of  the  National Commission for M inorities Act, 1992  (19 of 1992 ); 
3[(i) “National Comm ission for the Scheduled Castes”  means the National Commission for the 
Scheduled Castes referred to in article 338 of the Constitution;  
(ia) “National Comm ission for the Schedul ed Tribes”  means the National Commission for the 
Scheduled Tribes referred to in art icle 338A of the Constitution;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 2006, s. 2, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006 ).  
2. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
3. Subs. by s.  2, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  4 
  (j) “National Commission for Women”  means the National  Commission for  Women  c onstituted 
under section 3 of the National Commission for Wo men Act, 1990  (20 of 1990);  
(k)  “notification”  means a notification published in  the Official Gazette;  
(l) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made under  this Act;  
(m) “public servant”  shall have the meaning assigned to  it   in section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860);   
(n) “State Commission”  means a State Human Rights Commis sion constituted under section 21.  
 (2)  Any reference in this Act to a law, which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, 
shall, in relation to that State, be construed as a reference to a corre sponding law, if any, in force in that 
State.  
CHAP TER  II 
THE NATIONAL HUMAN  RIGHTS  COMMISSION  
 3. Constitution of a National Human Rights Commission. —(1)  The Central Government shall 
constitute  a body to be known as the National Human Rights Commission to exercise the powers 
conferred upon, and  to perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
(2)  The Commission shall consist of — 
(a)  a Chairperson  who  has been a Chief  Justice  of  t he Supreme Court;  
(b)  one Member who is, or has been, a Judge of the  Supreme  Court;   
(c)  one Member who is, or has been, the Chief Justice of a   High Court;  
(d) two Members to be appointed from amongst persons having knowledge of, or practical 
experience in, matters relating to  human rights.  
(3)  The Chairpersons of the National Com mission for  Minorities, 1[the National Commission for the 
Scheduled Castes , the Natio nal Commission for the Scheduled Tribes]  and the National Commission for 
Women shall be deemed to be Members of the Commission for the discharge of functions specified in 
clauses ( b) to ( j)  of section 12.  
(4) There shall be a Secretary -General who shall b e the Chief  Executive Officer of the Commission 
and shall exercise such powers and  discharge such functions of the Commission 2[(except judicial 
functions and the power to make regulations under section 40B) as may be delegated to him by the 
Commission or the Chairperson, as the case may be ]. 
(5)  The headquarters of the Commission shall be at Delhi and the  Commission may, with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in India.  
      4.  Appointment of Chairperson and other Members. —(1)   The Chairperson   and 3[the Members ] 
shall  be appointed by the President by warrant under his hand and seal: 
Provided that every appointmen t under this sub -section shall be made after obtaining the 
recommendatio ns of a Committee consisting of — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 2006, s.  3, for “the National Commission for the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes”                            
(w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “as it may del egate to him” (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006 ). 
3. Subs. by s.  4, ibid.,  for “o ther Members” (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006 ). (a)   the Prime Minister                                                                 —chairperson ; 
(b)   Speaker of  the House of the People                                                —member;  
(c)   Minister in-charge of the Ministry of   Home 
Affairs in the Government of India                                                —member;  5 
          
Provided further that no sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or sitting Chief Justice of a High C ourt 
shall be appointed except after consultation with the Chief Justice of India.  
(2)  No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member shall be invalid  merely by rea son of any            
1[vacancy of any member in the Committee referred to in the first proviso to sub -section ( 1)]. 
2[5. Resignation and r emoval of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Chairperson or any 
Member may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the President of India, resign his office.  
(2)  Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the Chairperson or any Member shall only be 
removed from his office by order of the President of India on the ground of proved misbehaviour or 
incapa city after the Supreme Court, on reference being made to it by the President, has, on inquiry held in 
accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf by the Supreme Court, reported that the 
Chairperson or the Member, as the case may be, ought on an y such ground to be removed . 
(3) Notwithstanding anything in sub -section ( 2), the President may, by order, remove from office the 
Chairperson or any Member if the Chairperson or s uch Member, as the case may be,— 
(a)   is adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b)   engages during  his  term   of  office  in  any   paid  employment outside the duties of his 
office; or   
(c)   is  unfit to continue in office by reason of  infirmity  of mind or body; or  
(d)   is of unsound mind and stands so  declared  by  a competent court; or   
(e)  is convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence which in the opinion of the 
Presi dent involves moral turpitude. ] 
3[6.  Term of office  of Chairperson and  Members. —(1)  A person  appointed  as Chairperson  shall 
hold office fo r a term of five years from the date on which  he enters upon his offic e or until he attains the 
age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.  
(2)  A person appointed as a Member shall hold office for a term of five years  from the date on w hich 
he enters upon his office and shall be eligible for re -appointment for another term of five years:  
Provided that no Member shall hold office aft er he has attained the age of seventy years . 
(3) On ceasing to hold offi ce, a Chairperson or a Member  shall be ineligible for further employment  
under the Government of India or under the Government of any State. ] 
7. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his function s in certain  circumstances .—(1)  In 
the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the  office of the Chairperson by reaso n of his death, 
resignation or otherwise, the  President may,  by  notification, authorise one of  the Members to  act as the 
Chair person until  the appointment of a new Chairperson to fill such vacancy.  
(2)  When the Chairperson is una ble to discharge his functions owing  to absence on  leave or 
otherwise, such one of the Members as the President may, by notification, authorise in this behalf, shall 
discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 2006, s.  4, for “vacancy in  the Committee” (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for section 5   (w.e.f.  23-11-2006 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for section 6  (w.e.f.  23-11-2006).  (d)   Leader of the Opposition in the   House of 
the People                                                  —member;  
(e)   Leader of the Opposition in the  Council of 
States                                                   —member;  
       (f)   Deputy Chairman of the Council  of  States                                                   —member : 6 
 1[8. Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members .—The salaries and  allowances 
payable to, an d the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and Members shall be such 
as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither  the salary and allowances nor the other  terms and condition s of servi ce of the 
Chairperson or a Member shall be varied to his di sadvantage after his appointment. ] 
9.  Vacancies,  etc., not to invalidate the  proceedings  of  the  Commission. —No  act  or  
proceedings  of  the  Commission  shall   be questioned  or shall be invalidated merely on the ground of  
existence of any vacancy  or defect in the constitution of the Commission.   
10.  Procedure  to  be  regulated  by  the  Commission. —(1)  The Commission  shall meet at such 
time and place as the  Chairperson  may think fit.  
2[(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the Commission shall have 
the power to lay down by regulations its own procedure. ] 
 (3)  All  orders  and  decisions  of  the  Commission  shall   be   authenticated  by  the                     
Secretary -General or any other officer  of  the   Commission duly authorised by the Chairperson in this 
behalf.  
11.  Officer s and other staff of the Commission. —(1) The Central Government shall make 
available to the Commission — 
 (a) an officer o f the rank of the Secretary to the Government  of   India  who  shall  be  the  
Secretary -General   of   the    Commission; and  
(b)   such police and investigative staff under  an  officer  not  below the rank of a Director 
General of Po lice and  su ch other officers and  staff as may be necessary for the efficient          
performance of the functions of the Commission.  
(2)  Subject to such rules as may be made by the Central Government  in  this  behalf, the 
Commission may  appoint  such  other admin istrative,  technical  and scientific staff as  it  may  consider 
necessary.   
(3)  The salaries, allowances and conditions of service   of   the officers   and  other staff appointed 
under sub -section ( 2)  shall  be such as may be prescribed.   
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION  
 12. Functions of the Commission .—The Commission shall perform all  or any of t he following 
functions, namely: — 
(a)  inquire, suo motu or on a petition presented to it by a victim or any person on his behalf  3[or 
on a direction or order of any court] , into complaint of — 
(i)   violation of human rights or abetment thereof; or   
(ii)  negligence in the prevention of such violation, by  a public servant;   
(b)   intervene in any proceeding involving any allegation of   violation  of  human rights pending 
before a court  with  the approval of such court;  
4[(c) visit, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, any 
jail or other institution under the control of the State Government, whe re persons are detained or 
lodged for purposes of treatment, reformation or protection, for the study of the living conditions of 
the inmates thereof and make recommendati ons thereon to the Government;]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Ac t 43 of 2006, s. 7, for section ( 8) (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by s. 8 , ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f.  23-11-2006).  
3. Ins. by  s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-11-2006).  
4. Subs. by  s. 9, ibid., for clause  ( c) (w.e.f. 23-11-2006).  7 
  (d) review   the  safeguards  provided  by  or  under   the  Constitution  or any law for the time 
being in force for  the   protection  of human rights and recommend measures for  their  effective 
implementation;  
(e) review the factors, including acts of terrorism,  that  inhibit   the  enjoyment  of  human  rights   
and   recommend  appropriate remedial measures;  
(f) study treaties and o ther international instruments on human  rights  and make 
recommendations for  their  effective  implementation;  
(g) undertake and promote research in the field  of  huma n rights;  
(h) spread human rights literacy among various sections  of society and promote awareness of the 
safeguards available for the  protection  of these rights  through  publications,  the media, seminars 
and other available means;  
(i)  encourage the e fforts of non -governmental organisations  and institutions working in the field 
of human rights;  
(j)  such other functions as it may consider necessary  for the promotion of human rights.  
13. Powers relating to inquiries. —(1) The Commission shall, while in quiring  into  complaints 
under this Act, have all the powers  of  a civil court trying a suit under  the  Code  of  Civil  Procedure, 
1908  (5 of 1908) ,  and in  particular  in respect of the following matters,  namely: — 
(a)   summoning and enforcing the at tendance of witnesses and  examining them on oath;  
(b)   discovery and production of any document;  
(c)   receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d)   requisitioning  any public record or copy thereof  from  any court or office;  
(e)   issuing  commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2)  The Commission shall have power to require  any  person, subject to any privilege which may be 
claimed by that person under any law for the time being in force, to furnish information on such points or 
matters as, in the opinion of the Commission, may be useful for, or relevant  to,  the  subject matter of the 
inquiry and  any  person  so required  shall  be  deemed  to  be  legally  bound  to  fur nish  such 
information  within the meaning of section 176 and section 177 of  the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(3)  The Commission or any other officer, not below the rank of a  Gazetted  Officer,  specially  
authorised  in  this  behalf  by the Commissi on  may enter any building or place where the  Commission  
has reason to believe that any document relating to the subject matter  of the  inquiry  may be found, and 
may seize any such  document  or  take extracts or copies therefrom subject t o the provisi ons of section 
100 of the Code  of Crimi nal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , in so far as it may  be applicable.  
(4)  The  Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court and when any offence as is described in 
section 175, section 178, section 179, section  180 or  section 228 of the I ndian Penal Code                        
(45 of 1860) is committed  in the view or pre sence of the Commission, the Commission may,  after  
recording  the facts constituting  the  offence  and  the statement  of the  accused  as  provided  for in the 
Code  of Crimi nal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) , forward the case to a  Magistrate  having jurisdiction to 
try the same and the Magistrate to whom any such  case is  forwarded shall proceed to hear the complaint 
against the  accused as if the case has been forwarded to him under section 346 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973.  
(5)  Every proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to  be a judicial proceedin g within the 
meaning of sections  193 and 228,  and for  the  purposes  of   section  196,   of  the  Indian  Penal   Code 
(45 of 1860), and the Commission shall  be  deemed to be a civil court for  all the purposes of section 195  
and  Chapter  XXVI of   the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  8 
 1[(6) Where the Commission considers it necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by order, transfer 
any complaint filed or pending before it to the State Commission of the State from which the complaint 
arises, for disposal in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that no such complaint shall be transferred unless the same is one respecting which the State 
Commission has jurisdiction to entertain the same.  
(7) Every c omplaint transferred under sub -section ( 6) shall be dealt with and disposed of by the State 
Commission as if it were a complaint initially filed before it. ] 
14.  Investigation .—(1) The Commission may, for the  purpose  of conducting  any investigation 
pertaining to the inquiry,  utilise  the services  of  any  officer  or investigation  agency  of  the  Central 
Government or any State Government with the concurrence of the Central  Government or the  State 
Government, as the case may be.  
(2)  For the purpose of investigating into any matter  pertaining to  the  inquiry, any officer or agency 
whose  services  are  utilis ed  under sub -section ( 1) may, subject to the direction and control of the 
Commission, — 
(a)   summon  and  enforce the attendance of any  person  and examine him;  
(b)   require  the discovery and production of any  document; and  
(c)   requisition any public record o r copy thereof from  any office.  
(3)  The provisions of section 1 5 shall apply in relation to  any statement made by a person before any 
officer or agency whose services  are utilised under sub -section ( 1) as they apply in relation  to  any 
statement made by a person in the course of giving evidence before the Commission . 
(4)  The officer or agency whose services are utilised under sub -section (1)  shall  investigate into any  
matter  pertaining  to  the inquiry  and  submit a report thereon to the  Commission  within  such period as 
may be specified by the Commission in this behalf.  
(5)  The Commission shall satisfy itself about the correctness of the facts stated and the conclusion, if 
any, arrived at in the  report submitted  to  it  under  sub -section ( 4) and  for  this  purpose  the 
Commission  may  make such inquiry (including the examination  of  the person  or persons who 
conducted or assisted in the investigation)  as it thinks fit.  
15. Statement made by persons to the Commission. —No  statement made  by  a  person  in  the 
course  of  giving  evidence  before  the Commission shall subject him to, or be used against him in, any  
civil or criminal proceeding except a prosecution for giving fa lse  evidence by such statement:  
 Provided that the statement — 
(a)   is made in reply to the question which he is  required by t he Commission to answer; or  
(b)   is relevant to the subject matter of the inquiry.  
16. Persons likely to be prejudicially affected to be heard .—If, at any stage of the inquiry, the 
Commission — 
(a)   considers it  necessary to inquire into the conduct  of any person; or  
(b)   is of the opinion that the reputation of any person  is  likely to be prejudicially affected by the 
inquiry,   
it shall give to that person a reasonable opportunity of being  heard in the inqui ry and to produce evidence 
in his defence:  
Provided  that nothing in this section shall apply where  the credit of a witness is being impeached.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 2006, s.1 0 (w.e.f.  23-11-2006).  9 
 CHAPTER IV  
PROCEDURE  
17. Inquiry into complaints .—The Commission while inquiring into the complaints of  violati ons of 
human rights may — 
(i)   call  for  information  or  report  from  the   Central Government or any State Government or 
any other authority  or organisation  subordinate t hereto within such time as may be specified by it:       
Provided that — 
(a)   if  the  information  or report  is  not  received  within the time stipulated  by  the 
Commission,  it  may proceed to inquire into the    complaint on its own;  
(b)   if,  on  receipt  of information  or  report,  the  Commission  is satisfied either that no 
further  inquiry is  required  or  that  the  required  action  has  been initiated  or  taken  by  the  
concerned  Government  or authority,  it  may not proceed with the  complaint  and inform the 
complainant accordingly;  
(ii)  without prejudice t o anyth ing contained in clause  (i), if it considers necessary, having regard 
to the nature of the  complaint, initiate an inquiry.  
1[18. Steps  during and  after inquiry .—The Commission may take any of the following steps  during 
or  upon the completion of an inquiry  held under this Act,  namely :— 
(a) where the inquiry discloses the commission of violation of human rights or negligence in the 
prevention of violation of human rights or abetment thereof by a public servant, it may recommend to 
the concerned Government or  authority — 
(i) to make payment of compensation or damages to the complainant or to the victim or the 
members of his family as the Commission may consider necessary;  
(ii) to initiate proceedings for prosecution or such other suitable action as the Commission 
may deem fit against the concerned person or persons;  
(iii) to take such further action as it may think fit;  
(b) approach the Supreme Court or the High Court concerned for such directions, orders or writs 
as that Court may deem necessary;  
(c) recommend to the concerned Government or authority at any stage of the inquiry for the grant 
of such immediate interim relief to the victim or the members of his family as the Commission may 
consider necessary;  
(d) subject to the provisions of clause ( e), provide a copy of the inquiry report to the petitioner or 
his representative;  
(e) the Commission shall send a copy of its inquiry report together with its recommendations to 
the concerned Government or authority and the concerned Government or authority shall, within a 
period of one month, or such further time as the Commission may allow, forward its comments on the 
report, including the action taken or proposed to be taken thereon, to the Commission;  
(f) the Commission shall publish its inquiry report together with the comments of the concerned 
Government or authority, if any, and the action taken or p roposed to be taken by the concerned 
Government or authority on the reco mmendations of the Commission.]  
19. Procedure with respect to armed forces. —(1) Notwithstanding  anything  contained  in  this 
Act, while dealing  with  complaints  of  violation  of  human  rights  by members  of  the  armed  forces,  
the Commission shall adopt the following procedure, namely: — 
(a)   it may,  either on its own motion or on receipt  of  a petition, seek a report from the Central 
Government;  
(b)   after  the receipt of th e report, it may,  either not proceed  with the complai nt or, as the cas e 
may be, make its  recommendations to that Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 2006, s. 1 1, for section 18  (w.e.f.  23-11-2006).  10 
 (2)  The  Central Government shall inform the Commission  of  the action  taken  on  the 
recommendations within  three  months  or   such further time as the Commission may allow.  
(3)  The Commission shall publis h its report together with   its recommendations made to the Central 
Government and the action taken by that Government on such recommendations.  
(4)  The Commission sha ll prov ide a copy of the report  published under sub -section ( 3) to the 
petitioner or his representative.  
20.  Annual  a nd  special  reports  of  the  C ommission. —(1) The Commission shall submit an 
annual report to the Central Government and to  the State Government concerned and may at any time 
submit  special reports  on  any matter which, in its opinion, is of such  urgency  or importance  that  it 
should not be def erred till  submission  of  the  annual report.  
(2)  The Central Government and the St ate G overnment, as the case may  be, shall cause the ann ual 
and special reports of the Commission to be laid before e ach House of Parliament or the State  Legislature 
respectively,  as the case m ay be, along with a memorandum of  action taken or proposed to be take n on 
the recommendations of the Commission and the reasons for non -acceptance of the recommendations, if 
any. 
CHAPTER V  
STATE  HUMAN RIGHTS  COMMISSIONS  
21.  Constitution of State Human Rights Commission .—(1) A State Government may constitute a 
body to be kn own as  the..................(name  of  the State) Human Rights Commission to exercise  the  
powers conferred  upon,  and to perform the functions assigned  to,  a  State Commission under this 
Chapter.  
1[(2) The State Commission shall, with effect from such date as the State Government may by 
notification specify, consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson who has been a Chief Justice of a High Court;  
(b) one Memb er who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court or District Judge in the State with a 
minimum of seven years experience as District Judge;  
(c) one Member to be appointed from among persons having knowledg e of or practical 
experience in matte rs relating to human rights. ] 
(3)  There shall be a Se cretary who shall be the Chief Executive  Officer of  the State Comm ission and 
shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions of the State Commission as it may delegate to 
him. 
(4)  The headquarters of the State C ommission shall be at such place as the State Government may, 
by notification, specify.  
(5)  A  State  Commission  may inquire into  violation  of  human rights only in respect  of  matters 
relatable  to any  of  the  entries enumerated in List II   and  List III in the Seventh Schedule to  the 
Constitution:  
Provided  that if any such matter is already being inquired  into  by  the Commission or any other 
Commission duly constituted under  any law  for  the  time being in force, the  State  Commission  shall  
not inquire into the said matter:  
Provided further that in re lation to the Jammu and Kashmir  Human  Rights  Commission, this                 
sub-section shall have effect as if for the words and figures “ List II and List III in the Seventh Schedule to 
the Constitution”, the words and figures “ List III in the Seventh Schedule to  the Constitution as 
applicable to the State of Jammu  and  Kashmir and in respect of matters in relation to w hich the 
Legislature of that  State has power to make laws”  had been substituted.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 2006, s.  12, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f.  23-11-2006).  11 
  1[(6) Two or more State Governments may, with the consent of a Chairperson or Member of a State 
Commission, appoint such Chairperson or, as the case may be, such Member of an other State 
Commission simultaneously if such Chairperson or Membe r consents to such appointment:  
Provided that every a ppointment made under this sub -section shall be made after obtaining the 
recommendations of th e Committee referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 22 in respect of the State for 
which a common Chairperson or Member, or both, as the ca se may be, is to be appointed.]  
22. Appointment  of   Chairperson and 2[Members ] of State  Commission. —(1) The Chairper son 
and 2[Members ] shall be appointed by the Governor by warrant under his hand and seal:  
Provided that every appointme nt under this sub -section shall  be made after obtaining the 
recommendation of a Committee consisting of — 
Provided further that where the re is a Legislative Council in a State, the Chairman of that  Council and 
the Leader of the Opposition   in that Council shall also be members of the Committee:  
Provided also that no sitting Judge of a High Court or a sitting district judge shall be appointe d except 
after consultation with  the Chief Justice of the High Court of the concerned State.  
(2)  No appointment of a Chairperson or a Member of the State Commission shall  be invalid merely 
by reason of 3[any vacancy of any Member in  the Committee referred to in sub -section ( 1)]. 
4[23. Resignation and Removal of Chairperson or a Member of the State Commission ].—5[(1) 
The Chairperson or a Member of a State Commission may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed  
to the Governor, resign his office.  
(1A) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Chairperson or any Member of the State 
Commission shall only be removed from his office by order of the Presiden t on the ground of proved 
misbehavio ur or incapacity after the Supreme Court, on a reference being made to it by the President, has, 
on inquiry held in accordance with the procedure prescribed in that behalf by the Supreme Court, reported 
that the Chairper son or such Member, as the case may be, ought on a ny such ground to be removed.]  
 (2)  Notwithstanding anything in 6[sub-section ( 1A)] the President may by order remove from off ice 
the Chairperson or any  7[Member ] if the Chairperson or such 7[Member ], as the case may be, — 
(a)   is adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) engages during his term of office in any paid  employment outside the duties of his office; or  
(c)   is  unfit to continue in office by reason of  infirmity of mind or body; or  
(d)   is  of  unsound  mind  and  stands  so  declared  by  a  competent court; or  
(e)   is  convicted  and  sentenced to  imprisonment  for  an offence which in the opinion of the 
President involves  moral  turpitude . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 43 of 2006,  s. 12 (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by  s.  13, ibid., for “other Members" (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
3. Subs. by s.  13, ibid., for “any vacancy in the Committee” (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
4. Subs. by s.  14, ibid., for “Removal of a Member of the State Commission” (w.e.f.  23 -11-2006).  
5. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
6. Subs. by s.  14, ibid., for “sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
7. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “other Member” (w .e.f. 23 -11-2006).  (a) the Chief Minister                                                      —chairperson;  
(b) Speaker of the Legislative Assembly                                                                  —member;  
(c) Minister in -charge of the Department      
of Home in that State                                                            —member;  
(d) Leader of the Opposition in the 
Legislative Assembly                                                            —member : 12 
 1[24. Term  of  office of  Chairperson and Members of the  State Commission .—(1) A person 
appointed as Chairperson shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon 
his office or until he attains the age of seventy years, whichever is earlier.  
(2) A person appointed as a Member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which 
he enters upon his offic e and shall be eligible for re -appointment for another term of five years:  
Provi ded that no Member shall hold office after he has attained the age of seventy years.  
(3) On ceasing to hold office, a Chairperson or a Member shall be ineligible for furthe r employment 
under the Governmen t of a State or under the Government of India. ] 
25. Member to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in certain circumstances .—(1) 
In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by reason of his death, 
resignation or otherwise, the Governor may, by notification, authorise one of the Members to act as the 
Chairperson until the appointment of a new Chai rperson to fill such vacancy.  
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence on leave or 
otherwise, such one of the Members as the Governor may, by notification, authorise  in this behalf, shall 
discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which the Chairperson resumes his duties . 
2[26. Terms  and conditions of service of  Chairperson and Members of  State Commission. — The 
salaries and allowances payable to, and  other terms and conditions of service of, the Chairperson and 
Members shall be such as may be prescribed by the State Government:  
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson or a Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.]  
27.  Office rs and other staff of the State Commission .—(1) The State Government shall make 
available to the Commission —  
(a) an officer not below the rank of a Secretary to the State Government   who  shall  be  the  
Secretary  of   the   State  Commission; and  
(b)   such  police and investigative staff under  an  officer not below the rank of an Inspector 
General of Police and su ch   other  officers  and  staff  as  may  be  necessary  for  the    efficient   
performance  of  the  functions  of   the   State   Commission.  
(2)  Subject to such rules as may be made by the State Government in  this behalf, the State 
Commission may app oint such other  adminis trative, technical and scientific staff as it may consider 
necessary.  
(3)  The   salaries, allow ances and conditions of service of the officers and other staff appointed under 
sub-section ( 2) shall  be such as may be prescribed by the  State Government.  
28. Annual and special reports of State Commission. —(1) The State Commission  shall submit an 
annual report to the State Government  and may  at  any time submit special reports on any matter which,  
in  its opinion,  is  of  such urgenc y or importance that  it  should  not  be deferred till submission of the 
annual report.  
(2)  The  State  Government shall cause the  annual  and  special reports of the State Commission to 
be laid before each House of  State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature 
consists  of one House, before that House along with a  memorandum  of action  taken  or proposed to be 
taken on the recommendations  of  the State Commission and the reasons for non -acceptance of the 
recommendation s, if any.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 2006, s.  15, for section 24 (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
2. Subs. by s.16, ibid., for section 26 (w.e.f.  23-11-2006).  13 
 29. Application of certain p rovisions relating to National Human Rights Commission to State 
Commissions. —The provisions of sections 9, 10,  12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17 and 18 shall apply to a  State  
Commission and  shall  have  effect,  subject  to  the  following  modifications,  namely: — 
(a)   references  to  “Commission”  shall  be  construed   as     references to “State Commission” ; 
(b)   in  section  10,  in  sub -section  ( 3),  for  the  word  “Secretary-General”,   the  word   
“Secretary”  shall   be   substituted;  
(c)   in section 12, clause ( f) shall be omitted;  
(d)   in  section  17,  in clause  ( i),  the  words  “ Central  Government or any”  shall be omitted.     
CHAPTER VI  
HUMAN  RIGHTS  COURTS  
30.  Human Rights Courts .—For the purpose of providing speedy trial of offences arising out of 
violation of hu man rights, the State Government may, with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the  
High Court,  by notification, specify for each district a Court of  Session to be a Human Rights Court to 
try the said offences:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply if — 
(a)   a  Court of Session is already specified as  a  special  court; or  
(b)   a  special  court  is  already  constituted,  
for such offences under any other law for the time b eing in force.  
31. Special Public Prosecutor. —For every Human Rights Court, the State  Government shall, by 
notification, specify a Public  Prosecutor or appoint an advocate who has been in pract ice as an advocate 
for not less  than seven years, as a Special    Public   Prosecutor  for   the purpose of conducting cases in  
that Court.  
CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
32. Grants by the Central Government. —(1) The Central Government shall,  after  due  
appropriation made by  Parliament by  law  in  this behalf, pay to the Commission by way  of grants  such 
sums of money as the Central  Government may think fit  for being utilised for the  purposes of this Act.  
(2)  The Commission may spend suc h sums as it thinks fit for perfor ming the functions under th is 
Act, and such sums shall be treated as  expenditure payable out of the grants referred to  in                              
sub-section ( 1). 
33.  Gr ants  by the State Government. —(1) The  State  Government shall,  after  due , appropriation 
made by Legislature by  law  in  this behalf, pay to the State Commission by way   of  grants such  sums  
of money as the State Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
(2)  The  State Commis sion may spend such sums as it thinks fit for performing the functions under  
Chapter V, and such sums shall be treated  as expenditure payable out of the grants referred to in                  
sub-section ( 1). 
34. Accounts and audit. —(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts  in such form as may be prescribed by the Central  
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2)  The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by  the Comptroller and Auditor -General at  
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expe nditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller  and Auditor -General.  
(3)  The  Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed  by him in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the Commission under  this Act shall have the same ri ghts and privileges and the  
authority  in  connection  with  such  audit  as  the  Comptr oller   and  Auditor -General  generally  has  in  14 
 connection  with  the  audit  of Government accounts and, in particular , shall have the right to  demand 
the  production  of  books, accounts, connected   vouchers  and  other documents  and  papers  and  to 
inspect any  of  the  offices  of  the Commission.  
(4)  The  accounts  of  the  Commission,  as  certified  by   the Comptroller  and Auditor -General or 
any other person appointed by  him in  this  behalf,  together with the audit report  thereon   shall  be 
forwarded annually to the Central Government by the Commission and the Central Government shall 
cause the audit report to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  
35.  Accounts  and  audit  of State  Commission .—(1)  The  State Commission  shall maintain 
proper accounts and other relevant  records   and  prepare  an annual statement of accounts in such form as  
may  be prescribed   by  the  State  Government  in  consultation   with   the Comptroller and                  
Auditor -General of India.  
(2)  The accounts of the State Commission shall be audited by the   Comptroller and Auditor -General 
at such intervals as may be  specified by  him  and any expenditure incurred in connection  with  such  
audit shall  be  payable  by the State Commission  to  the  Comptroller  and Auditor -General.  
(3)  The Comptroller and Auditor -General and any person appointed by him in connection with the 
audit of the accounts of the State  Commission  under this Act shall have the same rights and privileges  
and the  authority  in connection with such audit as the  Comptroller  and Audi tor-General generally has 
in connection with the audit of  Government  accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand  
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other  documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of t he State Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the State Commission, as certified  by  the Comptroller  and Auditor -General or 
any other person appointed by  him in  this  behalf, together with the audit report  thereon,  shall   be 
forwarded annually to the Sta te Government by the State Commission and the State Government shall 
cause the audit report to be laid, as  soon as may be after it is received, before the State Legislature.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
36.  Matters not subject to jurisdiction of the  Commi ssion. —(1) The  Commission  shall not 
inquire into any matter  which  is  pending before  a  State Commission or any other Commission  duly  
constituted under any law for the time being in force.  
(2)  The Commission  or the State Commission sha ll not  inquir e into  any matter after the expiry of 
one year from the date  on  which the act constituting violation of human rights is alleged to have been 
committed.  
37. Constitution of special investigation teams. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in force, where the Government considers it necessary so to do, it may constitute  
one or  more  special  investigation  teams,  consisting  of  such  police officers  as  it thinks necessary for 
purposes  of  investigation  and prosecut ion of offences arising out of violations of human rights.  
38. Protection  of action taken in good faith. —No suit or  other legal  proceeding  shall  lie against 
the  Central  Government,  State Government, Commission, the State Commission or any Member th ereof  
or any   person  acting  under  the  direction  either  of  the   Central Government,  State Government, 
Commission or the State  Commission  in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to 
be done in pursuance of this Act or of an y rules or any order made  thereunder or  in  respect of the 
publication by or under the  authority  of  the Central   Government,  State  Government,  Commission  or  
the   State Commission of any report, paper or proceedings.  
39.  Members and officers to  be public servants. —Every Member of   the  Commission,  State  
Commission and  every  officer  appointed  or authorised  by  the  Commission or the State  Commission  
to  exercise functions under this Act shall be deemed to be a public servant within the m eaning of             
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
  15 
 40.  Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The  Central Government  may,  by  
notification,  make  rules  to  carry  out   the provisions of this Act.  
(2)  In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power,  such  rules  may 
provide for  all  or  any  of  the foll owing matters, namely: — 
(a) the salaries and allowances  and  other  terms   and   conditions of service of the 1[Chairperson 
and Members ] under section 8;  
(b)   the  conditions subject to which other  administrative,  technical  and  scientific  staff may  be  
appointed  by  the Commission  and the salaries and allowances of  officers  and other staff under                 
sub-section ( 3) of section 11;  
(c)   any  other  power  of  a civil  court  required  to  be   prescribed under clause ( f) of                       
sub-section ( 1) of section 13;  
(d)   the  form  in which the annual statement of accounts  is to  be  prepared by the Commission 
under sub -section  ( 1)  of  section 34; and  
(e)   any  other  matter   which  has  to  be,  or  may   be,  prescribed.  
(3)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as s oon as may be  after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is  in session,  for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised  in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before  the expiry of the session immediatel y 
following the session or the succe ssive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any  modification   
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be  of no ef fect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or  
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity  of  anything previously done under that rule.  
2[40A . Power to make rules retrospectively. —The power to make rules under clause ( b) of           
sub-section ( 2) of section 40 shall include the power to make such rules or any of them retrospective ly 
from a date not earlier than the date on which this Act received the assent of the President, but no such 
retrospective effect shall be giv en to any such rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person 
to whom such rule may be applicable.]  
3[40B. Power of Commission to make regulations .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and 
the rules made thereunder, the Commission may,  with the previous approval of the Central Government, 
by notification, make regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the procedure to be follow ed by the Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 10;  
(b) the returns and statistics to be furnished by the State Commissions;  
(c) any other matter which has to be, or may be, specified by regulations.  
(3) Every regulation made by the Commission under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in  one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, t he regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previous ly done under 
that regulation. ] 
      41.  Power  of  State Government to make  rules. —(1)  The  State Government  may,  by  
notific ation,  make  rules  to  carry  out  the provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 43 of 2006, s.17 , for “Members”  (w.e.f.  23-11-2006).  
2. Ins . by Act 49 of 2000 , s. 2 (w.e.f.  11-12-2000).  
3. Ins. by Act 43 of 2006, s. 18 (w.e.f.  23-11-2006).  16 
 (2)  In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the   foregoing  power,  such  rules  may 
provide for  all  or  any  of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a)  the salaries  and  allowances  and  other  terms   and  conditions of service of 1[the 
Chairperson and Members ] under section 26;  
(b)   the  conditions  subject to which other  administrative,  technical and   scientific  staff  may be  
appointed  by  the  State Commission and the  salaries and allowances of officers and other staff 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 27;  
(c)  the form in which the annual sta tement of accounts  is to be prepared under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 35.  
(3)  Every  rule made by the State Government under this section shall  be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each  House  of  the  State Legislature where it consists of two Houses,  or  where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House. 
42. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving  effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the  Central  Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing  
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after th e expiry of the period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2)  Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
43.  Repeal and savings. —(1) The Protection of Human  Rights  Ordinance, 1993 (Ord. 30 of 1993)  is  
hereby repealed.  
(2)  Notwithstanding  such   repeal,  anything done or any  action taken  under  the said Ordinance, 
shall be  deemed to have been done o r taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  Act 43 of 2006,  s. 19,   for “the Members” (w.e.f. 23 -11-2006).  
--------------------------The Punjab Gram Panchayat, Samities and Zilla Parishad (Chandigarh Repeal) Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
 THE PUNJAB GRAM PA NCHAYAT, SAMITIES AND ZILLA  
PARISHAD (CHANDIGARH REPEAL) ACT, 1994  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Repeal of Punjab Acts 4 of 1953 and 3 of 1961 . 
3. Saving . 
  2 
 THE PUNJAB GRAM PA NCHAYAT, SAMITIES AND ZILLA  
PARISHAD (CHANDIGARH REPEAL) ACT, 1994  
ACT NO. 27 OF 1994  
[23rd April , 1994.]  
An Act to repeal the Punjab Gram Pa nchayat Act, 1952 and the Punjab Panchayat Samities and 
Zilla Parishads  Act, 1961 as in f orce in the  Union territory of Chandigrah.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Punjab Gram Panchayat, 
Samities and Zilla Parishad  (Chandigarh Repeal) Act, 1994.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Repeal of Punjab  Acts 4 of 1953 and 3 of 1961 .—The Punjab Gram Panchayat Act, 1952 and the 
Punjab Panchayat Samities and Zilla Parishads  Act, 1961, in so far as they extend to and operate as part 
of the law of, the Union territory of Chandigarh, are hereby rep ealed.  
3. Saving .—Notwithstanding the repeal of the Punjab Gram Panchayat Act, 1952 (Punjab Act 4 of 
1953) and the Punjab Panchayat Samities and Zilla Parishads Act, 1961 (Punjab Act 3 of 1961)  
(hereinafter referred to as repeal ed Acts) the repeal shall not, — 
(a) affect the previous operation of the repealed Acts or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder; or  
(b) affect any right, pr ivilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incur red under the 
repealed Acts; or  
(c) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed 
against repealed Acts, affect any investigation, legal proceedings or r emedy in respect of any such 
right, privilege, obligation liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid, and any such 
investigation, legal proceeding or r emedy may be instit uted, continued or enforced, and any such 
privilege, forfeiture or puni shment may be imposed as i f this Act had not been passed.  
                                                           
1. 23rd April, 1994 , vide notification No. S.O. 323 (E), dated 23rd April, 1994 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3( ii). 
 
--------------------------The Punjab Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
 THE PUNJAB MUNICIPAL CORPORATION LAW  (EXTENSION TO CHANDIGARH) 
ACT, 1994  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Extension and amendments of Punjab Act 42 of 1976.  
3. Repeal of Punjab Act III of 1911 and savings.  
4. Transitory provision . 
5. Repeal of Ordinance 7 of 1994 and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
  2 
 THE PUNJAB MUNICIPAL CORPORATION LAW  (EXTENSION TO CHANDIGARH) 
ACT, 1994  
ACT NO. 45 OF 1994  
[22nd July, 1994 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 to the  Union 
territory of Chandigarh.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: ― 
1. Short title and commencement. ―(1) This Act may be called the Punjab Municipal Corporation 
Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 24th day of May, 1994.  
2. Extension and amendments of Punjab Act 42 of 1976. –(1) The Punjab Municipal Corporation 
Act, 1976 is hereby extended to, and shall be in fo rce in, the  Union territory of Chandigarh.  
(2) With effect from  the commencement of this Act, ― 
(a) the references, in the Punjab Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (Pun. Act 42 of 1976), to State, 
authorities, or City mentioned in column 1 of Part I of the Sc hedule annexed to this Act shall be 
construed as if references therein to State, authorities, or City respectively mentioned or referred to 
opposite th ereto in column 2 of that Part;  
(b) the Punjab Municipal Cor poration Act, 1976 (Pun. Act 42 of 1976) shall be amended as 
specif ied in Part II of the Schedule.  
3. Repeal of Punjab Act III of 1911 and savings. ―(1) The Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 in  so far as 
it applies to the Union territory of Chandigarh or any part thereof shall stand repealed on the  comin g into 
force of this Act:  
Provided that the  repeal shall not affect ― 
(a) the previous operation of  the Punjab Municipal Act, 1911 (Pun. Act III of 1911) so repealed 
or anything duly done or suffered thereunder, or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or li ability acquired, accrued or incurred und er the said Act so 
repealed, or  
(c) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege, 
obliga tion or liability as aforesaid,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced as if this 
Act had not been passed:  
Provided further that, subject to the preceding proviso, anything done or any action taken (including 
any appointment or de legation made, notification, instruction or direction issued, form or bye -law framed, 
certificate obtained, permit or licence granted or registration effected) under such Act shall be deemed to 
have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of the Act now extended to that Union 
territory, and shall continue to be in force accordingly unless and until superseded by anything done or 
any a ction taken under the said Act.  
(2) In every law or notification passed or issued before the commencement of th is Act in which 
reference is made to or to any Chapter or section or provision of the said Act hereby repealed, such 
references shall, so far as may be practicable, be taken to be made to the said Act or, their co rresponding 
Chapter or section.  3 
 4. Transitory provision. ―Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government 
may, if necessary, appoint a person to be called the Special Officer, to exercise the powers and discharge 
the functions of the Municipal Corporation of Chandigarh  until the day on which the first meeting of the 
Corporation is held after the commencement of this Act.  
5. Repeal of Ordinance 7 of 1994 and saving. ―(1) The Punjab Municipal Corporation Law 
(Extension to Chandigarh) Ordi nance, 1994 is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Ordinance so repealed 
shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  4 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
THE PUNJAB MUNICIPAL CORPORATION ACT,  1976  
(PUNJAB  ACT 42 OF 1976)  
PART I 
 
References  Constructions  
1 2 
1. Punjab State  
2. State of Punjab  
3. Whole of Punjab State  
4. Whole of the State of Punjab  
5. Punjab where it refers to the State of Punjab  
6. Punjab Government  
7. Government of Punjab  
8. Government of the State of Punjab  
9. State Government  
10. The Government of Punjab  
11. Government  
12. Divisional Commissioner  
13. Director  
14. Associate councillor  
15. City   
 
Union territory of Chandigarh  
 
 
 
 
Administrator  
 
 
 
prescribed authority  
 
Councillor  
Chandigarh.  
 
PART II 
Section 2, ― 
(a) for clause ( 1), substitute ― 
‗(1) ―Administrator ‖ means the administrator of the Union territory of Chandigarh appointed 
by the President under a rticle 239 of the Constitution;  
(1A) ―backward classes ‖ means any of the backward classes specified from time to time by 
the Administrator and whose names are published in the Official Gazette; ‘; 
(b) omit clause ( 6); 
(c) after clause ( 7), insert ― 
‗(7A) ―Corporation ‖ means the Municipal Corporation of Chandiga rh constituted under this 
Act;‘;  5 
 (d) after clause ( 8), insert ― 
‗(8A) ―council lor‖, in relation to the Corporation, means a person elected or nominated under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 4; ‘; 
(e) for clause ( 10), substitute ― 
‗(10)―district ‖ means district of Chandigarh covering the entire area of the  Union territory of 
Chandigarh;  
(10A) ―District Planning Committee ‖ means a Committee constituted under article 243ZD of 
the Constitution; ‘; 
(f) omit clause ( 12); 
(g) after clause ( 14), insert ― 
‗(14A) ―Election Commission ‖ means the Election Commission of the Union territory of 
Chandigarh referred to in section 10; ‘; 
(h) after clause ( 17), insert ― 
‗(17A) ―Finance Commission ‖ means the Finance Commission of the Union territory of 
Chandigarh referred to in section 84A; ‘; 
(i) for clause ( 23), sub stitute―  
‗(23) ―licensed architect ‖, ―licensed engineer ‖ and ―licensed plumber ‖ mean respectively a 
person registered and licensed as architect, engineer and plumber under section 16 of the Capital 
of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act, 1952 (Punjab Act XXVII of 1952); ‘; 
(j) after clause ( 26), insert ― 
‗(26A) ―Municipality ‖ means  an institution of self -government constituted under ar ticle 243Q 
of the Constitution;  
(26B) ―Municipal area ‖ means the territorial area of the Municipality as is notified by the 
Administrator under section 3  of the Act; ‘; 
(k) after clause ( 36), insert ― 
‗(36A) ―population ‖ means the population as ascertained at the last preceding census of which 
the relevant figures have been published; ‘; 
(l) after clause ( 37), insert ― 
‗(37A) ―prescribed authority ‖ means such authority or officer as the Administrator may, from 
time to time, by order to be published in t he Official Gazette, prescribe:  
Provided that the Administrator may prescribe different authorities or officers for different 
provisions of this Act; ‘; 
(m) for clause ( 43), substitute ― 
‗(43) ―public street ‖ means any street or the soil below the surface thereof which is 
specifically vested in the Corporation by an order of the Admini strator issued in this behalf;‘;  
(n) for clause ( 51), substitute ― 
‗(51) ―rural areas ‖ means the areas of the Union territory of Chandigarh which are not urban 
areas; ‘; 
  6 
 (o) for clause ( 52), substitute ― 
‗(52) ―Scheduled Caste ‖ means any of the Scheduled Castes specified in Part II of the 
Schedule to the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) (Union territories) Order, 1951; ‘; 
(p) for clause ( 60), substitute ― 
‗(60) ―urban areas ‖ means such areas as the Administrator , may, having regard to the 
population of the area, density of the population therein, the revenue generated for local 
administration, the percentage of employment in non -agricultural activities, the economic 
importance or such other factors as he may deem fit, specify to be urban area by notification in 
the Official Gazette; ‘.  
After section 2, insert ― 
―2A. The application of certain definitions of the Capital of Punjab (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1952. ―The words used and not defined in this Act bu t defined in the Capital of 
Punjab (Develo pment and Regulation) Act, 1952 (Punjab Act XXVII of 1952) shall have the 
meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act. ‖. 
For section 3, substitute ― 
―3. Declaration of area to be municipal area. ―(1) For the purposes of this Act, the 
Administrator shall, by notification, specify such territorial area of the Union territory of Chandigarh 
to be the Municipal area of the Munic ipal Corporation of Chandigarh.  
(2) The Administrator may, from time to time, after cons ultation with the Corporation, by 
notification, alter the limit specified under sub -section ( 1) so as to include therein or to exclude 
therefrom such area as may be specified in the notification. The Corporation shall send its views to 
the Administrator wi thin a period of three months  of the date on which it is first consulted.  
(3) The power to issue a notification under sub -section ( 2) shall be subject to the con dition of 
previous publication.  
(4) When the limits specified under sub -section ( 1) are altered  so as to include therein any area, 
this Act and, except as the Administrator may otherwise by notification direct, all rules, notifications, 
bye-laws, orders, directions and powers made, issued or conferred and all taxes and fees imposed 
under this Act an d in force throughou t the area specified under sub -section ( 1) shall apply to such 
included area. ‖. 
Section 4, ― 
(a) for sub -section ( 1), substitute ― 
―(1) For the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this Act, there shall be a corporation 
charged with  the municipal government, to be known as the Municipal Corporation of 
Chandigarh. ‖; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for ― Every ‖, substitute ― The‖; 
(c) for sub -section ( 3), substitute ― 
―(3) The Corporation shall be composed of the following members, namely: ― 
(i) members to be direct ly elected, representing wards;  
(ii) nine members with voting rights to be nominated by the Administrator, from amongst 
the persons who are eminent or distinguished in public affairs or those who have special 
knowledge or practical expe rience in respect of 1[municipal administration ; and] 
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 50 of 2000, s. 2, for ―municipal administration‖ (w.e.f. 11 -12-2000).  7 
 1[(iii) the member of House of the People representing the constituency which comprises 
wholly or partly, the municipal  area, with the right to vote. ] 
Section 5. ―In sub -section ( 2),― 
(i) in the first proviso, for ―forty and more than fifty ‖, substitute ―twenty ‖; 
(ii) omit second proviso.  
For section 6, substitute ― 
―6. Reservation of seats for women, Scheduled Castes and backward classes. ―(1) Seats shall 
be reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes, from amongs t the seats reserved under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 5 for the Scheduled Castes, the number of such seats being determined by 
the Administrator by an order published in the Official Gazette, which shall not be less than  one-third 
of the total number of seats res erved for the Scheduled Castes.  
(2) Seats shall be reserved for women, the number of such seats being determined by an order 
published in the Official Gazette by the Administrator wh ich shall not be less than one -third 
(including the number of seats reserved for women belonging to the Scheduled Castes) of the total 
number of seats to b e filled up by direct election:  
Provided that the seats reserved for the Scheduled Castes or for women (including those 
belonging to  the Scheduled Castes) shall be allotted by rotation to different wards in such a manner as 
the Administrator may, by order published in the o fficial Gaz ette in this behalf, determine.  
(3) The reservation of seats under sub -section ( 4) of section 5 and under sub -section ( 1) of this 
section shall cease to have effect on the expiration of the period specified in a rticle 334 of the 
Constitution.  
(4) The Administrator may, if he considers it necessary, by an order published in the Official 
Gazette, direct th at such number of seats as may be specified in the order shall be reserved in favour 
of backward classes of citizens:  
Provided that, when a backward class is deleted by an order of the Administrator, the member 
elected from such class shall not cease to ho ld office merely as a result of such deletion and shall hold 
office as he would have held ha d the deletion not been made. ‖. 
For section 7, substitute ― 
―7. Duration of the Corporation. ―(1) The Corporation, unless sooner dissolved under  
section 407, shall continue for five years from the date appointed for its first meeting  and no longer.  
(2) An election to constitute the Corporation shall be completed – 
(a) before the expiry of  its duration specified in sub -section ( 1); 
(b) before the expiration of a period  of six months fr om the date of its dissolution:  
Provided that where the reminder of the period for which the dissolved Corporation would have 
continued is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this sub -section 
for constituting the Corporation for such period.  
(3) The Corporation constituted upon its dissolution before the expiration of its duration shall 
continue only for the reminder of the period for which the dissolved Corporation would have 
continued under sub -section ( 1) had it not been so dissolved. ‖. 
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 50 of 2000, s. 2 (w.e.f. 11 -12-2000).  8 
 Section 8. ―For sub -section ( 2), substitute ― 
―(2) The Administrator shall, by an order in th e Official Gazette, determining ,― 
(a) the numb er of wards; and  
(b) extent of each ward.  
(3) The Election Commission shall, by an order in the Official Gazette, determine the wards in 
which seats shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, for women and the manner in which seats 
shall be rotated under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) of section 6. ‖. 
For section 10, substitute ― 
―10. Election s to the Corporation. ―(1) The superintendence, direction and control of 
preparation of the electoral rolls for, and the conduct of all elections to the Corporation shall be 
vested in the Election Commission appoi nted under section 7 of the Delhi Municipal Corporation  
Act, 1957 (66 of 1957), and the Election Commission so appointed under that section shall be 
responsible for the functions conferred on the Election Com mission under this sub -section.  
(2) The Administrator shall, when so requested by the Election Commission, make available to 
that Commission such staff which the Administrator considers necessary for the discharge of the 
functions conferred on the Commission by sub -section ( 1).‖. 
Section 12. ―In clause ( a), for ―twenty -five years ‖, substitute ―twenty -one years ‖. 
Section 13, ― 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), after clause ( 1), insert ― 
―(m) if he is so disqualified by or under any law for the time being in force for the purposes 
of electi ons to the House of the People:  
Provided that no person shall be disqualified on the ground that he is less than twenty -five 
years of age, if he has attain ed the age of twenty -one years;  
(n) if he is so disqualified by or under any law made by Parliament. ‖; 
(ii) in sub -sectio n (2), after clause ( c), insert ― 
―(d) a person shall not be disqualified for being nominated as a member of the Corporation on 
the ground that he holds office of profit for the purposes of election to the House of the People 
under any law for the time being in force. ‖. 
After section 13, insert ― 
―13A. Decisions on questions as to disqualification of members. ―(1) If any question arises as 
to whether a member has become subject to any disqualifications mentioned in section 13, the 
question shall be referred for the decision of the Administrator and his decision shall be final. ‖. 
Section 15, ― 
(i) omit sub -section ( 2); 
(ii) in sub -section ( 3), for ―Director ‖, substitute ―Administrator ‖. 
Section 16, ― 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for ―Director ‖, substitute ―Administrator ‖; 
(ii) in the proviso to sub -section ( 1), for ―four‖, substitute ―six‖;  
(iii) in sub -section ( 2),― 
(a) in the opening portion, for ―Scheduled Castes ‖, substitute ―Scheduled Castes, backward 
classes or for the women, as the case may be, ‖; 9 
 (b) after the words ―Scheduled Castes ‖ occurring at the end, add ―backward classes or be a 
woman ‖. 
Section 17, ― 
(a) omit  ―or co -opted‖  and ―or co -option ‖; 
(b) for ―Director ‖, substitute ―Election Commision ‖.  
Section 35. ―In sub -section ( 1), omit ―other than an associated council lor‖.  
After section 35, insert ― 
―35A. Vacation of seats in case of multiple membership. ―No councillor shall be a member 
both of the Corporation and Parliament and if a person is so chosen, then at the expiration of fourteen  
days from the date of the publication in the Gazette of India, or as the case may be, in the Official 
Gazette whichever is later, that he has been so chosen, that person ‘s seat in Parliament shall become 
vacant unless he has previously resigned his seat i n the Corporation. ‖.  
Section 36. ―For sub -section ( 1), substitute ― 
―(1) If a councillor becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 13, his 
seat shall thereupon become vacant.  
(1A) If during three successive months, a councillor is, without permission of the Corporation, 
absent from all meetings thereof, the Corporation may declare his seat vacant. ‖. 
Section 38, ― 
(a) for sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 2A), substitute ― 
―(1) The Corporation shall, at its first meeting in each year, elec t one of its elected members 
to be the Chairperson to be known as the Mayor and the other two such members to be the  
Senior Deputy Mayor and the D eputy Mayor of the Corporation:  
Provided that during the duration of the Corporation, the office of the Mayor  shall be 
reserved in favour of a member who is a woman for the first and the fourth year of the 
Corporation and in favour of a member belonging to a Scheduled Caste in the third year of the 
Corporation. ‖; 
(b) after sub -section ( 3), insert ― 
―(3A) If the vacancy be a casual vacancy in the office of the Mayor and is reserved for a 
woman or for a member belonging to the Scheduled Caste, the vacancy shall be filled by electing 
one of the councillors from amongst women or members of the Scheduled Castes, as th e case 
may be. ‖; 
(c) for sub -section ( 6), substitute ― 
(6) The Mayor may obtain reports from the Commissioner on any matter connected with the 
municipal government of Chandigarh. ‖. 
After section 41, insert ― 
―41A.  Wards Committees. ―(1) There shall be constituted such number of Wards Committees 
consisting of one or more wards, within the territorial area of the Corporation, as the Administrator 
may, from time to time, by order published in the Official Gazette, determine. The order shal l indicate 
the name of the Wards Committee and also the extent of the area comprised within the jurisdiction of 
such Committee.  
(2) Each Wa rds Committee shall consist of ― 
(a) all the councillors, elected from the wards in the territorial  jurisdiction of th e Committee;  10 
 (b) the person, if any, nominated by the Administrator, under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4 if his name is registered as an elector within the territorial limits of the Committee;  
(c) such number of persons, as may be prescribed, to be nominated by the Administrator.  
41B.  Chairperson of Wards Committee. ―(1) The Wards Committee shall, at its first meeting 
in each year, elect one of its members who is a councillor to be Chairperson:  
Provided that where a Wards Committee consists of one ward only, the councillor representing 
that ward in the Corporation shall be the  Chairperson of that Committee.  
(2) The Chairperson of the Wards Committee shall hold office from the date of his election un til 
the election of his successor in office unless in the meantime, he res igns his office as Chairperson.  
(3) On the occurrence of any casual vacancy in the office of the Chairperson, the Wards 
Committee shall, within one month of occurrence of such a vacancy, elect one of its members who is 
a councillor as Chairperson:  
Provided that where a vacancy has arisen o n the resignation or death of the only councillor on the 
Committee, the Administrator may appoint any other councillor as Chairperson of the Ward 
Committee till election is held to fill the vacancy in due course.  
41C. Resignation of Chairperson and members  of Wards Committee. ―(1) Any member of 
the Wards Committee, may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairperson 
and delivered to the Commissioner; and the Chairperson may resign his office by writing under his 
hand addressed to the  Mayor and  delivered to the Commissioner.  
(2) A resignation under sub -section ( 1) shall take effect from the date specified for the purpose in 
writing referred to in that sub -section, or if no such date is specified, from the date of its receipt by 
the Cha irperson or the Co mmissioner, whichever is later.  
41D.  Functions of Wards Committee. ―(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, a Wards 
Committee shall exercise the powers and perform the functions as may be determined from time to 
time by the Cor poration by resolution.  
(2) When any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the purview of the Wards 
Committee or the Corporation, it shall be referred to the Corporation and its d ecision thereon shall be 
final.  
41E.  Special Committees. ―(1) The Administrator may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette , constitute one or more Special Committees in addition to Wards Committees and the 
Committees referred to in section 42, as he thinks fit for the exercise of any power o r discharge of any 
functi on which the Corporation , may, by resolution , delegate to them or for inquiring into, reporting 
or advising upon any matter which the  Corporation may refer to them.  
(2) Any such Committee may consist of one or more councillors and such other persons having  
special knowledge or practical experience as the Administrator may nominate representing various 
interests which he may think fit, such as industry, commerce, labour, literature, sc ience, art and social 
services.  
41F. Constitution of District Planning Com mittees. ―(1) There shall be constituted in the 
district, a District Planning Committee to consolidate the plans prepared by the Corporation and the 
Panchayats in the District, and to prepare a draft development pl an for the district as a whole.  
(2) The manner in which the seats in the District Planning Committee constituted under                 
sub-section ( 1) shall be filled, the functions which may be assigned to such Committee and the 
manner in which the Chairperson of such Committee shall be c hosen, shall be  as prescribed by the 
Government, subject, however, to the provisions of art icle 243ZD of the Constitution.   11 
 (3) In preparing the draft development plan of the district, the District Planning Committee shall 
have regard to ― 
(i) the matter of  common interest between the Panchayats and Municipalities in the district 
including spatial planning, sharing of water and other physical and natural resources, the 
integrated development of infrastructure an d environment conservation; and  
(ii) the extent  and type of available resources whether financial or otherwise.  
(4) While preparing the draft development plan of the district, the District Planning Committee 
shall consult such institutions and organizations as the Gov ernment may, by order, specify.  
(5) The Chairperson of District Planning Committee shall forward the draft development plan as 
recommended by su ch Committee to the Government.  
(6) Any matter relating to a Committee constituted under section 41A or this section, not 
expressly provided in thi s Act, the same may be provided in the rules made in this behalf. ‖. 
Section 42, ― 
(a) omit sub -sections ( 1), (2), (4) and proviso to sub -section ( 5); 
(b) in sub -section ( 3), omit ―a Building and ‖. 
Section 44, ― 
(a) in clause ( q), add at the end ―except such important parks and stadia as may be specified by 
the Administrator by an order issued in this behalf ‖; 
(b) after clause ( t), insert ― 
―(tt) the preparation of plans for economic development and social justice; ‖. 
Section 45. ―In the opening portion, for ―The Corporation ‖, substitute ― 
―Subject to any general or special orders of the Administrator from time to time, the 
Corporation ‖. 
Section 47, ― 
(i) for sub -section ( 1), substitute ― 
―(1) The Administrator shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a suitable officer 
as the C ommissioner of the Corporation.  
(1A) The reporting authority on the work and conduct of the Commissioner shall be the 
Adviser to the Administrator and reviewing and accepting authority shall be the Administrator. ‖; 
(ii) after second proviso to sub -section ( 2), add ― 
―Provided also that where the Commissioner holds a lien on any service under any 
Government, the Administrator may at any time replace his services at the disposal of that 
Government. ‖; 
(iii) in sub -section ( 3),― 
(a) omit clause ( a); 
(b) omit  ―by giving a notice of at least one month to the Corporation ‖. 
Section 50. ―Omit ―for a term not exceeding two months ‖. 
Sections 65 and 66. ―Omit ―ad hoc ‖ wherever it occurs.   12 
 For section 71, substitute ― 
“71. Appointment of certain officers. ―(1) The Administrator shall appoint suitable officers to 
be respectively, the Municipal Engineer, the Municipal Health Officer, the Municipal Chief 
Accountant, the Municipal Secretary and the Municipal Chief Auditor and ma y appoint one or more 
Assistant Commissioners and such other officer or officers of a status e quivalent to or higher than the 
status of any of the officers specified earlier in this sub -section as the Administrator may deem fit on 
such monthly salaries and  allowances, if any, as may  be fixed by the Administrator.  
(2) The Municipal Chief Auditor shall not be eligible for any office under the Corporation after 
he has ceased to hold his office.  
71A. Schedule of permanent posts and creation of temporary posts. ―(1) The Commissioner 
shall, from time to time, prepare and lay before the Corporation two Schedules of posts other than 
those specified in section 71 setting forth the designations and grades of municipal officers and other 
municipal employees who should b e maintained permanently in the service of the Corporation 
indicating therein the salaries, fees and allowances which are proposed to be paid to such officers and 
other employees.  
(2) Of the two Schedules referred to in sub -section ( 1), the first Schedule shall deal with  
category ‗A‘ posts and the Second Schedule with other posts.  
(3) The Corporation may sanction the two Schedules either without modifications or with such 
modifications as it thinks fit and thereafter may amend them if it thinks it necessar y. Such sanction or 
amendment shall be subject to the  approval of the Administrator.  
(4) The Commissioner may create for a period not exceeding six months  any group ‗ B‘, ‗C‘  
and ‗ D‘ posts.  
71B.  Power to make appointments. ―(1) Subject to the provisions of section 71, the power of 
appointing municipal officers and other municipal employees whether temporarily or permanent shall 
vest in the Commissioner.  
(2) The claims of the members of the Scheduled Castes and backward classes of citizens shall be 
taken into consideration consistently with the maintenance of efficiency of administration, in the 
making of appointment of municipal officers and other municip al employees.  
71C. Recruitment. ―(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in s ection 71B, the direct 
recruitment to various posts may be made by the Administrator through such agencies as may be 
prescribed by him. ‖. 
Section 75. ―In clause ( b), for ―sub-section ( 7) of section 71‖ , substitute ― 
―the Schedules referred to in section 71A ‖. 
After section 84, insert ― 
―84A. The Finance Commission. ―(1) The Finance Commission constituted under section 107A 
of the Delhi Municipal Corporation Act, 1957 (66 of 1957) shall also be responsible, for the purposes 
of this Act, to review the financial  position of the Corporation and to make recommendati ons to the 
Administrator as to ― 
(a) the princi ples which should govern, ― 
(i) the determination of taxes, duties, tolls and fees which may be assigned to, or 
appropriated by, the Corporation;  
(ii) the grant -in-aid to the Corporation from the Consolidated Fund of India;  
(b) the measures needed to improve the financi al position of the Corporation;  13 
 (c) any other matter referred to the Finance Commission by the Administrator in the interest 
of sound f unctioning of the Corporation.  
(2) The Commission shall determine their procedure and shall have such powers in the 
performance of their functions as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Administrator shall cause every recommendation made by the Commission under thi s 
section together with an explanatory memorandum as to the action taken thereon to be laid before 
each House of Parliament. ‖. 
Section 87, ― 
(a) in sub -section ( 3), in clause ( b), in the proviso, for ―five hundred rupees ‖, substitute ―ten 
thousand rupees ‖; 
(b) in sub -section ( 4), for ―five thousand rupees ‖, substitute ―one lakh rupees ‖.  
Section 90, ― 
1[(a) in sub-section  (1),— 
(i) clauses  (b) and (c) shall  be omitted;  
(ii) in clause  (e), the word  ―and‖ occurring  at the end, shall  be 
omitted;  
(iii) after  clause  (f), the following  clause  shall  be inserted,  namely: — 
―(g) a tax on entertainments  and amusements. ‖ ]; 
2[(b) in sub-section  (6),— 
(i) after  the words  and figures  ―Punjab  Motor  Vehicles  Taxation  
Act, 1924,  the words  ―as applicable  to the Union  territory  of Chandigarh ‖, 
shall  be inserted;  
(ii) clauses  (d) and (e) shall  be omitted.] . 
Omit sections 113 to 117 (both inclusive).  
After section 126, insert ― 
―126A.  Prior approval of the Chief Administrator. ―Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sections 122 to 125, every permission given by the Commissioner shall be subject to the prior 
approval of the Chief Administrator appointed under clause ( e) of section 2 of the Capital of Punjab 
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1952, (Punjab Act XXVII of 1952) and subject to such 
conditions as the Chief Administrator may impose in this behalf. ‖. 
Omit section 127  
Section 152. ―In the proviso to sub -section ( 1), for ―one thousand rupees ‖, substitute ―ten thousand 
rupees ‖. 
Section 174. ―Omit clause ( c). 
Section  225.―Omit sub -section ( 2). 
Omit sectio ns 226 to 275 (both inclusive).  
Omit sectio ns 286 to 312 (both inclusive).  
Omit sectio ns 343 to 346 (both inclusive).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2017, s.  2, for clause ( a)  (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 2 , ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -7-2017).  14 
 Section 397. ―For sub -section ( 2), substitute ― 
―(2) Every rule, regulation or bye -law made under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree 
in making any modification in the rule, regulation or bye -law or both the Houses agree that the rule, 
bye-law or regulation should not be made, the rule, bye-law or regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rul e, regulation or bye -law.‖. 
Section 399. ―In sub -section ( 1), omit Parts B, C and D.  
For section 407, substitute ― 
“407. Dissolution of Corporation. ―(1) If, in the opinion of the Government, the Corporation is 
not competent to perform its duties or persiste ntly makes default in the performance of duties 
imposed on it by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in force or exceeds or abuses 
any of its powers, the Government ma y, by an order published, along with the reasons therefor, in the 
Offici al Gaze tte, dissolve such Corporation:  
Provided that the Corporation shall be given a reasonable opportunity of bein g heard before its 
dissolution.  
(2) When the Corporation is dissolved under sub -section ( 1),― 
(i) all Councillors of the Corporation shall vacate their offices forthwith;  
(ii) all powers and duties of the Corporation during its dissolution shall be exercised and 
performed by such persons or authority as the Government may, by notification, appoint in this 
behalf; and  
(iii) all property in pos session of the Corporation s hall be held by the Government.  
(3) Upon dissolution of the Corporation under sub -section ( 1), the Government shall 
reconstitute the Corporation as specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 4, and election to 
reconstitute such Corporation shall be completed before the expiration of a period of six months 
from t he date of dissolution:  
Provided that where the remainder of the period for which the dissolved Corporation would 
have continued, is less than six months, it shall not be necessary to hold any election under this 
sub-section for reconstituting the Corp oration for such period.  
(4) The Corporation reconstituted upon the dissolution of the existing Corporation before the 
expiration of its duration, shall continue only for the remainder of the period for which the 
dissolved Corporation would have continued under section 7 had it not been so dissolved. ‖. 
After section 407, insert ― 
―407A.  Appointment of a person to carry out the work of Corporation in certain  
cases. ―(1) All powers and duties of the Corporation may, till it remains dissolved and is 
reconstituted shall be exercised and performed by such persons or authority as the Governm ent may 
appoint in this behalf.  
(2) All properties vested in the Corporation shall till the  Corporation  remains dissolved and is 
reconstituted shall vest in and devolve upon the Government. ‖. 
  15 
 After section 424, insert ― 
“424A.  Application of the Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act, 1952 and 
the Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Cont rol Act, 1952. ―Notwithstanding anything contained in 
this Act, the provisions of the Capital of Punjab (Development and Regulation) Act, 1952 (Punjab 
Act XXVII of 1952) and of the Punjab New Capital (Periphery) Control Act, 1952 (Punjab Act 1 of 
1952) and the rules, regulations, bye -laws, notifications, orders, scheme, form or notice, made 
thereunder shall continue to be applicable in relation to the development and regulation of the Union 
territory of Chandigarh as immediately before the commencement of th e Punjab Municipal 
Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994. ‖. 
After section 428, i nsert ― 
‗428A.  Special provision as to transferred functions. ―(1) In this section ―transferred 
functions ‖ means such functions of the administration which on the commencement of the Punjab 
Municipal Corporation Law (Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994, become th e functions of the 
Corporation.  
(2) On and from the commencement of the Punjab Municipal Corporation  Law (Extension to 
Chandigarh) Act, 1994 ,― 
(a) all stores, articles and other movable properties belonging to the administration 
immediately before the specified date and utilised for or in connection with the transferred 
functions shall pass to and vest in the Corporation;  
(b) all appointments, notifications, orders, schemes, rules, forms, notices or bye -laws made or 
issued or any licence or permission granted by the administration immediately before such 
specified date in connection with the transferred functions shall continue in force and be deemed 
to have been made, issued or granted by the Corporation unless and until they are superseded by 
any appointment, notification, order, scheme, rule, form, notice or bye -law made or issued or any 
licence or per mission granted by the Corporation;  
(c) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be done by, with or for the administration immediately before such specified 
date for or in connection  with the transferred functions shall be deemed to have been incurred, 
entered into, engaged to be done by , with or for, the Corporation;  
(d) all assess ments, valuations, measurements or divisions made by the administration 
immediately before such commence ment or in connection with the transferred functions shall 
continue in force and be deemed to have been made by the Corporation unless and until they are 
superseded by any assessment, valuation, measurement or di vision made by the Corporation;  
(e) all rate s, taxes, fees, rents and other sums of money due to the administration in relation to 
the transferred functions immediately before such commencement shall be deeme d to be due to 
the Corporation;  
(f) all rates, fees, rents and other charges leviable in, or  in relation to, the transferred functions 
shall, unless and until they are carried by the Corporation continue to be levied at the same rate at 
which they are being levied by the administration immedi ately before such commencement;  
(g) all suits and trans actions and other legal proceedings instituted or which might have been 
instituted by or against the administration immediately before such commencement for any matter 
in relation to the transferred functions may be continued or instituted  by or against th e 
Corporation;  
(h) every officer and other employee serving under the administration immediately before 
such commencement in connection with the transferred functions shall be transferred to and 16 
 become an officer or other employee of the Corporation with s uch designation as the Corporation 
may determine and hold office by the same tenure and at the same remuneration and on the same 
terms and conditions of service as he would have held the same if the Corporation had not been 
established and shall continue t o do so unless and until such tenure, remuneration and terms and 
conditions are d uly altered by the Corporation:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such officer or 
other employee shall not be a ltered to the disadvantage without the previous  sanction of the 
Administrator:  
Provided further that the Corporation may employ any such officer or employee in the discharge 
of such functions as it may think proper and every such officer or other employee shall discharg e 
those functions accordingl y. 
(3) As soon as may be after the commencement of the Punjab Municipal Corporation Law 
(Extension to Chandigarh) Act, 1994, t he Administrator shall decide, ― 
(a) which stores, articles and other movable properties referred to in  clause ( a) of                    
sub-section ( 2) have been utilised by the administration for or in connection with the transferred 
functions;  
(b) which debts, obligations, liabilities, contracts, matters and things referred to  in clause ( c) 
of the said s ub-section have been incurred, entered into, or engaged to be done by, with or for the 
administration or in connection with the transferred functions;  
(c) which officers and other employees referred to in clause ( h) of that sub -section served 
under the administration in connection with the transferred functions. ‘. 
Omit section 431.  
Omit Schedule I.  
Third Schedule. ―Omit ―sections 258, 259 ( 1), 260 ( 1), 263 ( 4), 265, 266 ( 1) and ( 2), 268, 269, 270, 
271, 272 ( 1) and ( 2), 273 ( 1), (2) and ( 3) and section 274  (1), and the entries there  against in the second, 
third and fourth columns ‖. 
AMENDMENT  OF THE CAPITAL  OF PUNJAB  (DEVELOPMENT  AND REGULATION ) ACT, 1952  
(PUNJAB  ACT  No. XXVII OF 1952)  
For section 7A, substitute ― 
“7A. Power to apply certain provisions of Punjab Act 42 of 1976 to Chandigarh .―(1) The 
Chief Administrator may, from time to time by notification in the Official Gazette, and with the 
previous approval of the Administrator of the Union territory of Chandigarh, apply to Chandigarh or 
any part there of with such adaptations and modifications not affecting the substance as may be 
specified in the notification, all or any of the provisions of the Punjab Municipal Corporation  
Act, 1976 (Punjab Act 42 of 1976), in so far as such provision s are applicable  to Chandigarh.  
(2) While exercising the powers or performing the functions under the provisions of the Punjab 
Municipal Corporation Act, 1976 (Punjab Act 42 of 1976) applied to Chandiga rh by a notification 
under sub -section ( 1), the Chief Administrator shall be subject to the control of the Administrator and 
not to that of the Commi ssioner or Deputy Commissioner.  
(3) Notwithstanding the substitution of section 7A of the Capital of Punjab (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1952 (hereinafter referred to as substituted section) the subst ituted section shall 
not― 17 
 (a) affect the previous operation of the substituted section or anything duly done or suffered 
thereunder; or  
(b) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquir ed accured or incurred unde r the 
substituted section; or 
(c) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence committed 
against substituted section; affect any investigation, legal proceedings or remedy in respect of any 
such right, privilege, obligati on, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid and any 
such investigation, legal proceedings or remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any 
such privilege, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this substitution has not been 
made. ‖. 
--------------------------The Transplantation of Human Organs and Tissues Act, 1994--------------------------
1 
  THE TRANSPLANTATION OF HUMAN ORGANS AND TISSUES ACT, 1994  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTION S 
1. Short title, application and commencement.  
2. Definition s. 
 
CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITY FOR THE REMOVAL OF HUMAN ORGANS  OR TISSUES OR BOTH  
3. Authority for removal of human organs  or tissues or both . 
4. Removal of human organs  or tissues or both  not to be authorised in certain cases.  
5. Authority for removal of human organs  or tissues or both  in case of unclaimed bodies in hospital  
or pri son. 
6. Authority for removal of human organs  or tissues or both  from bodies sent for post -mortem 
examination for medico -legal or pathological purposes.  
7. Preservation of human organs  or tissue or both . 
8. Savings.  
9. Restrictions on removal and transplantation of human organs  or tissues or both . 
 
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF HOSPITALS  
10. Regulation of hospital conducting the removal, storage or tran splan tation of human organs  or 
tissue or both . 
11. Prohibition of removal or transplantation of human organs or tissues or both for any purpose 
other than therapeutic purpose.  
12. Explaining effects, etc., to donor and recipient.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
APPROPRIATE  AUTHORITY  
13. Appropriate Authority.  
13A. Advisory Committee s to advise Appropriate Authority . 
13B. Powers of Appropria te Authority.  
13C. National Human Organs or tissues or both and Tissues Removal and Storage Network.  
13D. National registry . 
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION OF HOSPITALS  
14. Registration of hospitals engaged in removal, storage or transplantation of human organs  or 
tissues or both . 
14A. Registration of  Tissue Bank.  
15. Certificate of registration.  
16. Suspens ion or cancellation of registration.  
17. Appeals.  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
SECTION S 
18. Punishment for removal of human organ without authority.  
19. Punishment for commercial dealings in human organs.  
19A. Punishment for illegal dealings in human tissues.  
20. Punishment for contravention of any other provision of this Act.  
21. Offences by companies.  
22. Cognizance of offences.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
23. Protection of action take n in good faith.  
24. Power to make rules.  
25. Repeal and savings.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 
 THE TRANSPLANTATION OF 3[HUMAN ORGANS  AND TISSUES ] ACT, 1994  
ACT NO. 42 OF 1994  
[8th July , 1994.]  
An Act to provide for the regulation of removal, storage and  transplantation of                                   
1[human organs and tissues for therapeutic purposes and for the prevention of commercial 
dealings in human organs and tissues ] and for matters  connected therewith or incidental 
thereto.  
WHEREAS  it is expedient to provide for the regulation of removal,  storage and transplantation o f 
2[human organs  or tissues or both ] for therapeutic purposes  and for the prevention of commercial dealings 
in 2[human organs  or tissues or both ]; 
AND  WHEREAS  in  Parliament has no power to make  laws  for  the States with respect to any of the 
matters aforesaid except as provided  in articles 249 and 250 of the Constitution;  
AND  WHEREAS  in pursuance of clause ( 1) of article  252  of  the Constitution,  resolutions  have been 
passed by all the Houses  of  the Legislatures of the States of Goa, Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra to  
the  effect  that the matters aforesaid should be regulated  in  those   States by Parliament by law;  
BE it enacted  by Parliament in the Fort y-fifth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be  called the Transplantation of 
3[Human Organs  and Tissues ] Act, 1994.  
(2)  It  applies,  in  the first instance, to the  whole  of  the  States  of Goa, Himachal Pradesh and 
Maharashtra and to all the  Union  territories  and it shall also apply to such other State which  adopts  this  
Act  by  resolution passed in that behalf under  clause  ( 1)  of article 252 of the Cons titution.  
(3)  It  shall  come into force in the States  of  Goa,  Himachal Pradesh and Maharashtra and in all the 
Union territories on such  date4 as  the  Central Government may, by notification, appoint and  in  any  
other  State which adopts this Act un der clause ( 1) of article 252  of  the Constitution, on the date of such 
adoption; and any  reference  in  this  Act  to the commencement of this Act shall, in relation  to  any State 
or Union territory, means th e date on which this Act comes into force in s uch State or Union territory.  
2. Definition s.—In  this  Act,  unless  the   context   otherwise  requires, — 
(a)  “advertisement”   includes  any  form  of   advertising  whether  to  the public generally or to 
any  section  of  the  public or, individually to selected persons;  
(b)  “Appropriate Authority”  means the Appropriate Authority  appointed under section 13;  
(c)  “Authorisation Committee” means the committee  constituted  under clause ( a) or clause ( b) of                   
sub-section (4) of section 9;  
(d)  “brain -stem  death”   means  the  stage  at  which   all  functions of the brain -stem have 
permanently and irreversibly  ceased  and is so certified under sub -section ( 6) of  section 3;  
(e)  “deceased person”  means  a person in whom permanent dis appearance  of  all  evidence of life 
occurs,  by  reason  of   brain -stem  death or in a cardio -pulmonary sense, at any  time  after live birth 
has taken place;  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 16 of 2011, s. 2, for “human organs for therapeutic purposes and for the prevention of commercial dealings in 
human organs” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).   
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “human or gans” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014) .  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “Human Organs” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
4. 4th February, 1995, vide Notification No. S.O. 80( E), dated the 4th February, 1995, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(ii). 
 4 
 (f)  “donor”  means any person, not less than eighteen  years  of age, who voluntarily authorises  the 
removal of any of his  human  organs for therape utic purposes under sub -section  (1) or                      
sub-section ( 2) of section 3;  
(g)  “hospital ” includes  a nursing home,  clinic,  medical  centre,  medical  or  teaching  institution  
for  therapeutic  purpo ses and other like institution;  
(h)  “human organ”  means any part of a human body consisting  of  a structured arrangement of 
tissues which, if wholly ,  removed, cannot be replicated by the body;  
 1[(ha) “Human Organ Retrieval Centre ” means a hospital ,— 
 (i) which has adequate facilities for treating seriously ill patients who can be potential 
donours of organs in the event of death; and  
(ii) which is registered under sub -section ( 1) of section 14 for retrieval of human organs;  
(hb) “minor” means a person who has not completed the age of eighteen years; ] 
            2[(i) “near relative”  means spouse, son, dau ghter, father, mother, brother, sister, grandfather, 
grandmother, grandson or granddaughter;]  
 (j)  “notification”   means a no tification  published  in  the O fficial Gazette;  
(k)   “payment”   means payment in money or money’ s worth  but  does not include any payme nt 
for defraying or reimbursing — 
(i) the cost of removing, transporting or  preserving  the 3[human organ  or tissue or both]  to be 
supplied; or  
(ii)  any  expenses  or loss of earnings incurred by a  person so far as reasonably and directly  
attributable  to his supplying any human organ from his body;  
(l)  “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made under  this  Act;  
(m) “recipient”   means a person into whom any  3[human  organ  or tissue or both]  is, or is 
proposed to be, transplanted;  
(n)   “registered  medical  practitioner”   means  a   medical  practitioner    who   possesses   any   
recognised  medical  qualification  as defined in  clause ( h) of section 2  of  the  Indian  Medical 
Council Act, 1956 (102 of 1956) , and who is enrolled  on  a  State  Medical  Register  as defined in 
clause  ( k)  of  that  section;  
(o) “therapeutic purposes”  means systematic  treatment  of  any  disease or the measures to 
improve health  according  to  any particular method or modality;  4*** 
5[(oa) “tissue”  means a group of cells , except blood , performing a particular function in the 
human body;  
(ob) “Tissue Bank” means a facility registered under section 14A  for carrying out any activity 
relating to the recovery, screening, testing, processing, storage and distribution of tissues, but does not 
to include a Blood Bank;]  
 (p) “transplantation”  means the grafting of any human organ  from  any  living  person or 
deceased person  to  some  other  living per son for therapeutic purposes;  
 5[(q) “transplant co -ordinator” means a person appointed by the hospital for co -ordinating all 
matters relating to removal or transplantation of human organs or tissues or both and fo r assisting the 
authority for removal of human organs   in accordance with the provisions of sections 3 .] 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2011, s. 5 (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 10-1-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “human organ” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
4. The word “and” omitted  by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
5. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
 
 5 
 CHAPTER II  
AUTHORITY FOR THE REMOVAL OF  1[HUMAN ORGANS  OR TISSUES OR BOTH ] 
3. Authority  for removal of 1[human organs  or tissues or both] .—(1) Any donor may, in  such  
manner  and  subject to such conditions as  may  be  prescribed,  authorise  the  removal, before his death, 
of any 2[human organ  or tissue or both]   of  his  body for therapeutic purposes.  
 3[(1A) For the purpose of removal, storage or t ransplantation of such human organs  or tissue s or both , 
as may be prescribed, it shall be the duty of the registered medical practitioner working in a hospital , in 
consultation with transplant co -ordinator, if such transplant co -ordinator is available, — 
(i) to ascertain from the person admitted to the Intensive Care Unit or from his near relative that 
such person had authorised at any time before his death the removal of any human organ or tissue or 
both of his body under sub -section ( 2), then the hospital shall proceed to obtain the documentation for 
such authorisation;  
(ii) where no such authority as referred to in sub -section ( 2) was made by such person, to make 
aware to that person or near relative for option to authorise or decline for donation of                           
human organs or tissues or both;  
(iii) to require the hospital to inform in writing to the Human Organ Removal Centre for removal, 
storage or transplantation of human organs or tissues or both of the donor identified in                 
clauses ( i) and ( ii) in s uch manner as may be prescribed  
(1B) The duties mentioned under clauses ( i) to ( iii) of sub -section ( 1A) from such date, as may  be 
prescribed, shall also apply in the case of a registered medical practitioner working in an Intensive Care 
Unit in a hospital which is not registered under this Act for the purpose of removal, storage or 
transplantation of hu man organs or tissues or both .] 
(2)  If  any donor had, in writing and in the presence of two  or  more  witnesses                                             
(at  least one of whom is a  near  relative  of  such  person),  unequivocally authorised at any time before 
his  death,  the   removal  of  any  human  organ  of his  body,  after  his  death,  for  therapeutic  purposes, 
the person lawfully in possession of  the  dead  body of the donor shall, unless he has any reason to believe 
that  the  donor  had  subsequently revoked the authorit y aforesaid, grant  to  a  registered  medical  
practitioner all reasonable  facilities  for  the  removal,  for therapeutic purposes, of that 2[human organ or 
tissue or both] from the  dead  body of the donor.  
(3)  Where  no  such authority as is referred to   in  sub -section ( 2), was made by any person before his 
death but no objection was also  expressed  by such person to any of his 1[human organs  or tissue s or both]   
being used  after  his death for therapeutic purposes, the person lawfully in  possession  of  the dead body 
of such person may, unless he has reason to  believe  that any near relative of the  deceased person has 
objection to any of  the  deceased  person’ s  1[human  organs  or tissue s or both]  being  used  for   
therapeutic  purposes, authorise the removal  of any 2[human organ or tissue or both] of the deceased 
person for its use for  therapeutic  purposes.  
(4)  The authority given under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or,  as the case may be,                          
sub-section ( 3) shall be  sufficient  warrant  for the removal, for therapeutic purposes, of the 2[human 
organ  or tissue or both] ; but  no  such  removal  shall be made by any person other than  the  registered  
medical practitioner:  
 3[Provided that a technician possessing such quali fications and experience, as may be prescribed, 
may enucleate a cornea.]  
(5)  Where  any 2[human organ or tissue or both]  is to be removed from the body  of  a  deceased  
person,  the registered medical practitioner  shall  satisfy  himself,  before such removal, by a personal 
examination of  the  body  from  which any 2[human organ  or tissue or both]  is to be removed, that life is 
extinct  in  such body or, where it appears to be a case of brain -stem death,  that  such death  has been 
certified under  sub-section ( 6). 
(6)  Where  any 2[human organ  or tissue or both]  is to be removed from the body  of  a   person in the 
event of his  brain -stem death, no such removal shall  be  undertaken  unless such death is certified, in such 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act of 16 of 2011, s. 4, for “ human organs” (w.e.f. 10-1-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “ human organ” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  6 
 form and  in  such  manner and on sa tisfaction of such conditions and requirements as  may  be  prescribed,  
by  a  Board of medical  experts  consisting  of  the  following, namely: — 
(i)  the  registered medical practitioner in charge  of  the  hospital in which brain -stem death has 
occurred;  
(ii) an independent registered medical practitioner, being a  specialist,  to  be  nominated  by  the  
registered   medical  practitioner specified in clause ( i), from the panel of names  approved by the 
Appropriate Authority;  
(iii)  a  neurologist or a neuros urgeon to be  nominated  by  the registered medical practitioner 
specified in clause  ( i), from   the  panel  of  names  approved  by  the   Appropriate   Authority : 1*** 
 2[Provided that where a neurologist or a neurosurgeon is not available, the registered medical 
practitioner may nominate an independent registered medical practitioner, being a surgeon or a 
physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist subject to the conditio n that they are not members of the 
transplantation team for the concerned recipient and to such c onditions as may be prescribed;]  
(iv)  the registered medical practitioner treating the person  whose brain -stem death has occurred.  
(7)  Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in sub -section ( 3), where   brain -stem  death  of  any person, 
less than eighteen  years  of  age,  occurs  and is certified under sub -section ( 6), any of the parents  of  the  
deceased  person  may give authority, in such form  and  in  such  manner  as may be prescribed, for the 
removal of any 3[human organ  or tissue or both]   from  the body of the deceased person.  
4. Removal of 4[human organs  or tissues or both ] not to be authorised in certain cases. —(1) No 
facilities shall be granted under sub-section ( 2) of section 3 and no authority shall be given under                  
sub-section ( 3) of that  section  for the removal of any 3[human organ or tissue or both] from the body of a 
deceased person,  if the person required to grant such facilities , or empowered to  give  such authority, has 
reason to believe that an inquest may be  required  to be held in relation to such body in pursuance of the 
provisions  of  any law for the time being in force.  
(2) No authority for the removal of any  3[human organ  or tissue or both]  from the body  of a deceased 
person shall be given  by a person to whom such body has been entrusted solely for the purpose of 
interment, cremation or other  disposal.  
5. Authority for  removal of 4[human organs  or tissues or both]  in  case  of  unclaimed  bodies in 
hospital or  prison .—(1) In the case of a dead body lying in  a  hospital or prison and not claimed by any 
of the near relatives  of  the  deceased  person within forty -eight hours from the  time  of  the  death  of the 
concerned  person, the authority for the removal  of  any  3[human  organ or tissue or both]  from  the dead 
body which so remains  unclaimed  may  be  given,  in the prescribed form, by the person in charge, for 
the  time  being,  of the management or control of the ho spital or prison, or  by  an  employee of such 
hospital or prison authorised in this  behalf  by  the person in charge of the management or control thereof.  
(2)  No authority  shall be given under sub -section ( 1) if the  person empowered to give such authority  
has reason to believe that any  near relative of the deceased person is likely to claim the dead  body  even 
though such near relative ha s not come forward to claim the  body  of the deceased person within the time 
specified in sub -section ( 1). 
6. Authority fo r removal of 4[human organs  or tissues or both ] from bodies sent  for                     
post-mortem examination for medico -legal or pathological purposes .—Where  the body of a person 
has been sent for post -mortem examination — 
(a) for medico -legal purposes by reason of the death of  such  person having been caused by accident 
or any other  unnatural  cause; or  
 (b) for pathological purposes,   
                                                           
1. The word “and” omitted by Act 16 of 2011, s.  6 (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “human organ ” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “human organ s” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014 ). 
 7 
 the person competent under this Act to give authority for the  removal  of  any  1[human  organ  or tissue or 
both]  from such dead body may, if  he  has  reason  to  believe that such 1[human organ or tissue or both] 
will not be required for the purpose for  which  such body has been sent for post -mortem  examination,  
authoris e the  removal,  for ther apeutic purposes, of that 1[human  organ  or tissue or both]   of  the  
deceased person provided that he is satisfied that the deceased person  had  not ex pressed,  before his 
death, any objection to any  of  his  2[human organs  or tissue s or both]  being used, for therapeutic purposes 
after his death  or,  where  he  had granted an authority for the use of any  of  his  2[human  organs  or 
tissues or both ] for therapeutic purposes, after his death, such authority  had  not been revoked by him 
before his death.  
7. Preservation  of 2[human organs  or tissues or both ].—After the removal of  any 1[human  organ 
or tissue or both ] from  the  body  of  any   person,  the   registered   medical  practitioner  shall take such 
steps for the preservation of the  1[human  organ  or tissue or both]  so removed as may be prescribed.  
8. Savings .—(1) Nothing in the foregoing provisions of   this Act  shall be construed as rendering 
unlawful any dealing with the body  or with   any part of the body of a deceased person if such dealing 
would have been lawful if this Act had not been passed.  
(2)  Neither  the  grant  of any facility or  authority  for  the  removal  of  any  1[human organ  or tissue 
or both]  from the body of a  deceased  person  in  accordance  with  the provisions of this Act  nor the 
removal  oil  any  1[human  organ or tissue or both] from the body of a deceased person in pursuance  of  
such authority  shall be deemed to be a n offence punishable  under  section   297 of the Indian  Penal Code 
(45 of 1860).  
9. Restrictions on re moval and transplantation of 2[human organs  or tissues or both ].—(1) Save 
as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), no 1[human organ or tissue or both] removed  from the body of a 
donor before his death shall be transplanted into a  recipient unless the donor is a near relative of the 
recipient.  
 3[(1A) Where the donor or the recipient being near relative is a foreign national, prior approval of the 
Authorisation Committee shall be required before removing or transplanting h uman organ or tissue or 
both:  
Provided that the Authorisation Committee shall not approve such removal or transplantation if the 
recipient is a foreign national and the donor is an Indian national unless they are near relatives.  
(1B) No human organs or tissues or both shall be removed f rom the body of a minor before his death 
for the purpose of transplantation except in the manner as may be prescribed.  
(1C) No human organs or tissues or both shall be removed from the body of a mentally challenge 
person before his death for the purpose of  transplantation.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub -section, — 
(i) the expression “mentally challenged person ” includes a person with mental illness or mental 
retardation, as the case may be;  
(ii) the  expression “mental illness” includes dementia, schizophrenia and such other mental 
condition that makes a person intellectually disables;  
(iii) the expression “mental retardation” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in               
clause ( r) of section 2 o f the Person s With Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Right  and 
Full Participation) Act, 1995  (1 of 1996) .] 
(2)  Where  any donor authorises the removal of any of his  2[human  organs  or tissues or both ]   after  
his  death under sub -section ( 2) of section 3 or  any  person  competent or empowered to give authority for 
the removal of any  1[human  organ  or tissue or both]   from the body of any deceased person authorises  
such  removal,  the  1[human organ or t issue or both] may be removed and transplanted into the body of  
any recipient who may be in need of such 1[human organ  or tissue or both] . 
(3)  If  any  donor authorises the removal of any  of  his  2[human  organs  or tissue s or both ] before  his  
death  under  sub-section ( 1)  of  section  3  for  transplantation  into  the body of such recipient, not  being  
a  near  relative,  as  is  specified by the donor by reason  of  affection  or  attachment  towards  the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2011, s. 4  for “human organ” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “h uman organs” (w .e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f . 10-1-2014).  
 8 
 recipient or for any oth er  special  reasons,  such  1[human  organ  or tissue or both]  shall not be removed 
and transplanted  without  the  prior approval of the Authorisation Committee.   
2[(3A) Notwithstanding anything conta ined in sub -section ( 3), where — 
(a) any donor has agreed to make a donation of his human organ or tissue or both before his death 
to a recipient, who is his near relative, but such donor is not compatible biologically as a donor for the 
recipient; and  
(b) the second donor has agreed to ma ke a donation of his human organ or tissue or both before 
his death to such recipient, who is his near relative, but such donor is not compatible biologically as a 
donor for such recipient; then  
(c) the first donor who is compatible biologically as a donor  for the second recipient and the 
second donor is compatible biologically as a d onor of a human organ or tissue  or both for the first 
recipient and both donors and both recipients in the aforesaid group of donor and recipient have 
entered into a single agr eement to donate and receive such human organ or tissue or both according to 
such biological compatibility in the group,  
the removal and transplantation of the human organ or tissue or both, as per the agreement referred to 
above, shall not be done withou t prior approval o f the Authorisation Committee. ] 
3[(4) (a)   The composition of the Authorisation Committee shall be such as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government from time to time.  
 (b) The State Government and the Union territories shall constitut e, by notification, one or more 
Authorisation Committee consisting of such members as may be nominated by the State Government and 
the Un ion territories on such terms and conditions as may be specified in the notifi cation for the purposes 
of this  section. ] 
(5)  On  an  application jointly made, in such form and  in  such  manner  as  may  be prescribed, by 
the donor and  the  recipient,  the  Authorisation  Committee  shall, after holding an  inquiry  and  after  
satisfying  itself  that  the applicants have complied  with  all  the  requirements of this Act and tile rules 
made thereunder, grant to  the  applicants  approval for the remo val and transplantation of the human  
organ . 
(6)  If, after the inquiry and after giving an opportunity to the  applicants  of be ing heard, the 
Authorisation Committee  is  satisfied  that  the applicants have not complied with the requirements  of  
this Act  and  the  rules  made thereunder, it shall,  for  reasons  to  be  recorded in writing, reject the 
application for approval.  
CHAPTER III  
REGULATION OF HOSPITALS  
10. Regulation of  hospitals conducting the removal,  storage or  transplantation  of                    
4[human organs  or tissues or both ].—(1) On and from the commencement  of this Act, —  
(a)  no  hospital, unless registered under this  Act,  shall  conduct, or associate with, or help in, the 
removal,  storage  or transplantation of any 1[human organ  or tissue or both ;] 
(b)   no  medical  practitioner  or any  other  person  shall  conduct,  or cause to be conducted, or 
aid in  conducting  by  himself or through any other person, any activity relating to  the removal, 
storage or transplantation of any 1[human organ  or tissue or both]  at a place other than a place 
registered under this Act; 5*** 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2011, s. 4 , for “human organ” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
3. Subs. by s.  7, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
4. Subs.  by s. 4, ibid., for “human organs”  (w.e.f. 10-1-2014) . 
5. The word “and” omitted by s.  8, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014)  
 
 
 9 
 (c)   no  place  including a hospital registered  under  sub -section ( 1)   of  section 15 shall be used 
or cause  to  be  used   by   any   person  for   the   removal,   storage   or  transplantation  of  any 
1[human organ or tissue or both] except  for  therapeutic  purposes ; 2[and]  
 3[(d) no Tissues Bank, unless registered under this Act, shall carry out any activity relating to the 
recovery, screening, testing, processing, storage and distribution of tissues .] 
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), the eyes or the ears may be removed at 
any place from the dead body of any  donor, for therapeutic purposes, by a registered medical practitioner.  
Explanation. —For the pur poses of   this sub -section , “ears” includes ear drums and ear bones.  
11. Prohibition of removal or transplantation of 4[human organs  or tissue s or both]  for any  
purpose other than the  rapeatic purposes. — No donor and no  person  empowered  to give authority for 
the removal of any human organ  shall  authorise  the removal of any  1[human organ  or tissue or both]  for 
any purpose  other  than  therapeutic purposes.  
12. Explaining   effects,   etc.,  to  donor  and   recipient .— No registered  medical  practitioner  
shall  undertake  the  removal   or  transplantation  of any 1[human organ  or tissue or both]  unless he has 
explained,  in  such  manner  as may be prescribed, all possible effects, complications  and  hazards  
connected with the removal and transplantation to  the  donor  and the recipient respectively.   
CHAPTER IV  
APPROPRIAT E AUTHORITY  
13. Appropriate  Authority. —(1)  The  Central  Government   shall  appoint,  by  notification,  one  
or  more  officers  as   Appropriate   Authorities for each of the Union territories for the purposes of this   
Act. 
(2)  The State Government shall appoint, by notification, one or  more officers as Appropriate 
Authorities for the purposes of this Act.  
(3)  The Appropriate Authority shall perform the following functions, namely: — 
(i) to grant registration under sub -section ( 1) of  section  15  or  renew  registration under               
sub-section  ( 3)  of  that  section;  
(ii) to suspend or cancel registration under sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  
 5[(iii) to enforce such standards, as may be prescribed, — 
(A) for hospitals engaged in the removal, storage or transplantation of any human organ:  
(B) for Tissue Banks engaged in recovery, screening, testing, processing, storage and 
distribution of tissues; ] 
(iv) to  investigate any complaint of breach of any  of  the  provisions  of this Act or any of the 
rules  made  thereunder  and take appropriate action;  
 6[(iva) to inspect Tissue Banks periodically; ] 
(v)  to  inspect hospitals periodically for  examination  of  the quality of transplantation and the   
follow -up medical care  to  persons  who have undergone transplantation  and  persons  from whom 
organs are removed; and  
(vi) to undertake such other measures as may be prescribed.  
 7[13A. Advisory Committee s to advise Appropriate Authority .—(1) The Central Government  and 
and the State Governments, as the case may be, by notification, shall constitute an Advisory Committee 
for a period of two years to aid and advise the Appropriate Authority to discharge its functions.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2011, s. 4, for “human organ”  (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. The word “and” in s by s. 8 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “human organs” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
5. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
6. Ins. by s. 9,  ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
7. Ins. by  s. 10 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  10 
 (2) The Advisory Committee shall consist of — 
(a) one  administrative expert not below the rank of Secretary to the State Government, to be 
nominated as Chairperson of the Advisory Committee;  
(b) two medical experts having such qualifications as may be prescribed;  
(c) one officer not below the rank of a Joint  Director to represent the Ministry or Department 
of Health and Family Welfare, to be designated as Member -Secretary;  
(d) two eminent social workers of high social standing and integrity, one of whom shall be 
from a mongst representatives of women’ s organis ation;  
(e) one legal expert who has held the position of an Addition al District Judge or equivalent;  
(f) one person to represent non -governmental organisations or associations which are working 
in the field of organ or tissue donations or human rights;  
(g) one specialist in the field of human organ transplantation, provided he is not a member of 
the transplantation team.  
(3) The terms and conditions for appointment to the Advisory Committee shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government.  
13B. Powers of Appropriate Authority .—The Appropriate Authority shall for the purposes of this 
Act have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  
and, in particular, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning of any person who is in possession of any information relating to violation of the 
provisions of this Ac t or the rules made thereunder;  
(b) discovery and production of a ny document or material object;  
(c) issuing search warrant for a ny place suspected to be indulging in unauthorised removal, 
procurement or transplant ation of human organs or tissues  or both; and  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
13C.  National Human Organs  and Tissues Removal and Storage Network. —The Central  
Government may, by notification, establish a National Human Organs  and Tissues Removal and Storage 
Network at one or more places and Regional Network in such manner and to perform such f unctions, as 
may be prescribed.  
13D. National registry. —The Central Government shall maintain a national registry of the donors 
and recipients of human organs  and tissues and such registry shall have such information as may be 
prescribed to an ongoing evaluation of the scientific and clinical status of human organs and tis sue.] 
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION OF HOSPITALS  
14. Registration  of  hospital s  engaged  in  removal,  storage  or  transplantation of                       
1[human organ s or tissues or both ].—(1) 2[No hospital  (including Human Organ Retrieval Centre) ] shall  
commence  any  activity  relating to the removal, storage or transplantation  of  any  3[human  organ or 
tissue or both] for therapeutic purposes after the commencement  of  this Act unless such hospital is duly 
registered under this Act:  
Provided   that   every  hospital  engaged,  either   partly   or  exclusively,  in  any  activity relating to 
the  removal,  storage  or  transplantation   of   any 3[human  organ  or tissue or both]   for   therapeutic   
purposes  immediately  b efore  the  commencement of this  Act,  shall  apply  for  registration within           
sixty days from the date of such commencement:   
Provided  further  that every hospital  engaged  in  any  activity  relating to the removal, storage or 
transplantation of any 3[human organ  or tissue or b oth] shall  cease  to engage in any such activity on the  
expiry  of  three  months from the date of commencement of this Act unless such  hospital   has  applied  
for registration  and is go  registered  or  till  such  application is disposed of, whichever is earlier.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act of 16 of 2011, s. 4, for “human organs” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “No hospital” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid.,  for “human organ” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  11 
 (2)  Every applicatio n for registration under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the Appropriate 
Authority in such form and in such  manner and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3)  No  hospital shall be registered under thi s Act  unless  the   Appropriate Authority is satisfied that 
such hospital is in a position  to  provide  such specialised ser vices and facilities, possess ) such skilled 
manpower and equipments and maintain such standards as may  be  prescribed.  
 1[(4) No hospital shall be registered under this Act, unless the Appropriate Authority is satisfied that 
such hospital has appointed a transplant coordinator having such qualifications and experience as may be 
prescribed. ] 
 2[14A. Registration of Tissue Bank .—(1) No Tissue Bank shall, after the commence ment of the 
Transplantation of Human O rgans  (Amendment) Act, 2011  (16 of 2011) , commence any activity relating 
to the recovery, screening, testing, processing, storage and distribu tion of tissues unless it is dul y 
registered under this Act:  
Provided that any facility engaged, either party or exlusively, in any activity relating to the recovery, 
screening , testing, processing, storage and distribution of tissues immediately before the commencement 
of the Transplantat ion of Human Organs  (Amendment) Act, 2011  (16 of 2011) , shall apply for 
registration as Tissues Bank within sixty days from the date of such commencement:  
Provided fu rther that such facility shall cease to engage in any such activity on the expiry of three  
months from the date of commencement of the Transplantation of Human Organs  (Amendement)               
Act, 2011  (16 of 2011) , unless such Tissue Bank has applied for registration and is so registered, or till 
such application is disposed of, whichever is  earlier.  
(2) Every application for registration under sub -section ( 1) shall be made to the Appropriate 
Authority in such form and in such manner and shall be accompanie d by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) No Tissue Bank shall be registered under t his Act unless the Appropriate A uthority is satisfied 
that such Tissue Bank is in a po sition to provide such specialis ed service and facilities, possess such 
skilled manpower and equipments and maintain such standards as may be prescribed.]  
15. Certificate of  registration. —(1) The  Appropriate  Authority  shall,  after holding an inquiry and 
after satisfying itself that  the  applicant  has complied with all the requirements of this Act and  the   rules  
made  thereunder , 3[grant to the hospital  or to the tissue Bank, as the case may be, ]  a  certificate  of  
registration  in  such  form,  for such period  and  subject  to  such  conditions as may be prescribed.  
(2)  If, after the inquiry and after giving an opportunity to the  applicant of being heard, the 
Appropria te Authority is satisfied that  the applicant has not complied wit h the requirement  of this Act  
and the  rules  made thereunder, it shall, for reasons to be  recorded  in  writing, reject the application for 
registration.   
(3)  Every certificate of registra tion shall be renewed in such manner and on payment of such fees as 
may be prescribed.  
16. Suspension   or   ca ncellation   of   registration. —(1)   The   Appropriate Authority may,                
suo motu or on complaint, issue a notice to  any 4[hospital  or Tissue Bank, as the case may be ,] to show 
cause why its registration under this Act  should  not be suspended or cancelled for the reasons mentioned 
in the notice.  
(2)  If, after giving a reasonable opportunity of being heard  to  the  4[hospital  or Tissue Bank, as the 
case may be, ] the Appropriate Authority is satisfied that  there  has  been  a breach of any of the provisions 
of this Act or the rules  made  thereunder,  it may, without prejudice to any criminal action that  it  may  
take  against s uch 4[hospital  or Tissue Bank, as the case may be, ] suspend it s registration  for  such  period 
as it may think fit or cancel its registration:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2011, s. 11 (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 10-1-2014).  
3. Sub s. by s. 13, ibid., for “grant to the hospital” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “hospital” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  12 
 Provided that where the Appropriate Authority is of the opinion  that it is necessary or expedient so to 
do in the  public interest, it  may,  for reasons to be recorded in writing, suspend the  registration  of any 
1[hospital  or Tissue Bank, as the case may be,]  without issuing any notice.   
17. Appeals. —Any person aggrieved by an order of the Authorisation   Committee rejecting an 
application for approval under sub -section ( 6) of section 9, or any hospital 2[or Tissue Bank , as the case 
may be ,] aggrieved by an order of the Appropriate   Authority rejecting an application for registration 
under  sub -section   (2)  of  section  15  or an order of  suspension  or  cancellation  of  registration  under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 16, may, within  thirty  days  from the date of the receipt of the order, prefer an 
appeal,  in  such manner as may be prescribed, against suc h order to — 
(i)  the Central Government where the appeal is against  the  order of the Authorisation Committee 
constituted under clause   (a)  of sub -section ( 4) of section 9 or against the order  of  the Appropriate 
Authority appointed under sub -section ( 1)  of section 13; or  
 (ii) the State Government, where the appeal is against  the  order of the Authorisation Committee 
constituted under clause ( b)  of sub -section ( 4) of section 9 or against the order  of  the Appropriate 
Authority appointed under sub-section ( 2)  of section 13.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
18. Punishment for removal of  human organ without authority. —(1) Any person who renders his 
services to or at any hospital and who, for  purposes of transplantation, conducts, associates with , or  helps  
in any manner in, the removal of any human organ without authority, shall  be  punishable with 
imprisonment for a term  which may extend  to 3[ten years and with fine which may extend to twenty lakh  
rupees ]. 
(2)  Where  any  person  convicted under  sub -section  ( 1)  is  a  registered  medical  practitioner, his 
name shall be reported  by  the  Appropriate  Authority  to the respective State  Medical  Council  for  
taking  necessary  action including the removal of his name  from  the  register  of   the  Council for a 
period of 4[three  years]  for  the  first  offence and permanently for the subsequent offence.  
 5[(3) Any person who renders his se rvices to or at any hospital and who conducts, or associates with 
or helps in any manner in the removal of  human tissue without authority, shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to five lakh 
rupees.]  
19. Punishment for commercial dealings in human organs .—Whoever — 
(a)  makes or receives a ny payment for the supply of, or for  an offer to supply, any human organ;  
(b)  seeks  to find a person willing to supply  for  payment  any human organ;  
(c) offers to supply any human organ for payment ; or 
(d)   initiates or  negotiates any arrangement involving  the  making  of any payment for the supply 
of, or for an offer  to  supply, any human organ ; 
(e)  takes  part  in the management or control of a body  of  persons, whether a society, firm or 
company, whose activities  consist  of   or  include  the  initiation  or  negotiation  of   any  arrangement 
referred to in clause ( d); or 
(f)  publishes or distributes or causes to be  published  or  distributed any advertisement, —            
(a)  inviting  persons  to supply for pay ment of  any  human  organ;  
(b)  offering to supply any human organ for payment; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2011, s. 14, for “hospital” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 10-1-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “five years and with fine which may extend to  ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “two years” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
5. Ins. by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  13 
 (c)  indicating that  the advertiser is willing to  initiate  or negotiate any arrangement referred 
to in clause ( d); 
1[(g) abets  in the preparation or submission of false documents including giving false affidavits to 
establish that the donor is making the donation of the human organs, as a near relative or by reason of 
affection or attachment towards the recipient , 
shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall  not  be  less  than 2[five  years but which 
may extend  to ten years and shall  be  liable  to fine which shal l not be less than twenty lakh  rupees  but  
may extend to one cror e rupee s]. 
3*   *   *   *   * 
4[19A.  Punishment for illegal dealings in human tissues .—Whoever — 
(a) makes or receives any payment for the supply of, or for an of fer to supply, any human tissue ; 
or 
(b) seeks to find a person willing to supply for payment and  human tissue ; or 
(c) offers  to supply any human tissue  for payment;  or 
(d) initiates or negotiates any arrangement involving the making of any payment for the supply 
of, or for an of fer to supply, any human tissue ; or 
(e) takes  part in the management or control of a body of persons, whether a society, firm or 
company, whose activities consist of or include the initiation or negotiation of any arrangement 
referred to in clause ( d); or  
(f) publishes  or distributes or causes to be published o r distributed any advertisement — 
 (i) inviting persons to supply for payment of any human tissue ; or 
(ii) offering to supply any human tissue  for payment; or  
(iii) indicating that the advertiser is willing to ini tiate or negotiate any arrangement referred to 
in clause ( d); or 
(g) abets in the preparation or submission of false documents including giving false affidavits to 
establish that the donor is making the donation of the human tissues as a near relative or b y reason of 
affection or attachment towards the recipient,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may 
extend to three  years and shall be liable to fine which shall not be less than five lakh rupees but which  
may ex tend to twenty -five lakh  rupees .] 
20. Punishment  for contravention of any other provision  of  this   Act.—Whoever contraven es 
any provision of this Act or  any rule made,  or any condition of the registration granted, thereunder for 
which  no punishment  is  separately provided in this Act, shall  be  punishable  with  imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to 5[five years or  with  fine which may extend to twenty lakh rupees].  
21. Offences by companies. —-(1) Where any offence  punishable under  this  Act  has been 
committed by a company, every person who,  at  the  time  the offence was committed was in charge of, 
and was  responsible  to,  the  company for the conduct of the business of the  company,  as  well  as the 
company, sha ll be deemed to be guilty of the offence  and  shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall  render  any  such  person  liable to any 
punishment, if  he  proves  that  the  offence   was committed without his knowledge or that be had  
exercised  all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2)  Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where  any offence punishable under this 
Act has been committed by a  co mpany  and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the  
consent  or  connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part  of,  any director, manager, secretary 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2011, s. 17 (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “two years but which may extend to seven years and shall be liable to fine which shall not be less than 
ten thousand rupees but may extend to twenty thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
3. The p roviso omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
4. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
5. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for “three years or with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  14 
 or other officer of the company, such  director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed  to  
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded  against  and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a)  “company”  means any body  corporate and includes a  firm  or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director”  in relation   to a firm, means a partner  in  the firm.  
 22. Cognizance of offence s.—(1) No court shall take cognizance of  an offence under this Act except 
on a complaint made by — 
 (a)  the  A ppropriate  Author ity concerned,  or  any  officer  authorised  in this behalf by the 
Central Government  or  the  State  Government  or, as the case may  be,  the  Appropriate   Authority; 
or; 
(b)  a  person who has given notice of not less than  sixty  days, in such manner as may be 
prescribed, to the Appropriate  Authority  concerned,  of  the alleged  offence  and  of  his  intention to 
make a complaint to the court.  
(2)  No court other than that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a  Judicial Magistrate of the    first  class  
shall  try  any   offence  punishable under this Act.  
(3)  Where  a  complaint has been made under clause ( b)  of  sub -section  ( 1),  the  court may, on 
demand by such  person,  direct  the  Appropriate  Authority  to  make  available  copies  of  the  relevant  
records in its possession to such person.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
 23. Protection  of  action  taken  in  good  faith .—(1)  No suit,  prosecution or other legal 
proceeding shall lie against any person for   anything  which  is  in  good faith done or intended  to  be  
done  in  pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
(2)  No  suit  or other legal proceeding shall  lie  against  the  Central  Government or the State 
Government for any damage  caused  or  likely   to  be  caused for anything which is in  good  faith  done  
or intended to be done in pursuance of the provisions of this Act.  
      24. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by  notification, make rules for carrying   
out the purposes of t his Act.  
(2)  In particular , and without prejudice to the generality of  the foregoing power , such rules may 
provide  for all or any of the  following matters, namely: — 
 (a)  the manner in which and the conditions subject to which  any  donor  may authorise  removal, 
before his death,  of  any  1[human organ  or tissue or both]  of  his body  under sub -section ( 1A) of 
section 3;  
2[(aa) the human organ or tissues or both in respect of which duty is cast on registered medical 
pracitioner  the manner of obtaining documentation of authoirsation under clause ( i) of sub -section 3;  
(ab) the manner of informing the Human Organ Retrieval Centre under clause ( iii) of                  
sub-section ( 1A) of section 3;  
(ac) the date from which duties m entioned in sub -section ( 1A) are applicable to registered 
medical practitioner working  a unregistered hospital under sub -section ( 1B) of section 3;  
(ae) the qualification and experience of a technician under the proviso to sub -section ( 4) of 
section 3;]                                          
                                                           
1. Subs. by A ct of 16 of 2011, s. 4 for “human organ” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Ins. by s. 20 , ibid. (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  15 
 (b)  the form and the manner in which a brain -stem death  is  to be certified and the conditions and 
requirements which are  to  be  satisfied for that purpose under sub -section  ( 6)  of section 3;  
1[(ba) the conditions for nomination of a surgeon or a physician and an anaesthetist or intensivist 
to be included in the Board of medical experts under the proviso to clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 6) of 
section 3;] 
(c)  the form and the manner in which any of t he parents may  give  authority, in the case of    
brain -stem death of a  minor,  for  the removal of any 2[human organ  or tissue or both]  under                     
sub-section ( 7)  of section 3;  
(d)  the form   in which authority for the  removal  of  any  2[human organ  or tissue or both]  from 
an, unclaimed dead body may be given by  the  person  incharge of the management or control of the  
hospital  or prison under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(e)  the steps to be taken for the preservation of the 2[human  organ or tissue or both] removed 
from the body of any person, under section 7;  
 1[(ea) the manner of removal of hum an organs or tissues or both fro m the body of a minor before 
his death for transplantation under sub -section ( 1B) of section 9;  
(eb) the composition of the Authorisation Committees under sub -section ( 4) of section 9;]  
(f)  the form and the manner in which an application may  be  jointly made by the donor and the 
recipient under sub -section ( 5) of section 9;  
(g)  the manner in which all  possible effects, complications  and hazards connected with the 
removal and transplantation is  to be explained by the registered medical practitioner to the  donor and 
the recipient under section 12;  
 (h)  the standards as are to be enforced by the  Appropr iate Authority  for hospitals engaged in 
the removal,  storage  or  transplantation of any 2[human organ  or tissue or both]  under clause ( iii) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 13;  
(i)  the other measures as the Appropriate Authority  shall  undertake  in performing its functions 
under clause  ( vi)  of sub-section ( 3) of section 13;  
 1[(ia) the qualifications of medical experts and the terms and conditions for appointment to 
Advisory committee under sub -section s (2) and ( 3) of section 13A;  
(ib) the power of  the Appropriate Authority in any other matter under clause ( d) of section 13B;  
(ic) the manner of establishment of a National Human Organs and Tissues Removal and Storage 
Network and Regional Network and functions to be performed by them under section 13C;  
(id) the information in the nationa l registry of the donors and recipients of human organs and 
tissues and all information under section 13D;]  
(j)  the  form  and the manner in which an  application  for  registration  shall  be  made  and the  
fee  which  shall  be  accompanied, under sub -section ( 2)  of section 14;  
(k)  the  specialised  services  and the  facilities  to  be  provided, skilled manpower and the 
equipments to be possessed  and  the  standards  to  be  maintained  by  a  hospital  for  registration, 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 14;  
 1[(ka) the qualifications and experience of a transplant co -ordinator under sub -section ( 4) of 
section 14;  
(kb) the form and the manner in which an application for registration shall be made and the fee 
whic h shall be accompanied, under sub -section ( 2) of section 14A;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 16 of 2011, s. 20 (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,  for “human organ” ( w.e.f. 10-1-2014).  16 
 (kc) the specialis ed service and the facilities to be provided, skilled manpower and the equipment 
to be possessed and the standards to be maintained by a Tissue Bank, under sub -section ( 3) of            
section 14A;]  
(l)   the  form  in  which,  the period  for  which  and  the  conditions subject to which certificate of 
registration is to  be  granted to a 1[hospital  or Tissue Bank] , under sub -section ( 1)  of  section 15;  
(m)  the  manner  in wh ich and the fee on payment  of  which  certificate  of  registration  is to be  
renewed  under  sub -section ( 3) of section 15;  
(n)  the   manner in which an appeal may b e  preferred  under  section 17;  
(o)  the manner in which a person is required to give notice  to  the Appropriate Authority of the 
alleged offence  and  of  his intention to make a complaint to the court, under  clause  (b) of                      
sub-section ( 1) of section 22; and  
(p)  any other matter which is required to be, or  may  be,  prescribed.  
(3)  Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may  be  after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is  in  session,  for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised  in  
one session or in two or more successi ve sessions, and if, before  the  expiry  of  the  session  immediately 
following  the  session  or  the  successive  sessions  aforesaid,  both  Houses  agree  in  making  any  
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not  be made, t he rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such  modified  form  or  be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that  any  
such  modification or annulment shall be without  prejudice  to  the  validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
25. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Ear Drums and Ear Bones (Authority  for Use for Therapeutic 
Purposes) Act, 1982  (28 of 1982) and the Eyes  (Authority  for Use for Ther apeutic Purposes) Act, 1982 
(29 of 1982)  are hereby repeale d. 
(2)  The repeal shall, however, no t affect the previous operation  of the Acts so repealed or anything 
duly done or suffered thereunder.  
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2011, s. 20, for “hospital” (w.e.f. 10 -1-2014).  
 
