--------------------------The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995--------------------------
1 
 THE CABLE TELEVISION NETWORKS (REGULATION)  ACT, 1995  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION NETWORK  
3. Cable television network not  to be operated except after registration . 
4. Registration as cable operator . 
4A. Transmission of programmes through digital addressable systems , etc. 
4B. Right of way for cable operators and permission by public authority . 
5. Programme code . 
6. Advertisement code . 
7. Maintenance of register . 
8. Compulsory transmission of certain channels . 
9. Use of standard equipment in cable television network . 
10. Cable television network not to interfere with any telecommunication system . 
10A. Inspection of cable network and services . 
CHAPTER III  
SEIZURE AND CONFISCATION OF CERTAIN EQUIPMENT  
11. Power to seize equipment used for operating cable television network . 
12. Confiscation . 
13. Seizure o r confiscation of equipment not to interfere with other punishment . 
14. Giving of opportunity to the cable operator of seized equipment . 
15. Appea l. 
CHAPTER IV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
16. Punishment for contravention of provisions of this Act . 
17. Offences by companies . 
18. Cognizance of offences . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
19. Power to prohibit transmission of certain programmes  in public interest . 
20. Power to prohibit operation of cable television network in public interest.  
21. Application of other laws not barred.  
22. Power to make rules . 
23. Repeal and savings . 
  2 
 THE CABLE TELEVISION NETWORKS (REGULATION)  ACT, 1995  
ACT NO. 7 OF 1995  
[25th March , 1995 .]  
An Act to regulate the operation of cable television networks in the country and for matters 
connected t herewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -sixth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELI MINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Cable Television 
Networks (Regulation) Act, 1995.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 29th day of September, 1994 . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
1[(a) “authorised officer ” means, within his  local limits of jurisdiction, — 
(i) a District Magistrate, or  
(ii) a Sub -divisional Magistrate, or  
(iii) a Commissioner of Police,  
 and includes any other officer notified in the Official Gazette, by the Central Government or the State 
Government, to be an authorised officer for such local limits of jurisdiction as may be determined by 
that Government;]  
2[(ai) “Authority” means the Tel ecom Regulatory Authority of India established under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997  (24 of 1997) ; 
(aii) “Broadcaster”  means a person or a group of persons, or body corporate, or any  organisation 
or body providing programming services and includes his or its authorised distribution agencies;  
(aiii) “cable operator” means any person who provides cable service through a cable  television 
network or otherwise controls or is responsible for  the management and operation  of a cable 
television network and fulfils the prescribed eligibility criteria and conditions; ] 
(b) “cable service”  means the  transmission by cables of pro grammes including re -transmission by 
cables of any broadcast tele vision signals;  
(c) “cable television network” means any system consisting of a set of closed transmission paths 
and associated signal generation, control and distribution equipment, designed to provide cable 
service for rec eption by multiple subscribers;  
(d) “co mpany”  means a company as defined in section 3 of the Co mpanies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956 ); 
(e) “person”  means — 
(i) an indivi dual who is a citizen of India;  
(ii) an association of indi viduals or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, whose 
members are citizens of I ndia;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 20 00, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2011 , s. 2, for cl ause (aa) (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  3 
 1[(iii) a company as defined in section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ;] 
2[(ei) “post”  means a post and includes a pole, tower, standard, stay, strut, cabinet, pillar  or any 
above ground contrivance for carrying, suspending or supporting any network  infrastructure facility; ] 
(f) “prescribed”  means prescrib ed by rule s made under this Act;  
(g) “programme”  mean s any tel evision broadcast and includes — 
(i) exhibition  of films, features, dramas, advertisements and serials 3***; 
(ii) any audio or visual or audio -visual li ve performance or presentation,  
and the expression “programming service”  shall be constr ued accordingly;  
2[(gi) "public authority" means any authority,  body or institution of local self -government  
constituted  or established by or under — 
(i) the Constitution of India;  
(ii) any law made by Parliament;  
(iii) any law made by a State Legislature;  
(iv) any  notification issued or order made by the appropriate Government,  
and includes any — 
(v) body owned, controlled or substantially financed; or  
(vi) non -governmental organisation substantially financed,  
directly or indirectly by funds provided by the appropri ate Government; ] 
(h) “registering authority”  means such authority  as the Central Government may, by notification 
in the O fficial Gazette, specify to perform the functions of the regist ering authority under this 
Act2[within such local limits of jurisdiction  as may be determined by that  Government ]; 
(i) “subscriber”  means 4[any individual, or association of individuals, or a company, or any  other 
organisation or body ]who receives the signals  of cable television network at a place 5[indicated by 
him or it]  to the cable operator, without further trans mitting it to any other person.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF CABLE TELEVISION NETWORK  
3. Cable television network not to be oper ated except after registration .—No person shall operate 
a cable television network unless he is registered as a  cable operator under this Act.  
6*   *   *   *   * 
7[4. Registration as cable operator .—(1) Any person who is desirous of operating or is  operating a 
cable television network may apply for registration or renewal of registration, as  a cable operator to the 
registering authority.  
(2) The cable operator shall fulfil such eligibility criteria and conditions as may be  prescribed and 
different eligibility criteria may be prescribed for different categories of cable operators . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2011, s. 2, for sub -clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
3. The words “through video cassette recorders or video cassette players” omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
4. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “a person” (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “indicated by him”  (w.e.f. 2 5-10-2011).  
6. The proviso omitted by s. 3, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
7. Subs. by s. 4, ibid.,for section 4 (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  4 
 (3) On and from  the date of issue of notification under section 4A, no new registration  in a State, city, 
town or area notified under that section shall be granted to any cable operator  who does not undertake to 
transmit or re -transmit channels in an encrypted form throu gh a digital addressable system.  
(4) An application under sub -section ( 1) shall be made in such form and be  accompanied by such 
documents and fees as may be prescribed.  
(5) On receipt of the application, the registering authority shall satisfy itself that the applicant has 
furnished all the required information prescribed under sub -section ( 4) and on  being so satisfied, register 
the applicant as a cable operator and grant him a certificate of  registration or renew its registration, as the 
case may be, subject to such terms and conditions  as may be  prescribed under sub -section ( 6): 
Provided that the registering authority may, if it is satisfied that the applicant does not  fulfil the 
eligibility criteria and conditions prescribed under sub -section ( 2) or the application  is not accompanied 
by necessary documents or fees as prescribed under sub -section ( 4), and  for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, by order, refuse to grant its registration or renewal, as  the case may be, and communicate the 
same to the app licant:  
Provided further that the applicant may prefer an appeal against the order of the registering  authority 
refusing grant or renewal of registration to the Central Government.  
(6) Without prejudice to the compliance of eligibility criteria for registr ation of cable operators , the 
Central Government may prescribe, having regard to the interests of the sovereignty  and integrity of 
India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign  States, public order, decency or morality, 
foreign relation  or contempt of court, defamation or incitement  to an offence, such terms and conditions 
of registration including additional criteria  or conditions to be fulfilled by the cable operator.  
(7) The Central Government may suspend or revoke the registration gr anted under sub -section ( 5) if 
the cable operator violates one or more of the terms and conditions of such registration : 
Provided that no such order of suspension or revocation shall be made without giving reasonable  
opportunity of being heard to the cable  operator. ] 
1[4A. Transmission of programmes through digi tal addressable systems, etc .—(1) Where  the 
Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so to do, it may,  by notification 
in the Official Gazette, make it obligatory for every cable operator to transmit  or re -transmit programmes 
of any channel in an encrypted form through a digital addressable  system with effect from such date as 
may be specified in the notification and different dates  may be specified for different St ates, cities, towns 
or areas, as the case may be:  
Provided that the date specified in the notification shall not be earlier than six months  from the date of 
issue of such notification to enable the cable operators in different States,  cities, towns or area s to install 
the equipment required for the purposes of this sub -section.  
(2) The Central Government may prescribe appropriate measures and take such steps  as it may 
consider necessary for implementation of the notification issued under sub -section( 1). 
(3) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary in the public interest so  to do, and if not 
otherwise specified by the Authority, it may direct the Authority to specify,  by notification in the Official 
Gazette, one or more free -to-air channels  to be included in the  package of channels forming basic service 
tier and any one or more such channels may be  specified, in the notification, genre -wise for providing a 
programme mix of entertainment,  information, education and such other programmes and f ix the tariff for 
basic service tier  which shall be offered by the cable operators to the consumers and the consumer shall 
have  the option to subscribe to any such tier:  
Provided that the cable operator shall also offer the channels in the basic service ti er on a la carte  
basis to the subscriber at a tariff specified under this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government or the Authority may specify in the notification referred  to in  
sub-section ( 3), the number of free -to-air channels to be included in the pac kage of  channels forming 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2011, s. 5, for section 4A (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  5 
 basic service tier for the purposes of that sub -section and different numbers may  be specified for different 
States, cities, towns or areas, as the case may be.  
(5) It shall be obligatory for every cable operator to publicise the p rescribed  information including but 
not limited to subscription rates, standards of quality of service and  mechanis m for redressal of 
subscribers’ grievances in such manner and at such periodic intervals  as may be specified by the Central 
Government or the  Authority for the benefit of  the subscriber.  
(6) The cable operator shall not require any subscriber to have a receiver set of a  particular type to 
receive signals of cable television network:  
Provided that the subscriber shall use a digital addressable system to be attached to  his receiver set for 
receiving programmes transmitted on any channel.  
(7) Every cable operator shall provide such information relating to its cable services  and networks in 
such format and at such periodic intervals to the Central Government or the  State Governments or the 
Authority or their authorised representatives, as may be specified  by them from time to time.  
(8) All actions taken by the Central Government or the Authority in pursuance of the  provisions of 
this section as they  stood immediately before the 25th day of October, 2011shall continue to remain in 
force till such actions are modified as per the provisions of this  Act. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “addressable system” means an electronic device (which includes hardware and its  associated 
software) or more than one electronic device put in an integrated system through  which signals of 
cable television network can be sent in encrypted form, which can be  decoded by the device or 
devices, having an a ctivated Conditional Access System at the  premises of the subscriber within the 
limits of authorisation made, through the Conditional  Access System and the subscriber management 
system, on the explicit choice and request of  such subscriber, by the cable op erator to the subscriber;  
(b) “basic service tier”  means a package of free -to-air channels to be offered by a  cable operator 
to a subscriber with an option to subscribe, for a single price to subscribers of  the area in which his 
cable television network is  providing service;  
(c) “encrypted” , in respect of a signal of cable television network, means the changing  of such 
signal in a systematic way so that the signal would be unintelligible without use of an  addressable 
system and the expression "unencrypted" shall be construed accordingly;  
(d) “free -to-air channel” , in respect of a cable television network, means a channel for  which no 
subscription fee is to be paid by the cable operator to the broadcaster for its re -transmission  on cable;  
(e) “pay channel” , in respect of a cable television network, means a channel for which  
subscription fees is to be paid to the broadcaster by the cable operator and due authorisation needs to 
be taken from the broadcaster for its re -transmission on cable;  
(f) “subscriber manag ement system”  means a system or device which stores the  subscriber 
records and details with respect to name, address and other information regarding  the hardware being 
utilised by the subscriber, channels or bouquets of channels subscribed to  by the subscr iber, price of 
such channels or bouquets of channels as defined in the system,  the activation or deactivation dates 
and time for any channel or bouquets of channels, a log of  all ac tions performed on a subscriber’ s 
record, invoices raised on each subscribe r and the  amounts paid or discount allowed to the subscriber 
for each billing period.  
4B. Right of way for cable operators and pe rmission by public authority .—(1) Subject  to the 
provisions of this Act, any cable operator entitled for providing cable services may,  from time to time, lay 
and establish cables and erect posts under, over, along, across, in or  upon any immovable property vested 
in or under the control or management of a public  authority.  
  6 
 (2) Any public authority under whose control or ma nagement any immovable  property is vested may, 
on receipt of a request from a cable operator permit the cable operator  to do all   or any  of the following 
acts, namely: — 
(a) to place and maintain underground cables or posts; and  
(b) to enter on the property, from time to time, in order to place, examine,  repair, alter or remove 
such cables or posts.  
(3) The facility of right of way under this section for laying underground cables, and erecting  posts, 
shall be available to all cable operators subject to the obligation of reinstatement  or restoration of the 
property or payment of reinstatement or restoration  charges in respect thereof at the option of the public 
authority.  
(4) When a public autho rity in public interest considers it necessary and expedient that  the 
underground cable or post placed by any cable operator under the provisions of this  section should be 
removed or shifted or its position altered, it may require the cable operator  to rem ove it or shift it or alter 
its position, as the case may be, at its own cost in the timeframe indicated by the public authority.  
(5) The Central Government may lay down appropriate guidelines to enable the State  Governments to 
put in place an appropriate mechanism for speedy clearance of requests from  cable operators for laying 
cables or erecting posts on any property vested in, or under the  control or management of, any public 
authority and for settlement of disputes, including  refusal  of permission by th e public authority.  
(6) Any permission granted by a public authority under this section may be given  subject to such 
reasonable conditions as that public authority thinks fit to impose as to the  payment of any expenses, or 
time or mode of execution of any work, or as to any other matter  connected with or related to any work 
undertaken by the cable operator in exercise of those  rights.  
(7) Nothing in this section shall confer any right upon any cable operator other than that of  user for 
the purpose only of l aying underground cable or erecting posts or maintaining them. ] 
5. Programme code .—No person shall transmit or re -transmit through a cable service any 
programme unless such programme is in conformity with  the prescribed programme code.  
1*    *    *    *   * 
6. Advertisement code .—No person shall transmit or re -transmit through a cable service any 
advertisement unless such advertisement is in conformity with th e prescribed advertisement code.  
2*    *    *    *   * 
7. Maintenance of register .—Every cable operator shall maintain a register in the prescribed form 
indicating therein in brief the programmes transmitted or re -transmitted through the cable service during a 
month and such register shall be maintained by the cable operator for a period  of one year after the actual 
transmission or re -trans mission of the said programmes.  
3[8. Compulsory tra nsmission of certain channels .—(1) The Central Government may, by  
notification in the Official Gazette, specify the names of Doordarshan  channels or the  channels operated 
by or on behalf of Parliament, to be mandatorily carried by the cable  operators in their cable service and 
the manner of reception and re -transmission of such  channels:  
Provided that in areas where digital addressable sys tem has not been introduced in  accordance with 
the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 4A, the notification as regards  the prime band is concerned 
shall be limited to the carriage of two Doordarshan terrestrial  channels and one regional language chann el 
of the State in which the network of the cable  operator is located.  
(2) The channels referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be re -transmitted without any  deletion or 
alteration of any programme transmitted on such channels.  
                                                           
1. The p roviso o mitted by Act 36 of 2000, s. 3 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
2. The p roviso o mitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
3. Subs . by Act 21 of 2011,  s. 6, for section 8 (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  7 
 (3) Notwithstanding the provisi ons of sub -section ( 1), any notification issued by the  Central 
Government or the Prasar  Bharti (Broadcasting Corporation of India) in pursuance of  the provisions of 
sub-section ( 1), prior to the 25th day of October, 2011 shall continue to  remain in force t ill such 
notifications are rescinded or amended, as the case may be. ] 
9. Use of standard equipme nt in cable television network .—No cable operator shall, on and from 
the date of the expiry of a period of three years from the date of the establishment and publication of the 
Indian Standard by the Bureau of Indian Standards in accordance with the provisions of the Bureau of 
Indian S tandards Act, 1986 (63 of 1986 ), use any 1[equipment  or digital addressable system]  in his cable 
television network unless such 1[equipmen t or digital addressable system]  conforms  to the said Indian 
Standard.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
10. Cable television network not to interfere with any telecommunication syste m.—Every cable 
operator shall ensure that the cable television network being operated by him does not interfere, in any 
way, with the functioning of the  authorised telecommunication system s3[and is in conformity with such 
standards relating to interference as may be prescribed by the Central Government].  
4[10A. Inspection o f cable network and services .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions  
contained in the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  (13 of 1885) or any other law for the time being in force, the  
Central Government or its officers authorised by it or authorised agency shall have the  right  to inspect the 
cable network and services.  
(2) No prior permission or intimation shall be required to exercise the right of the  Central 
Government or its authorised representatives to carry out such inspection.  
(3) The inspection shall ordinarily be  carried out after giving reasonable notice except  in 
circumstances where giving of such a notice shall defeat the purpose of the inspection.  
(4) On being so directed by the Central Government or its authorised officers oragency so authorised 
by it, the ca ble operator shall provide the necessary equipment, services  and facilities at designated place 
or places for lawful interception or continuous monitoring  of the cable service at its own cost by or under 
the supervision of the Central Government or  its off icers or agency so authorised by it ]. 
CHAPTER III  
SEIZURE AND CO NFISCATION OF CERTAIN EQUIPMENT  
5[11. Power to seize equipment used for operat ing cable television network .—If any  authorised  
officer has reason to believe that the provisions of section 3, section 4A, section 5,section 6, section 8, 
section 9 or section 10 have been or are being contravened by any cable operator , he may seize the 
equipment being used by such cable operator for operating the  cable television network:  
Provided that the seizure  of equipment in case of contravention of sections 5 and 6 shall  be limited to 
the programming service provided on the channel generated at the level of the  cable operator. ] 
12. Confiscation .—The equipment seized under sub -section ( 1) of section 11 shall be liable to 
confiscation unless the cable operator from whom the equipment has been seized registers himself as a 
cable operator under section 4 within a period of thirty days from the date of  seizure of the said 
equipment.  
13. Seizure o r confiscation of equipment not to int erfere with other punishment .—No seizure or 
confiscation of equipment referred to in section 11 or section 12 shall prevent the infliction of any 
punishment to which the person affected thereby is liable un der the provisions of this Act . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 21 of 2011  s. 7, for “equipment” (w.e.f.25 -10-2011).  
2. The p roviso omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
3. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
5. Subs. by  s. 10,  ibid.,for section 11 (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  8 
 14. Giving of opportunity to the cabl e operator of seized equipment .—(1) No order adjudicating 
confiscation of the equipment referred to in section 12 shall be made unless the cable operator has been 
given a notice in writing informing him of the grounds  on which it is proposed to confiscate such 
equipment and giving him a reasonable opportunity of making a representation in writing, within such 
reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against the confiscation and if he so desires of being 
heard in the matter:  
Provided that where no such notice is given within a period of ten days from the date of the seizure of 
the equipment, such equipmen t shall be returned after the expiry of that period to the cable operator from 
whose possession it was seize d. 
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908) shall, so far as may be, apply to every proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
15. Appeal .—(1) Any  person aggrieved by any decision of the court adjudicating a confiscation of 
the equipment may prefer an a ppeal to the court to which an appeal lies from the decisi on of such court.  
(2) The appellate court may, after giving the appellant an opportunity of  being heard, pass such order 
as it thinks fit confirming, modifying or revising the decision appealed against or may send back the case 
with such directions as it may think fit for a fresh decision or adjudication, as the case may be, after 
taking ad ditional evidence if necessary.  
(3) No further appeal shall lie against the order of the co urt made under sub -section ( 2). 
CHAPTER IV  
OFFENCE S AND PENALTIES  
16. Punishment for contraven tion of provisions of this Act .—1[(1)] Whoever  contravenes any of 
the provisions of  this Act shall be punishable, — 
(a) for the first offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years  or with fine 
which may extend to on e thousand rupees or with both;  
(b) for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years 
and with fine which may extend to five thousand rupe es. 
2[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
contravention of section 4A shall be a cognizable offence under this section.]  
17. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the c onduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall  
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such perso n liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence  under this Act has  
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any negligence on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded aga inst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
                                                           
1. Section 16 numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by Act 2 of 2003,  s. 5 (w.e.f. 3 1-12-2002).  
2. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 3 1-12-2002).  9 
 (b) “director”  in relation to a fi rm means a partner in the firm.  
18. Cognizance of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act except upon a comp laint in writing made 1[by anyauthoris ed officer ]. 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANE OUS 
19. Power to prohibit transmission of certain  programmes in public interest .—Where 2[any 
authoris ed officer ], thinks it necessary or expedient so to do in the public interest, he may, by order, 
prohibit any cable operator from transmitting or re -transmitting 3[any programme or channel if, it is not in 
conformity with the prescribed programme code referred to in s ection 5and advertisement code referred to 
in section 6 or if it is] likely to promote, on grounds of religion, race, language, caste or community or any 
other ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill -will between different religious, 
racial, linguistic or regional groups or castes or communities o r which is likely to disturb the public 
tranquillity.  
20. Power to prohibit operation of cable televis ion network in public interest .—4[1]Where the 
Central Government thinks it necessary or expedient so to do in public interest, it may prohibit the 
operat ion of any cable television  network in such areas as it may, by notification in the Official G azette, 
specify in this behalf.  
5[(2) Where the Central Government thinks it necessary or expedient so to do in the  interest of the — 
(i) sovereignty  or integrity of India; or  
(ii) security of India; or  
(iii) friendly relations of India with any foreign State; or  
(iv) public order, decency or morality,  
it may, by order, regulate or prohibit the transmission or re -transmission of any channel or  programm e. 
(3) Where the Central Government considers that any programme of any channel is not inconformity 
with the prescribed  programme code referred to in s ection 5 or the prescribed  advertisement code referred 
to in s ection 6, it may by order, regulate or proh ibit the  transmission or re -transmission of such 
programme ]. 
21. Applic ation of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the Drugs and C osmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940 ), the Pharmacy Act, 1948  
(8 of 1948 ), the Emblems and Names (Prevent ion of Improper Use) Act, 1950 (12 of 1950 ), the Drugs 
(Control) Ac t, 1950 (26 of 1950 ), the Cinematograph Act, 1952 (37 of 1952 ), the Drugs and Magic 
Remedies (Objection able Advertisements) Act, 1954 (21 of 1954 ), the Prevention of Food Adulteration 
Act, 1954 (37 of 1954 ), the Prize Competitions Act, 1955 (42 of 195 5), the Copyright Act, 1957  
(14 of 1957 ), the Trade an d Merchandise Marks, Act, 1958 (43 of 1958 ), the Indecent Representation of 
Women (Pro hibition) Act,  1986 (60 of 1986 ) 6[, the Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986 ) and the 
Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997 (24 of 1997)].  
22. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 2000, s. 7, for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
2. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “any particular programme if it is”  (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
4. Section 20 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
5. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2000).  
6. Subs.  by Act 21 of 2011, s.11, for “and the Consumer Protection Act, 1986” (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  10 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
1[(a) the eligibility criteria for different categories of cable operators under sub -section( 2) of 
section 4; ] 
2[(aa) the form of application, documents to be accompanied and the fees payable  under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 4; ] 
3[(aaa) the terms and conditions of registration under sub -section ( 6) of section4; ] 
4[(aaaa ) the appropriate measures under sub -section ( 2) of section 4A for implementation  of the 
notification under sub -section ( 1) of that section; ] 
(b) the programme  code under s ection 5;  
(c) the advertisement code under s ection 6;  
(d) the form of register to be mainta ined by a cable operator under s ection 7;  
4[(da) the specifications of interference standards for interfering with any telecommunication  
system under se ction 10; ] 
(e) any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days  which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyth ing p reviously done under that rule.  
23. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Cable Television Networks (Regulation) Ordinance, 1995  
 (Ord. 3 of 1995 ) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance, s hall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provision of this Act.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 21 of 2011, s. 12,  for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 25-10-2011).  
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for clause ( aa) (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for clause ( aaa) (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
4. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 25 -10-2011).  
--------------------------The Delhi Rent Act, 1995--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI RENT ACT, 1995  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Certain provisions not to apply to premises.  
4. Registration of tenancy agreements.  
5. Inheritability of tenancy.  
CHAPTER II  
RENT  
6. Rent payable.  
7. Standard rent.  
8. Other charges payable.  
9. Revision of rent in certain cases.  
10. Notice of revision of rent.  
11. Rent a uthority to fix standard rent, etc.  
12. Fixation of interim rent.  
13. Limitation for application for fixation of standard rent, etc.  
14. Limitation of liability of middlemen.  
15. Receipt to be given for rent paid.  
16. Deposit of rent by tenant.  
17. Time limit for making deposit and consequences of incorrect particulars in application for 
deposit.  
18. Saving as to acceptance of rent and other charges payable and forfeiture thereof in deposit.  
CHAPTER III  
REPAIRS OF PREMISES  
19. Duties of landlord.  
20. Duties of tenant.  
21. Cutting off or withholding essential supply or service.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROTECTION OF TENANTS AGAINST EVICTION  
22. Protection of tenant ag ainst eviction.  
23. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to accrue to certain persons.  
24. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to accrue to members of the armed forces, etc.  
25. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to accrue to Central Government and State 
Government employees.  
26. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to accrue to widows, handicapped persons and 
old persons.  
27. Payment of rent during eviction proceedings.  
28. Restrictions on sub -letting.  
29. Notice of creation and termination of sub -tenancy.  
30. Sub-tenant to be tenant in certain cases.  
31. Recovery of possession for occupation and re -entry.  
32. Recovery of possession for repairs and re -building and re -entry.  
33. Recovery of possession in case of tenancies for limited period.  2 
 SECTIONS  
34. Special provision for recovery of possession in certain cases.  
35. Permission to construct additional structures.  
36. Special provision regarding vacant building sites.  
37. Vacant possession to landlord.  
CHAPTER V  
HOTEL S AND LODGING HOUSES  
38. Application of the C hapter.  
39. Fixing of fair rate.  
40. Revision of fair rate.  
41. Charges in excess of fair rate not recoverable.  
42. Recovery of p ossession by manager of a hotel or the owner of a lodging house.  
CHAPTER VI  
RENT AUTHORITIES  
43. Appointment of Rent Authorities and additional Ren t Authorities.  
44. Powers of Rent Authority.  
45. Procedure to be followed by Rent Authority.  
CHAPTER VII  
DELHI RENT TRIBUNAL  
46. Establishment of Delhi Rent Tribunal . 
47. Composition of Tribunal and Benches thereof.  
48. Qualifications for appointment as Chairman and Members.  
49. Term of office.  
50. Seniormost Member to act as Chairman or discharge his function s in certain circumstances.  
51. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of services of Chairman and other Members.  
52. Resignation and removal.  
53. Provision as to the holding of  offices by Chairman and Member on ceasing to be such Chairman 
or Member.  
54. Financial and administrative powers of Chairman.  
55. Staff of the Tribunal.  
56. Distribution of business among the Benches.  
57. Jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal.  
58. Power to punis h for contempt.  
59. Application to Tribunal.  
60. Procedure of Tribunal.  
61. Appeal to the Tribunal.  
62. Conditions as to making of interim orders.  
63. Right of applicant to take assistance of legal practitioner.  
64. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench to another.  
65. Decision to be by majority.  
66. Exclusion of jurisdiction of courts except the Supreme Court.  
67. Transfer of pending cases.  
68. Proceedings before the Tribunal to be judicial proceedings.  
69. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants.  
70. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
71. Criminal jurisdiction of the Tribunal.  
72. Amendment of orders.  
73. Final ity of orders.  
 
 3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
PENALTIES  
SECTIONS  
74. Penalties.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
75. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred in respect of certain matters.  
76. Rent Authorities to be p ublic servants.  
77. Protection of  action taken in good faith.  
78. Special provision regarding decrees affected by the Delhi Tenants (Temporary Protection) Act, 
1956 and the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958.  
79. Transfer of pending cases to Rent Authority.  
80. Power of Central  Government to remove difficulties.  
81. Power to make rules.  
82. Repeal and savings.  
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.  
SCHEDULE III.  
SCHEDULE IV.  
 
 
  4 
 THE DELHI RENT ACT, 1995  
ACT NO. 33 OF 1995  
[23rd August , 1995.]  
An Act to provide for the regulat ion of rents , repairs and mainte nance and evictions relating to 
premises and of rates of hotels and lodging houses in the National Capital Territory of Delhi.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Delhi Rent Act, 1995.  
(2) It extends to the areas included within the limits of the New Delhi Municipal Council and the 
Delhi Cantonment Board and to urban areas within the limits of the Municipal Corporation of Delhi for 
the time being:  
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exclude any area 
from the operation of this Act or any provision thereof:  
Provided further that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exclude 
any premises or class of buildings from the operation of this Act or any provision thereof.  
(3) It sha ll come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Bench” means a Bench of the Tribunal;  
(b) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Tribunal;  
(c) “fair rate” means the fair rate fixed under section 39 and includes the rate as revised under 
section 40;  
(d) “hotel or lodging house ” means a building or a part of a building where lodging, with or 
without board or other services, is provided for a monetary consider ation;  
(e) “landlord” means a person who, for the time being is receiving, or is entitled to receive, the 
rent of any premises, whether on his own account or on account of or on behalf of, or for the benefit 
of, any other person or as a trustee, guardian o r receiver for any other person or who would so receive 
the rent or be entitled to receive the rent , if the premises were let to a tenant;  
(f) “lawful i ncrease” means an increase in rent permitted under the provisions of this Act;  
(g) “manager of a hotel ” includes any person in charge of the management of the hotel;  
(h) “Member” means a Member of the Tribunal and includes the Chairman;  
(i) “owner of a lodging house ” means a person who receives or is entitled to receive whether on 
his own account or on beha lf of himself and others or as an agent or a trustee for any other person, 
any monetary c onsideration from any person on acco unt of board, lodging or other s ervices provided 
in the lodging house;  
(j) “premises” means any building or part of a building whic h is, or is intended to be, let 
separately for use as a residence or for non -residential use or for any other purpose, and includes — 
(i) the garden, grounds and out -houses , if any, appertaining to such building or part of the 
building;  
(ii) any  fittings to such building or part of the building for the mor e beneficial enjoyment 
thereof;  
but does not include a room in a hotel or a lodging  house;  
(k) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  5 
 (l) “Rent Authority ” means an authority  appointed under sub-section  (1) of section 43 and 
includes an additional Rent Authori ty appointed under sub -section (2) of that section;  
(m) “standard rent ”, in relation to any premises, means the rent calculated under section 7;  
(n) “tenant” means any pe rson by whom or on whose account or behalf the rent of any premises is 
or, but for a special contract, would be payable, and includes — 
(i) a sub -tenant;  
(ii) any person continuing in possession after the termination of his tenancy,  
but does not include — 
(i) any person against whom an order or decree for eviction has been made, except where 
such decree or order for eviction is liable to be re -opened under the proviso to section 3 of the 
Delhi Rent Control (Amendment) Act, 1976 (18 of 1976) ; 
(ii) any person t o whom a licence as defined in section 52 of the Indian  Easements Act, 1882 
(5 of 1882 ) has been granted;  
(o) “Tribunal” means the Delhi Rent Tribunal established under section 46;  
(p) “urban area ” has the same meaning as in the Delhi Municipal Corporation  Act, 1957             
(66 of 1957) . 
3. Certain provisions not to apply to premises .—(1) Nothing in th is Act shall apply — 
(a) to any premises belonging to the Government or a local authority;  
(b) to any tenancy or other like relationship created by a grant from the Government in respect of 
the premises taken on lease , or requisitioned, by the Government:  
Provided that where any premises belonging to Government have been or are lawfully let out by 
any person by virtue of an agreement with the Government or otherwise, then, notwithstanding any 
judgment, decree or order of any court or other authority, the provisions of this A ct shall apply to 
such tenancy;  
(c) to any premises, whether residential or not  and whether let out before or after the 
commencement of this Act, whose monthly deemed rent on the date of commencement of this Act 
exceeds three thousand and five hundred rupees;  
(d) to any premises constructed on or after the 1st day of December, 1988 b ut before the 
commencement of this Act for a period of ten years from the date of completion of such construction;  
(e) to any premises constructed on or after the commencement of this Act, for a period of fifteen 
years from the date of completion of such c onstruction;  
(f) to any premises, being a premises not let out within seven years before letting out the same, for 
a period of fifteen years from the date it is let out;  
(g) to any premises let  out to a citizen of a foreign c ountry or an embassy, high commission, 
legation or commission of a foreign State or such intern ational organisation as may be s pecified by 
the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette;  
(h) to any premises belonging to such religious, charitable or educational trust  or class of trusts as 
may be specified by the Central Government by notification in the Official Gazette;  
(i) to any tenancy, whether entered before or after the commencement of this Act, for a period of 
twenty years or more and registered under the Regis tration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) and not terminable 
before its expiration  at the option of the landlord.  
Explanation  I.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the provisions of this Act shall 
apply to any premises, not being a premises mention ed in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) let out to the Government or a local authority;  
(b) let out by a hire -purchaser, lessee or sub -lessee, by whatever name called, who has been 
allotted such premises by the Delhi Development Authority or any other local authority by way of an 6 
 agreement of hire -purchase, lease or sub -lease, even before the f ull ownership rights accrue to such 
hire-purchaser, lessee or sub -lessee, as the case may be.  
Explanation  II.—“Premises belonging to the Government or a local authority ” shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any judgment, decree or order of a court,  not include a building erected on any land 
held by any person from the Government or a local authority by virtue of an agreement, a lease, licence or 
grant although such land under the conditions of such agreement, lease, licence or grant may continue to 
belong to the Government or a local authority.  
Explanation III .—“Deemed rent on the date of commencement of this Act ” shall be the rent 
calculated in the manner provided in section 7, together with revision, if any, as provided in section 9 and 
decreased in the case of premises constructed after the commencement of this Act at the same rate as the 
rate of enhancement sti pulated in Schedule I to reflect the position on the date of the commencement of 
this Act.  
Explanation IV .—“Date of completion of construction ” shall be the date of completion as intimated 
to the concerned authority or of assessment to property tax, whiche ver is earlier, and, where the premises 
have been constructed in stages, the date on which the initial building was completed and an intimation 
thereof was sent to the concerned authority or was assessed to property tax, whichever is earlier.  
Explanation V .—“Premises constructed ” shall include — 
(i) re-building of more than seventy -five per cent . of an existing building;  
(ii) additional construction to an existing building.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), in the Transfer of Propert y Act, 1882       
(4 of 1882) , the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) and any other law for the time being in force, 
the Rent Authority shall have the jurisdiction to decide all disputes relating to tenancies in respect of the 
premises referred to in clauses ( c) to ( i) of sub -section ( 1). 
4. Registration of tenancy agreements .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 107 of 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882) , no person shall, after the commencement of this Act, let 
or take on rent any premises except by an ag reement in writing.  
(2) Every agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1) or required to be registered under sub-section  (3) 
shall be registered under the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) , within such period as may be prescribed 
and for this purpose the ag reement shall be deemed to be a document for which registration is compulsory 
under section 17 of the said Act.  
(3) Where, in relation to a tenancy created before the commencement of this Act, — 
(a) an agreement in writing was entered into and was not registered under the Registration Act, 
1908 (16 of 1908) , the landlord and the tenant shall jointly present a copy thereof for registration 
before the registering officer under the said Act;  
(b) no agreeme nt in writing was entered into, the landlord and the tenant shall enter into an 
agreement in writing with regard to that tenancy and present the same for registration before the 
registering officer under the said Act:  
Provided that where the landlord and t he tenant fail to present jointly a copy of tenancy agreement 
under clause ( a) or fail to reach an agreement under clause ( b) such landlord and the tenant shall 
separately file the particulars about such tenancy with the prescribed authority in such form a nd in such 
manner and within su ch period as may be prescribed.  
5. Inheritability of tenancy .—(1) In the event of death of a tenant, the right of tenancy shall devolve 
for a period of ten years from the date of his death to his successors in the following o rder, namely: — 
(a) spouse;  
(b) son or daughter or where there are both son and daughter both of them;  
(c) parents;  
(d) daughter -in-law, being the widow of his pre -deceased son:  7 
 Provided that the successor has ordinarily been living in the premises with the  deceased tenant as a 
member of his family up to the date of his death and was de pendent on the deceased tenant:  
Provided further that a right to tenancy shall not devolve upon a successor in case such successor or 
his spouse or any of his dependent son or  daughter is owning or occupying a reside ntial premises in the 
National C apital Territory of Delhi.  
(2) If a person, being a successor mentioned in sub -section ( 1), was ordinarily living in the premises 
with the deceased tenant but was not dependent on him on the date of his death, or he or his spouse or any 
of his dependent son or daughter is owning or occupying a residential premises in the National Capital 
Terri tory of Delhi, such successor shall acquire a right to continue in possession as a tenant for a limited 
period of one year from the date of death of the tenant; and, on the expiry of that period, or on his death, 
whichever is earlier, the right of such suc cessor to continue in possession of the premises shall become 
extinguished.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) where, by reason of sub -section ( 2), the right of any successor to continue in possession of the 
premises be comes extinguished, such extinguishment shall not affect the right of any other successor 
of the same category to continue in possession of the premises but if there is no other successor of the 
same category, the right to continue in possession of the pre mises shall not, on such extinguishment, 
pass on to any other successor specified in any lower category or categories, as the case may be;  
(b) the right of every successor, referred to in sub -section ( 1) to continue in possession of the 
premises shall be p ersonal to him and shall not, on the death of such successor, devolve on any of his 
heirs.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall apply to a non -residential premises and the 
vacant possession of such premises shall be delivered to the land lord within one year — 
(i) of the death of tenant, in case the tenant is an individual;  
(ii) of the dissolution of the firm, in case the tenant is a firm;  
(iii) of the winding up of the company, in case the tenant is a company;  
(iv) of the dissolution of the corporate body other than a company, in case the tenant is such a 
corporate body.  
CHAPTER II  
RENT 
6. Rent payable .—(1) The rent payable in relation to a premises shall be — 
(a) the rent agreed to between the landlord and the tenant a s enhanced in the manner provided in 
Schedule I; or  
(b) the standard rent specified under section 7,  
as revised under section 9.  
(2) In the case of a tenancy entered into before the commencement of this Act, the landlord may, by 
notice in writing to the te nant within three months from the date of such commencement, enhance the rent 
as specified under section 7 and the rent so enhanced, shall be payable from the date of such 
commencement.  
7. Standard rent .—(1) “Standard rent ”, in relation to any premises, means the rent calculated on the 
basis of ten per cent. per annum of the aggregate amount of the cost of construction and the market price 
of the land comprised in the premises on the date of co mmencement of the construction:  
Provided that the standard rent calculated as aforesaid shall be enhanced in the manner provided in 
Schedule I.  
 
 8 
 (2) For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) cost of construction shall include cost of electrical fittings, water pumps, overhead water 
tanks,  storage tanks and other water, sewerage and other fixtures and fittings in the premises;  
(b) in case any fixtures and fittings referred to in clause ( a) are in common use by more than one 
occupant in a building, such proportion of cost of the fixtures and  fittings shall be included in the cost 
of construction of the premises as bears the proportion to the plinth area of such premises to the plinth 
area of that building;  
(c) the cost of construction shall be the actual amount spent on construction, and in a  case where 
such amount cannot be ascertained, such cost shall be determined as per the scheduled rates of the 
Central Public Works Department for cost of construction for similar construction for the year in 
which the premises was constructed;  
(d) the mar ket price of the land shall be the price for which the land was bought as determined 
from the deed of sale registered under the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908) , if construction 
commenced in the year of registration or the land rates notified by a local  authority for the year in 
which constru ction was commenced, whichever i s higher;  
(e) the land comprised in the premises shall be the plinth area of the building and such of the 
vacant land up to fifty per cent. of the plinth area as is appurtenant thereto ; 
(f) in a case where a premises forms part of a building having more than one premises , such 
proportion of price of land forming part of such building shall be taken to be the market price of the 
land comprised in the premises as is equal to the proportio n of the plinth area of such premises to the 
plinth area of that building;  
(g) notwithstanding anything contained in clauses ( c) and ( d), the cost of construction and the 
market price of the land comprised in the premises purchased from or allotted by the Government or a 
local authority shall be the aggregate amount payable to such Government or the local authority for 
the premises:  
Provided that the Rent Authority may, for the purpose of arriving at, the cost of construction and the 
market price of the land comprised in the premises , allow addition, subject to a maximum of thirty per 
cent. of amount payable to the Government or the local authority, to the amount so payable for any 
expenditure incurred by the landlord or by the first or any subsequent pur chaser or allottee for any 
improvement, addition or structural alternation in the premises.  
8. Other charges payable .—(1) A tenant shall be liable to pay to the landlord, besides the rent, the 
following charges, namely: — 
(a) charges , not exceeding fifteen per cent. of the rent for the amenities as specified in  Schedule 
II as agreed to between the landlord and the tenant;  
(b) maintenance charges at the rate of ten per cent. of the rent;  
(c) without prejudice to the liability of landl ord to pay the property tax to the local authority, the 
pro rata  property tax in relation to the premises.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of calculating the monthly charges payable by the tenant to the 
landlord towards the property tax, the amount paid o r payable as property tax for the immediately 
preceding year or the estimated tax payable shall form the basis.  
(2) The landlord shall be entitled to recover from the tenant the amount paid by him towards charges 
for electricity or water consumed or other c harges levied by a local or other authority which is ordinarily 
payable by the tenant.  
9. Revision of rent in certain cases .—Where a landlord has at any time, before the commencement 
of this Act with or without the approval of the tenant or after the comme ncement of this Act with the 
written approval of the tenant incurred expenditure for any improvement, addition or structural alteration 
in the premises, not being expenditure on decoration or tenantable repairs necessary or usual for such 
premises, and the  cost of that improvement, addition or alteration has not been taken into account in 9 
 determining the rent of the premises, the landlord may lawfully increase the rent per year by an amount 
not exceeding ten per cent. of such cost.  
(2) Where, after the rent  of a premises has been fixed under this Act, or agreed upon, as the case may 
be, there has been a decrease, diminution or deterioration of accommodation in such premises, the tenant 
may claim a reduction in the rent.  
10. Notice of revision of rent .—(1) Wh ere a landlord wishes to revise the rent of any premises under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 9, he shall give the tenant a notice of his intention to make the revision and, in 
so far as such revision is lawful under this Act, it shall be due and recoverable f rom the date of 
improvement, addition or structural alteration.  
(2) Every notice under sub -section ( 1) shall be in writing signed by or on behalf of the landlord and 
given in the manner provided in section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 18 82). 
11. Rent authority to fix standard rent, etc .—(1) The Rent Authority shall, on an application made 
to him in this behalf, in the prescribed manner, fix in respect of any premises — 
(i) the deemed rent for the purpose of clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(ii) the enhancement in rent in the manner provided in Schedule I ; 
(iii) the standard rent as per the provisions of section 7;  
(iv) the other charges payable as per t he provisions of section 8; and  
(v) the revision in rent as per the provisions  of section 9:  
Provided that it shall not be permissible for the landlord to apply for the fixation of standard rent as 
per the provisions of section 7 in the case of a tenancy entered into after the commencement of this Act.  
(2) In working out the cost of  construction of any premises or the  market price of land comprised in 
such premises for the purposes of section 7 or the expenditure incurred for any improvement, addition or 
structural alteration or the decrease, diminution or deterioration of accommodat ion in a premises for the 
purpose of section 9, the Rent Authority may take the assistance of a prescribed valuer who shall carry 
out the assessment in the manner prescribed.  
(3) In fixing the standard rent of any premises or the lawful increase or decreas e of the rent or 
determining the other charges payable, the Rent Authority shall fix or determine an amount which appears 
to him to be reasonable having regard to the provisions of section 7 or section 9 or section 8 and the other 
circumstances of the case . 
(4) In fixing the standard rent of any premises part of which has been lawfully sub -let, the Rent 
Authority may also fix the standard rent of such part sub -let. 
(5) Where for any reason it is not possible to determine the standard rent of any premises on  the 
principles set forth in section 7, the Rent Authority may fix such rent as would be reasonable having 
regard to the situation, locality and condition of the premises and the amenities provided therein, and 
where there are similar or nearly similar pre mises in the locality, having regard also to the rent payable in 
respect of such premises.  
(6) The standard rent shall in all cases be fixed for a tenancy of twelve months:  
Provided that where any premises are let or re -let for a period of less than twelve  months, the standard 
rent for such tenancy shall bear the same proportion to the annual rent as the period of tenancy bears to 
twelve months.  
(7) In fixing the standard rent of any premises under this section, the Rent Authority shall fix the 
standard rent thereof in an unfurnished state and may also determine an additional charge to be payable 
on account of any fittings or furniture supplied by the landlord and it shall be lawful for the landlord to 
recover such additional charge from the tenant.  
 10 
 (8) in fixing the standard rent or lawful increase or decrease of rent or determining the other charges 
payable in respect of any premises under this section, the Rent Authority shall specify a date from which 
the amount so fixed shall be deemed to have effect : 
Provided that, in the matter of standard rent, in no case the date so specified shall be earlier than the 
date of the filing of the application for the increase or decrease of the standard rent:  
Provided further that if the increase is because of improve ment, addition or structural alteration, it 
shall come into effect from the date of completion of such improvement, addition or alteration.  
(9) The Rent Authority may, while fixing standard rent or lawful increase or decrease in rent or other 
charges payab le, order for payment of the arrears of amount due by the tenant to the landlord in such 
number of instalments as he deems proper.  
12. Fixation of interim rent .—If an application for fixing the standard rent or for determining the 
lawful increase or decrease of rent or other charges payable is made under section 11, the Rent Authority 
shall, as expeditiously as possible, make an order specifying the amount to be paid pending final decision 
on the application and shall appoint the date from which the a mount so specified shall be deemed to have 
effect.  
13. Limitation for application for fixation of standard rent, etc .—A tenant may file an application 
to the Rent Authority for fixing the standard rent of the premises and a landlord or a tenant may file 
application for determining the lawful increase or decrease of rent or other charges payable, — 
(a) in the case of any premises which was let and in which the cause of action for lawful increase 
or decrease of rent or payment of other charges arose, before th e commencement of this Act, within 
two years from such commencement;  
(b) in the case of any premises which was let after the commencement of this Act, — 
(i) for fixing the standard rent thereof , within two years from the date on which the premises 
was let;  
(ii) in any other case, within two years from the date on which cause of action arose:  
Provided that the Rent Authority may entertain the application after the expiry of the said period of 
two years, if he is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by s ufficient cause from filing the application 
in time.  
14. Limitation of liability of middlemen .—No collector of rent or middl eman shall be liable to pay 
to his principal, in respect of any premises, any sum by way of rental and other charges which exceeds t he 
amount which he is entitled under this Act to realise from the tenant or  tenants of the premises.  
15. Receipt to be given for rent paid .—(1) Every tenant shall pay rent and other charges payable 
within the time fixed by contract or in the absence of suc h stipulation, by the fifteenth day of the month 
next following the month for which it is payable and where any default occurs in the payment of rent or 
other charges, the tenant shall be liable to pay simple interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. per a nnum 
from the date on which such payment of rent and other charges payable is due to the date on which it is 
paid.  
(2) Every tenant who makes payment of rent or other charges payable or advance towards such rent or 
other charges to his landlord shall be entitled, against acknowledgment, to obtain forthwith from the 
landlord or his authorised agent a writ ten receipt for the amount paid to him , signed by the landlord or his 
authorised agent:  
Provided that it shall be open to the tenant to remit the rent to his landlord by postal money order.  
(3) If the landlord or his autho rised agent refuses or neglects  to deliver to the tenant the receipt 
referred to in sub -section ( 2), the Rent Authority may, on an application made to him in this behalf by the  
tenant with in two months from the date  of payment and after hearing the landlord or his authorised agent, 
by order direct the landlord or his authorised agent to pay to the tenant, by way of damages, such sum not 
exceeding double the amount of rent or other charges p aid by the tenant and the costs of the application 
and shall also grant a certificate to the tenant in respect of the rent or other charges paid.  11 
 (4) If the landlord or his authorised agent refuses to accept or evades acceptance of receipt of rent and 
other charges payable to him, the tenant may, by notice in writing, ask the landlord to supply him the 
particulars of his bank account in a bank located in the National Capital Territory of Delhi into which the 
tenant may deposit the rent and other charges pay able to the credit of the landlord.  
(5) If the landlord supplies the particulars of his bank account, the tenant shall deposit the rent and 
other charges payable in such bank account from time to time.  
(6) If the landlord does not supply the particulars of  bank account under sub -section ( 4), the tenant 
shall remit the rent and the other charges payable to the landlord from time to time through postal money 
order after deducting the post al charges.  
16. Deposit of rent by tenant .—(1) Where the landlord does not accept any rent and other charges 
payable tendered by the tenant within the time and the manner referred to in section 15 or refuses or 
neglects to deliver a receipt referred to therein or where there is a bona fide  doubt as to the person or 
persons to  whom the rent and other charges are payable, the tenant may deposit such rent and other  
charges payable with the Rent Authority in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that in cases where there is a bona fide  doubt as to the person or persons to whom the rent 
and other charges are payable, the tenant may remit such rent and ot her charges payable to the Rent  
Authority by postal money order.  
(2) The deposit shall be accompanied by an application by the tenant co ntaining the following 
particulars, namely: — 
(a) the premises for which the rent and other charges payable are deposited with a description 
sufficient for identifying the premises;  
(b) the period for which the rent and other charges payable are deposited;  
(c) the name and address of the landlord or the person or persons claiming to be entitled to such  
rent and other charges payable;  
(d) the reasons and circumstances for which the application for depositing the rent and other 
charges payable is made;  
(e) suc h other particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) On deposit of the rent and other charges payable being made, the Rent Authority shall send in the 
prescribed manner a copy of the application to the landlord or the persons claiming to be entitled to the 
rent and other charges payable with an endorsement of the date of the deposit.  
(4) If an application is made for the withdrawal of any deposit of rent and other charges payable the 
Rent Authority shall, if satisfied that the applicant is the person entitled to receive the rent and other 
charges deposited, order the amount of the rent and other charges to be paid to him in the manner 
prescribed:  
Provided that no order for payment of any deposit of rent and other charges payable shall be made by 
the Rent Authority  under this sub -section without giving all the persons named by the tenant in his 
application under sub -section ( 2) as claiming to be entitled to payment of such rent and other charges 
payable an opportunity of being heard and such order shall be without p rejudice to the rights of such 
persons to receive such rent and other charges payable being decided by a court of competent jurisdiction.  
(5) If at the time of filing the application under sub -section ( 4) but not after the expiry of thirty days 
from receiv ing the notice of deposit, the landlord or the person or persons claiming to be entitled to the 
rent and other charges payable complains or complain to the Rent Authority that the statements in the 
tenant’s application of the reasons and circumstances whic h led him to deposit the rent and other charges 
payable are untrue, the Rent Authority, after giving the tenant an opportunity of being heard, may levy on 
the tenant a fine which may extend to an amount equal to two months ’ rent, if the Rent Authority is 
satisfied that the said statements were materially untrue and may order that a sum out of the fine realised 
be paid to the landlord as compensation.  
(6) The Rent Authority may, on the complaint of the tenant and after giving an opportunity to the 
landlord o f being heard, levy on the landlord a fine which may extend to an amount equal to two months ’ 12 
 rent, if the Rent Authority is satisfied that the landlord, without any reasonable cause, refused to accept 
rent and other charges payable though tendered to him within the time referred to in section 15 and may 
further order that sum of fine realised be paid to the tenant as compensation.  
17. Time limit for making deposit and consequences of incorrect particulars in application for 
deposit .—(1) No rent and other c harges deposited under section 16 shall be considered to have been 
validly deposited under that section, unless the deposit is made within twenty -one days of the time 
referred to in section 15 for payment of the rent and other charges payable.  
(2) No such deposit shall be considered to have been validly made, if the tenant wilful ly makes any 
false statement in his application for depositing the rent and other charges payable, unless the landlord has 
withdrawn the amount deposited before the date o f filing an application for the recovery of possession of 
the premises from the tenant.  
(3) If the rent and other charges payable are deposited within the time mentioned in sub -section ( 1) 
and do not cease to be a valid deposit for the reasons mentioned in  sub-section ( 2), the deposit shall 
constitute payment of rent and other charges payable to the landlord, as if the amount deposited had been 
validly tendered.  
18. Saving as to acceptance of rent and other charges payable and forfeiture thereof in 
deposit .—(1) The withdrawal of rent and other charges payable deposited under section 16 in the manner 
provided therein shall not operate as an admission against the person withdrawing it of the correctness of 
the rate of rent and other charges payable the period of default, the amount due, or of any other facts 
stated in the tenant ’s application for depositing the rent and other charges payable under the said section.  
(2) Any rent and other charges payable in deposit which are not withdrawn by the landlord or by t he 
person or persons entitled to receive such rent and other charges payable shall be forfeited to Government 
by an order made by the Rent Authority, if they are not withdrawn before the expiration of five years 
from the date of posting of the notice or de posit.  
(3) Before passing an order of forfeiture, the Rent Authority shall give notice to the landlord or the 
person or persons entitled to receive the rent and other charges in deposit by registered post at the last 
known address of such landlord or perso n or persons and shall also publish the notice in his office and in 
any local newsp aper.  
CHAPTER III  
REPAIRS OF  PREMISES  
19. Duties of landlord .—(1) Subject to any contract in writing to the contrary, every landlord shall 
be bound to keep the premises in good and tenantable repairs in relation to matters falling under Part A of 
Schedule III.  
Explanation .—“Good and tenantable repairs ” under this secti on and section 20 shall mean such 
repairs as shall keep the premises in the same co ndition in which it was let out except for the normal wear 
and tear.  
(2) Where any repairs, in relation to a matter falling under Part A of Schedule III, without which the 
premises are not habitable or useable except with undue inconvenience are to be made and the landlord 
neglects or fails to make them within a period of three months after notice in writing, the tenant may 
apply to the Rent Authority for permission to make s uch repairs himself and may submit to the Rent 
Authority an estimate of the cost of such repairs, and, thereupon, the Rent Authority may, after giving the 
landlord an opportunity of being heard and after considering such estimate of the cost and making suc h 
inquiries as it may consider necessary, by an order in writing, permit the tenant to make such repairs at 
such cost as may be specified in the order and it shall thereafter be lawful for the tenant to make such 
repairs himself and to deduct the cost ther eof, which shall in no case exceed the amount so specified, from 
the rent or otherwise recover it from the landlord:  
Provided that the amount so deducted or recoverable from re nt in any year shall not exceed  one-half 
of the rent payable by  the  tenant  for that year and  any amount  remaining not   recovered in   that year  
shall be deducted or recovered from rent in the subsequent years at the rate of not more than twenty -five 
per cent. of the rent for a month:  13 
 Provided further that where there are more th an one premises owned by a landlord in a building , the 
tenants thereof may jointly carry out the repairs and share the expenses proportionately.  
(3) Nothing in sub -section ( 2) shall apply to a premises which — 
(a) at the time of letting out was not habitabl e or useable except with undue inconvenience and 
the tenant had agreed to take the same in that condition;  
(b) after being let out was caused to be not habitable or useable except with undue inconvenience 
by the tenant.  
20. Duties of tenant .—(1) Every tenant shall be bound to keep the premises in good and tenantable 
repairs in relation to matters falling under Part B of Schedule III.  
(2) Where any repairs, in relation to a matter fall ing under Part B of Schedule III , without which the 
premises are not h abitable or useable except with undue inconvenience, are to be made and the tenant 
neglects or fails to make them within a period of two months after notice in writing, the landlord may 
apply to the Rent Authority for permission to make such repairs himsel f and may submit to the Rent 
Authority an estimate of the cost of such repairs, and, thereupon the Rent Authority may, after giving the 
tenant an opportunity of being heard and after considering such estimate of the cost and making such 
enquiries as he may  consider necessary, by an order in writing, permit the landlord to make such repairs at 
such cost as may be specified in the order, and it shall thereafter be lawful for the landlord to make such 
repairs himself and to recover the cost  of such repairs, wh ich shall in no case exceed the amount so 
specified, from the tenant.  
(3) The landlord or a person authorised by him shall have the right to enter and inspect the premises 
after notice to the tenant in the manner prescribed.  
(4) The tenant shall make good all damages caused to the premises by his negligence within three 
months of being informed in writing to do so by the landlord failing which the landlord may apply to the 
Rent Authority for permission to make good the said damages and the Rent Authority sh all decide the 
matter in the manner provided in sub -section ( 2). 
(5) The tenant shall hand over the possession of the premises on determination of tenancy in the same 
condition, except for the normal wear and tear, as it was in when it was handed over to h im at the 
beginning of such tenancy and in a case where certain damages have been caused, not being damages 
caused by force  majeur , the tenant shall make good the damages caused to the premises failing which the 
landlord may apply to the Rent Authority for  permission to make good the said damages and the Rent 
Authority shall decide the matter in the manner provided in sub -section ( 2). 
(6) The tenant shall not, whether during the subsistence of tenancy or thereafter, demolish any 
improvement or alteration ca rried out by him in the premises or remove any material used in such 
improvement or alteration, other than any fixture of a removable nature, without the permission of the 
landlord failing which such demolition or alteration shall be deemed to be a damage caused by such 
tenant under sub -section ( 4) and shall be dealt with according ly. 
21. Cutting off or withholding essential supply or service .—(1) No landlord or tenant, either by 
himself or through any person purporting to act on his behalf , shall, without just and sufficient cause cut 
off or withhold any essential supply or service enjoyed by the tenant or the landlord, as the case may be, 
in respect of the premises let to him, or as the case may be, under his own occupation.  
(2) If a landlord or a tenant contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the tenant or the landlord, 
as the case may be, may make an application to the Rent Authority complaining of such contravention.  
(3) If the Rent Authority is satisfied that the essential supply or service was wilfully cut off or 
withheld, he may pass an order directing the restoration of the amenities immediately pending the inquiry 
referred to in sub -section ( 4). 
Explanation .—An interim order may be passed under this sub -section without giving notice to the 
landlord or the tenant, as the case may be.  
(4) If the Rent Authority on inquiry finds that the essential supply or service enjoyed by the tenant or 
the landlord was cut off or withheld by the landlord or the tenant, as the case may be, wilfully and without 
just and sufficient cause, he shall make an order directing the restoration of such supply or service.  14 
 (5) The Rent Authority shall complete an enquiry under sub -section ( 4) within a period of one month 
of filing of an application for enquiry unless the Re nt Authority, for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
decides that it is not possible to complete the enquiry within such period.  
(6) The Rent Authority may, in his discretion, direct that compensation not exceeding one thousand 
rupees be paid to — 
(a) the  landlord or the tenant, as the case may be, by the complainant if the application under  
sub-section ( 2) was made frivolously or vexatiously;  
(b) the complainant, if the landlord or the tenant, as the case may be, had cut off or withheld the 
supply or ser vice without just and sufficient cause.  
Explanation I .—In this section, “essential supply or service ” includes supply of water, electricity, 
lights in passages and on staircases, conservancy and sanitary services.  
Explanation II .—For the purposes of this s ection, withholding any essential supply or service shall 
include acts or omissions , attributabl e to the landlord or the tenant,  as the case may be, on account of 
which the essential supply or service is cut off by a local  authority or any other agency.  
CHAPTER IV  
PROTECT ION OF TENANTS AGAINST EVICTION  
22. Protection of tenant against eviction .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained 
in any other law or contract, no order or decree for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be 
made by any court, Tribunal or Rent Authority in favour of the landlord against a tenant save as p rovided 
in sub-section  (2). 
(2) The Rent Authority may, on an application made to him in the prescribed manner, make an order 
for the recovery of possession of the premises on one or more of the following grounds only, namely: — 
(a) that the tenant has neit her paid nor tendered the whole of the arrears of the rent and other 
charges payable for two or more consecutive months legally recoverable from him within two months 
of the date on which a notice of demand for the arrears of such rent and other charges pa yable and 
interest at the rate of fifteen per cent. for the period of default has been served on him by the landlord 
in the manner provided in section 106 of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882  (4 of 1882) : 
Provided that a tenant shall not be entitled to the benefit of service of notice by the landlord under 
this clause where, having obtained such benefit once in respect of any premises, he again makes a 
default in the payment of rent and other charges payabl e in respect of those premises;  
(b) that the tenant has, on or after the 9th day of June, 1952, sub -let, assigned or otherwise parted 
with the possession of the whole or any part of the premises without obtaining the consent in writing 
of the landlord.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, any premises which have been let for being used 
for the purposes of business or profession shall be deemed to have been sub -let by the tenant, if the 
Rent Authority is satisfied that the tenant, without obtaining t he consent in writing of the landlord, 
has, after the 16th day of August, 1958, allowed any person to occupy the whole or any part of the 
premises ostensibly on the ground that such person is a partner of the tenant in the business or 
profession but really  for the purpose of sub -letting such premises to that person;  
(c) that the tenant has used the premises for a purpose other tha n that for which they were let — 
(i) if the premises have been let on  or after the 9th day of June, 1952, without obtaining the 
consent in writing of the landlord;  
(ii) the tenant has not been residing therein, without obtaining his consent:  
Provided that no application for the recovery of possession of any premises shall lie under this 
clause unless the landlord has given to the ten ant a notice in the prescribed manner requiring him to 
stop the misuse of the premises and the tenant has refused or failed to comply with such requirement 
within one month of the date of service of the notice and no order for eviction against the tenant s hall 
be made in such a case, unless the Rent Authority is satisfied that the misuse of the premises is of 15 
 such a nature that it is a public nuisa nce or that it causes damage to the premises or is otherwise 
detrimental to the interests of the landlord;  
(d) that the premises were let for use as a residence and — 
(i) neither the tenant nor any member of his family has been residing therein for a period of 
six months;  
(ii) the tenant has not been residing therein, without a reasonable cause for a period of two 
years, 
immediately before the date of the filing of the application for the recovery of possession thereof:  
Provided that the landlord may, on request in writing of the tenant, permit occupancy of the 
premises by a person other than the tenant or his family  not e xceeding the period of tenancy.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause and clause ( r), “family” means parents, spouse, 
dependent sons and daughters or such other relatives as are ordinarily living with the te nant and are 
dependent upon him;  
(e) that the premises or any part thereof have become unsafe or unfit for human habitation and are 
required by the landlord for carrying out repairs or re -construction which cannot be carried out 
without the premises being vacated:  
Provided that no order for the recovery of possession under this clause, clause ( g), clause ( h) or 
clause ( i) shall be made unless the Rent Authority is satisfied that the plans and estimates of such 
repairs or re -construction, as the case may be, have been properly prepared and tha t the landlord has 
the necessary means to carry out the said repairs or re -construction:  
Provided further that if the landlord proposes to chang e the use  of the premises after                   
re-construction, then, he shall so specify in his application for recovery of possession and, after such 
re-construction, the landlord shall, if it is otherwise permissible under law, utilize the built up area 
equal to the previous area for the original use to the ext ent required for the purpose of sub-section ( 1) 
of section 32 and the rest for any other use;  
(f) that the premises or any part thereof are required by the landlord for the purpose of immediate 
demolition ordered by the Government or any local authority or the premises are required by the 
landlord to carr y out any building work at the instance of the Government or a local authority in 
pursuance of any improvement scheme or development scheme and that such building work cannot 
be carried out without the premises being vacated;  
(g) that the premises or any p art thereof are required by the landlord for carrying out any repairs 
which cannot be carried out without the premises being vacated;  
(h) that the premises are required by the landlord for the purpose of building or re -building or 
making thereto any substa ntial addition or alteration including construction on the terrace or on the 
appurtenant land and that such building or re -building or addition or alteration cannot be carried out 
without the premises being vacated;  
(i) that the premises consist of not mor e than two floors and the same are required by the landlord 
for the purpose of immediate demolition with a view to re -build the same : 
Provided that where the building of which such premises or premises possession in respect of 
which has been recovered unde r clause ( e), clause ( f), clause ( g) or clause ( h) forms a  part has been  
re-built to an extent of less than seventy -five per cent., a tenant so disposse ssed shall have a right to 
re-entry at the new terms of tenancy in a premises in the re -built building equivalent in area to the 
original premises for which he was a tenant;  
(j) that the tenant, his spouse or a dependent son or daughter  ordinarily living with him has,  
whether before or after the commencement of this Act, built or acquired vacant possession of, or been 
allotted a residence:  
Provided that the Rent Authority may in appropriate cases allow the tenant to vacate the premises 
within such period as he may permit but not exceeding one year from the date of passing of orders of 
eviction;  16 
 (k) that the premises were let to the tenant for use as a residence by reason of his being in the 
service or employment of the landlord, and that the tenant has ceased, whether before or after the 
commencement of this Act, to be in such service or employment:  
Provided that no order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on this 
ground if the Rent Authority is of the opinion that there is any bona fide  dispute as to whether the 
tenant has ceased to be in the service or employment of the landlord;  
(l) that the tenant has, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, caused or permitted 
to be caused substantial damage to or such alteration of the premises as has the effect of changing its 
identity or diminishing its value.  
Explanation .—For the  purposes of this clause, “substantial damage ” shall mean such damage as 
shall involve an expen diture equivalent to six months ’ rent or more of the premises or such less 
expenditure as the Rent Authority is satisfied, keeping in view, the special nature of  damage, justifies 
the same to be treated as substantial damage for carrying o ut the repairs for such damage:  
Provided that no order for the recovery of possession of an y premises shall be made on the 
ground specified in this clause, if the tenant, within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the 
Rent Authority, carries out repairs to the damage caused to the satisfaction of the Rent Authority or 
pays to the landlord such amount by way of compensation as the Rent Authority may direct;  
(m) that the tenant or any person residing with the tenant has been convicted of causing nuisance 
or annoyance to a person living in the neighbourhood of the premises or has been convicted of using 
or allowing the use of the premises for an immoral or illega l purpose;  
(n) that the tenant has, notwithstanding previous notice, used or dealt with the premises in a 
manner contrary to any condition imposed on the landlord by the Government or the Delhi 
Development Authority or the Municipal Corporation of Delhi wh ile giving him a lease of the land on 
which the premises are situate:  
Provided that no order for the recovery of possession of any premises shall be made on this 
ground if the tenant, within such time as may be specified in this behalf by the Rent Authorit y, 
complies with the condition imposed on the landlord by any of the authorities referred to in this 
clause or pays to the authority imposing such conditions the amount by way of compensation as the 
Rent Authority may direct;  
(o) that the tenant in his rep ly having denied the ownership of landlord, has failed to prove it or 
that such denial was not made in a bona fide  manner ; 
(p) that the person in occupation of the premises has failed to prove that he is a bona fide  tenant;  
(q) that the tenant after having  agreed with or having informed the landlord in writing the date to 
vacate the premises does not do so on or after the date so agreed or informed;  
(r) that the premises let for residential or non -residential purposes are required, whether in the 
same form or after re -construction  or re -building, by the landlord for occupation for residential or 
non-residential purpose for himself or for any member of his family if he is the owner thereof, or for 
any person for whose benefit the premises are held and that th e landlord or such person has no other 
reasonably suitable accommodation:  
Provided that where the landlord has acquired the premises by transfer, no application for the 
recovery of possession of such premises shall lie under this clause unless a period of three years has 
elapsed from the date of the acquisition:  
Provided further that where an order for the recovery of possession of any premises is made on 
the ground specified in this clause, the landlord shall be entitled to obtain possession thereof on the  
expiration of a period of six months in the case of residential premises and one year in the case of 
non-residential premises from the date of passing of eviction order.  
  17 
 Explanation I .—For the purposes of this clause and sections 23 to 26, — 
(i) where the landlord in his application supported by an affidavit submits that the premises 
are required by him for occupation for himself or for any member of his family dependent on 
him, the Rent Authority shall presume that the premises are so required;  
(ii) premises let for a particular use may be required by the landlord for a different use if such 
use is permissible under law.  
Explanation II .—For the purposes of this clause or section 23, section 24, section 25 or       
section 26, an occupation by the landlo rd of any part of a building of which any premises let out by 
him forms a part sha ll not disentile him to recover  the possession of such premises.  
Explanation III .—For the purposes of this clause, “owner of the premises ” includes a person who 
has been allotted such premises by the Delhi Development Authority or any other local authority by 
way of an agreement of hire -purchase, lease or sub -lease, even before the full ownership rights accrue 
to such hire -purchaser, lessee or sub-lessee, as the case may be.  
(3) In any proceeding for eviction under clause ( e), (f), (g), (h) or ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22 
or section 23 or section 24 or section 25 or section 26, the Rent Authority may allow eviction from only a 
part of  the premises if the lan dlord is agreeable to the same:  
Provided that, in case of such part -eviction, the rent and other charges payable by the tenant will be 
decreased in proportion to the part vacated.  
(4) No order for the recovery of possession in any p roceeding under sub -section ( 2) shall be binding 
on any sub -tenant referred to in section 29 who has given notice of his sub -tenancy to the landlord under 
the provision of that section, unless the sub -tenant is made a party to the proceeding and the order for 
eviction is made binding on him.  
23. Right to recover immediate possession of pr emises to accrue to certain persons .—(1) Where 
a person in occupation of any residential premises allotted to him by the Government or any local 
authority is required by, o r in pursuance of, any general or special order made by that Government or 
authority to vacate such residential accommodation, or in default to incur certain obligations, on the 
ground that he or his spouse or his dependent son or daughter, as the case may  be, owns, in the National 
Capital Territory of Delhi a residential accommodation, there shall accrue, on and from the date of such 
order, to such person, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter, as the case may be, notwithstanding 
anything contained e lsewhere in this Act or in any other law for the time being in force or in any contract 
(whether express or implied), custom or usage to the contrary, a right to recover immediate possession of 
any premises let out by him, his spouse or his dependent son o r daughter, as the case may be:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be construed as conferring a right on such person, his 
spouse or his dependent son or daughter, as the case may be, owning, in the National Capital Territory of 
Delhi; two or more dwelling houses, to recover the possession of more than one dwelling house and it 
shall be lawful for such person, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter, as the case may be, to 
indicate the dwelling house possession of which he intended to recover.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, sections 24, 25 and 26, immediate possession 
shall mean possession recoverable on the expiry of sixty days from the date of order of eviction.  
(2) Where a landlord exercises the right of recovery conferred  on him by sub -section ( 1) or       
section 22, 24, 25 or 26 and he had received, — 
(a) any rent in advance from the tenant, he shall, within a period of ninety days from the date of 
recovery of possession of the premises by him, refund to the tenant such a mount as represents the rent 
payable for the unexpired portion of the contract, agreement or lease;  
(b) any other payment, he shall, within the period aforesaid, refund to the tenant a sum which 
shall bear the same proportion to the total amount so receive d, as the unexpired portion of the 
contract, agreement or lease bears to the total period of contract, agreement or lease:  
Provided that, if any default is made in making any refund as aforesaid, the landlord shall be liable to 
pay simple interest at the r ate of fifteen per cent. per annum on the amount which he has omitted or failed 
to refund : 18 
 Provided further that it shall be permissible for the landlord to set off any amount which he is 
lawfully entitled to recover from the tenant against the refund due to the tenant.  
24. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to accrue to members of the armed 
forces, etc .—(1) Where a person — 
(a) is a released or retired person from any armed forces and the premises let out by him, his 
spouse or his dependent s on or daughter, as the case may be, are required for his own residence; or 
(b) is a dependent of a member of any armed forces who had been killed in action and the 
premises let out by such member are required for the residence of the family of such member,  
such person, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter, as the case may be, may, within one year from 
the date of his release or retirement from such armed forces or, as the case may be , the date of death of 
such member, or within a period of one year f rom the date of commencement of this Act, whichever is 
later, apply to the Rent Authority for recovery of immedi ate possession of such premises.  
(2) Where a person is a member of any of the armed forces and has a period of less than one year 
preceding the date of his retirement and the premises let out by him, his spouse or his dependent son or 
daughter, as the case may be, are required for his own residence after his retirement, he, his spouse or his 
dependent son or daughter, as the case may be, may, at a ny time, within a period of one year before the 
date of his retirement, apply to the Rent Authority for recovery of immediate possession of such premises.  
(3) Where the person, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter referred to in sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2) has let out more than one premises, it shall be open to him, his spouse or his dependent 
son or daughter, as the case may be, to make an application under the sub -section in respect of only one of  
the premises chosen.  
Explanation .—For the p urposes of this section, “armed forces ” means an armed force of the Union 
constituted under an Act of Parliament and includes a member of the police force constituted under 
section 3 of the Delhi Police Act, 1978 (34 of 1978) . 
25. Right to recover immediat e possession of premises to accrue to Central Government and 
State Government employees .—(1) Where a person is a retired employee of the Central Government or 
of a State Government and the premises let out by him, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter are 
required for his own residence, such employee, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter, as the case 
may be, may, within one year from the date of his retirement or within a period of one year from the date 
of commencement of this Act, whic hever is later, apply to the Rent Authority for recovery of immediate 
possession of such premises.  
(2) Where a person is an employee of the Central Government or of a State Government and has a 
period of less than one year preceding the date of his retirem ent and the premises let out by him or his 
spouse or dependent son or daughter are required by him for his own residence after his retirement, he, his 
spouse or his dependent son or daughter, as the case may be, may, at any time within a period of one year  
before the date of retirement, apply to the Rent Authority for recovery of immediate possession of such 
premises.  
(3) Where the person, his spouse or his dependent son or daughter referred to in sub -section ( 1) or in 
sub-section ( 2) has let out more than one premises, it shall be open to him, his spouse or his dependent 
son or daughter, as the case may be, to make an application under the sub -section in respect of only one of 
the premises chosen.  
26. Right to recover immediate possession of premises to acc rue to widows, handicapped 
persons and old persons .—(1) Where the landlord is — 
(a) a widow and the premises let out by her, or by her husband,  
(b) a handicapped person and the premises let out by him,  
(c) a person who is of the age of sixty -five years or more and the premises l et out by him,  
is required by her or him or for her or his family or for any one ordinarily living with her or him for 
residential or non -residential use, she or he may apply to the Re nt Authority for recovery of immediate 
possession of such premises.  19 
 (2) Where the landlord referred to in sub -section ( 1) has let out more than one premises, it shall be 
open to him to make an application under that sub -section in respect of any one reside ntial and one non -
residential premises each chosen by him.  
Explanation  I.—For the purposes of this section, “handicapped person ” shall mean a person who is as 
if being an assessee  entitled for the time being to the benefits of deduction under section 80U of the 
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) . 
Explanation II .—The right to recover possession under this section shall be exercisable only once in 
respect of each for residential and f or non -residential use.  
27. Payment of rent during eviction proceedings .—(1) If, in any proceeding for the recovery of 
possession of any premises on any ground other than that referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 22, the tenant contests the claim for eviction, the landlord may, at any stage of the proceeding, 
make an application to the Rent Authority for an order on the tenant to pay to the landlord the amount of 
rent legally recoverable from the tenant and the Rent Authority may, after g iving the parties an 
opportunity of being heard, make an order directing the tenant to pay to the landlord or deposit with the 
Rent Authority within one month of the date of the order, an amount calculated at the rate of rent at which 
it was last paid for the period for which the arrears of the rent were legally recoverable from the tenant 
including the period subsequent thereto up to the end of the month previous to that in which payment or 
deposit is made and to continue to pay or deposit, month by month,  by the fifteenth of each succeeding 
month, a sum equivalent to the rent at that rate.  
(2) If, in any proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 1), there is any dispute as to the amount of rent 
payable by the tenant, the Rent Authority shall, within fifteen d ays of the date of the first hearing of the 
proceeding, fix an interim rent in relation to the premises to be paid or deposited in accordance with the 
provisions of sub -section ( 1), until the rent in relation thereto is determined having regard to the 
provisions of this Act, and the amount of arrears, if any, calculated on the basis of the rent so determined 
shall be paid or deposited by the tenant within one month of the date on which the standard rent is fixed 
or such further time as the Rent Authority ma y allow in this behalf.  
(3) If, in any proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 1), there is any dispute as to the person or persons 
to whom the rent is payable, the Rent Authority may direct the tenant to deposit with the Rent Authority 
the amount payable by him under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be, and in such a 
case, no person shall be entitled to withdraw the amount in deposit until the Rent Authority decides the 
dispute and makes an order for payment of the same.  
(4) If the Rent Authority is satisfied that any dispute referred to in sub -section ( 3) has been raised by a 
tenant for reasons which are false or frivolous, the Rent Authority may order the defence against eviction 
to be struck out and proceed with the hearing of the appl ication.  
(5) If a tenant fails to make payment or deposit as required by this section, the Rent Authority may 
order the defence against eviction to be struck out and proceed with the hearing of the application.  
28. Restrictions on sub -letting .—(1) Where at  any time before the 9th day of June, 1952, a tenant 
has sub -let the whole or any part of the premises and the sub -tenant is, at the commencement of this Act, 
in occupation of such premises, then, notwithstanding that the consent of the landlord was not ob tained 
for such sub -letting, the premises shall be deemed to have been lawfully sub -let. 
(2) No premises which have been sub -let either in whole or in part on or after the 9th day of         
June, 1952, without obtaining the consent in writing of the landl ord, shall be deemed to have been 
lawfully sub -let. 
(3) After the commencement of this Act, no tenant shall, without the previous consent in writing of 
the landlord, — 
(a) sub -let the whole or any part of the premises held by him as a tenant; or  
(b) transfer or assign his rights in the tenancy or in any part thereof.  
29. Notice of creation and termination of sub -tenancy .—Where, after the commencement of this 
Act, any premises are sub -let either in whole or in part by the tenant with the previous consent in writing 
of the landlord, the tenant or the sub -tenant to whom the premises are sub -let may, in the prescribed 20 
 manner, give notice to the landlord of the creation of the sub -tenancy within one month of the date of 
such sub -letting and notify the termination of such sub -tenancy within one month of such termination . 
30. Sub -tenant to be tenant in certain cases .—Where an orde r for eviction in respect of any 
premises is made under section 22 against a tenant but not against a sub -tenant referred to in section 29 
and a notice of the sub -tenancy has been given to the landlord, the sub -tenant shall, with effect from the 
date of th e order, be deemed to have become a tenant holding the premises in his occupation directly 
under the landlord on the same terms and conditions on which the tenant would have h eld from the 
landlord, if the tenancy had continued.  
31. Recovery of possession f or occupation and re -entry .—(1) Whe re a landlord recovers 
possession of any premises from the tenant in pursuance of an order made under clause ( r) of sub-section 
(2) of section 22, or under section 23, 24, 25, 26 or 33, the landlord shall not, except with  the permission 
of the Rent Authority obtained in the prescribed manner, re -let the whole or any part of the premises 
within three years from the date of obtaining such possession, and in granting such permission, the Rent 
Authority may direct the landlord  to put such evicted tenant in possession of the premises:  
Provided that where a landlord recovers possession of any premises from the tenant in pursuance of 
an order made under clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22 for occupation after re -constructi on or    
re-building, the period of three years shall be reckoned  from the date of completion of re-construction or 
re-building, as the case may be.  
(2) Where a landlord recovers possession of any premises as aforesaid and the premises are not 
occupied by the landlord or by the person for whose benefit the premises are held, within two months of 
obtaining such possession, or the premises having been so occupied are, at any time within three years 
from the date of obtaining possession, re -let to any person o ther than the evicted tenant without obtaining 
the permission of the Rent Authority under sub -section ( 1) or the possession of such premises is 
transferred to another person for reasons which do not appear to the Rent Authority to be bona fide , the 
Rent Au thority may, on an application made to him in this behalf by such evicted tenant within such time 
as may be prescribed, direct the landlord to put the tenant in possession of the premises on the same terms 
and conditions if the premises are in the same for m or on new terms and conditions if the premises have 
been re -constructed or re -built if he has not already built, acquired vacant possession of, or been allotted 
another premises or to pay him such compensation as the Rent Authority thinks fit or both, as  the facts 
and circumstances of the case may warrant.  
32. Recovery of possession for  repairs and re -building and re -entry .—(1) In making any order on 
the grounds specified in clause ( e), (f), (g), (h) or ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22 , the Rent Authority 
shall fix the new rent and ascertain from the tenant whether he elects to be placed in occupation of the 
premises or part thereof from which he is to be evicted and if the tenant so elects, shall record the fact of 
the election in the o rder and specify therein the date on or before w hich he shall deliver possession so as 
to enable the landlord to commence the work of repairs or building or re -building, as the case may be, and 
the date before which the landlord shall deliver the possessio n of the said premises.  
(2) If the tenant delivers possession on or before the date specified in the order, the landlord shall, on 
the completion of the work of repairs or building or re -building, place the tenant in occupation of the 
premises or part ther eof before the date specified in sub -section ( 1) or such extended date as may be 
specified by the Rent Authority by an order.  
(3) If, after the tenant has delivered possession on or before the date specified in the order, the 
landlord fails to commence the  work of repairs or building or re -building within three months of the 
specified date, the Rent Authority may, on an application made to him in this behalf by the tenant, within 
such time as may be prescribed, order the landlord to place the tenant in occu pation of the premises on the 
same terms and conditions and to pay to the tenant such compensation as the Rent Authority thinks fit.  
(4) If the tenant has delivered possession on or before the date specified in the order and the landlord 
fails to place the  tenant in occupation of the premises after repairs, building or re -building, as the case 
may be, in accordance with sub -section ( 2), the Rent Authority may, on an application made to him in this 
behalf by the tenant within such time as may be prescribed, order the landlord to place the tenant in 
occupation of the premises on revised terms and conditions and to pay to the tenant such compensation as 
the Rent Authority thinks fit.  21 
 33. Recovery of possession in case of tenancies for limited period .—(1) Where a landlord does not 
require the whole or any part of any premises for a particular period, and after obtaining the permission of 
the Rent Authority in the prescribed manner, lets the whole of the premises or part thereof as a residence 
for such per iod, not being more than five years, as may be agreed to in writing between the landlord and 
the tenant and the tenant does not, on the expiry of the said period, vacate such premises, then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in section 22 or in any other law, the Rent Authority may, on an 
application made to him in this behalf by the landlord within such time as may be prescribed, place the 
landlord in vacant possession of the premises or part thereof by evicting the tenant and every other person 
who may b e in occupation of such premises.  
(2) The Rent Authority shall not — 
(i) grant permission under sub -section ( 1) in relation to a premises consecutively more than two 
times except for good and sufficient reasons to be recorded in writing.  
Explanation .—A permission granted under sub -section ( 1) shall not be construed to be 
consecutive, if a period of five years or more has elapsed after the expiry of the last limited period 
tenancy;  
(ii) entertain any application from the tenant calling in question the bona fides  of the landlord in 
letting the premises under this sect ion. 
(3) All applications made before the Rent Authority and appeals made before the Tribunal by the 
tenant shall abate on the expiry of period for which permission has been granted under                         
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) While making an order under sub -section ( 1), the Rent Authority may award to the landlord 
damages for the use or occupation of the premises at double the last rent paid by the tenant together with 
interest at the rat e of fifteen per cent. per annum for the period from the date of such order till the date of 
actual vacation by the tenant.  
34. Special provision for recovery of possession in certain cases .—Where the landlord in respect 
of any premises is any company or other body corporate of any public institution, then , notwithstanding 
anything contained in section 22 or in any other law, the Rent Authority may , on an application made to 
him in this behalf by such landlord , place the landlord in vacant possession of su ch premises by evicting 
the tenant and every other person who may be in occupation thereof, if the Rent Authority is satisfied 
that— 
(a) the tenant to whom such premises were let for use as a residence at a time when he was in the 
service or employment of the landlord, has ceased to be in such service or employment and the 
premise s are required for the use of employees of such landlord; or  
(b) the tenant has acted in contravention of the terms, express or implied, under which he was 
authorised to occupy suc h premises; or  
(c) any other person is in unauthorised occupation of such premises; or  
(d) the premises are required bona  fide by the landlord for the use o f employees of such landlord 
or, in the case of a public institution,  for the furtherance of its act ivities.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “public institution ” includes any educational 
institution, library, hospital and charitable dispensary but does no t include any such institution set up by a 
private trust.  
35. Permission to construct additional structures .—Where the landlord proposes to make any 
improvement in, or construct any additional structure on, any building which has been let to a tenant and 
the tenant refuses to allow the landlord to make such improvement or construct such add itional structure 
and the Rent Authority, on an application made to him in this behalf by the landlord, is satisfied that the 
landlord is ready and willing to commence the work and that such work will not cause any undue 
hardship to the tenant, the Rent Au thority may permit the landlord to do such work and may make such 
other order as he thinks fit in the circumstances of the case.  
36. Special provision regarding vacant building sites .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
section 22, where any premises whi ch have been let comprise vacant land upon which it is permissible 22 
 under the building regulations or municipal bye -laws, for the time being in force, to erect any building , 
whether for use as a residence or for any other purpose and the landlord proposing to erect such building 
is unable to obtain possession of the land from the tenant by agreement with him and the Rent Authority, 
on an application made to him in this behalf by the landlord, is satisfied that the landlord is ready and 
willing to commence th e work and that the severance of the vacant land from the rest of the premises will 
not cause undue hardship to the tenant, the Rent Authority may — 
(a) direct such severance ; 
(b) place the landlord in possession of the vacant land;  
(c) determine  the rent payable by the tenant in respect of the rest of the premises; and  
(d) make such other order as he thinks fit in the circum stances of the case.  
37. Vacant possession to landlord .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, where 
the inter est of a tenant in any premises is determined for any reason whatsoever and any order is made by 
the Rent Authority under this Act for the recovery of possession of such premises, the order shall, subject 
to the provisions of section 30, be binding on all persons who may be in occupation of the premises and 
vacant possession thereof shall be given to the landlord by evicting all such persons therefrom:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to any person who has an independent ti tle to such 
premi ses. 
CHAPTER V  
HOTELS AND LODGING HOUSES  
38. Application of the Chapter .—The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all hotels and 
lodging houses in the areas which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify:  
Provided t hat if the Central Government is of opinion that it would not be desirable in the public 
interest to make the provisions of this Chapter applicable to any class of hotels or lodging houses, it may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt such class  of hotels or lodging houses from the operation 
of this Chapter.  
39. Fixing of fair rate .—(1) Where the Rent Authority, on a written complaint or otherwise, has 
reason to believe that the charges made for board or lodging or any other service provided in any hotel or 
lodging house are excessive, he may fix a fair rate to be charged for board, lodging or other services 
provided in the hotel or lodging house and in fixing such fair rate, specify separately the rate for lodging, 
board or other services.  
(2) In determining the fair rate under sub -section ( 1), the Rent Authority shall have regard to the 
circumstances of the case and to the prevailing rate of charges for the same or similar accommodation, 
board and service, during the twelve months immediately pr eceding the 1st day of June, 1951, and any 
general increase in the cost of living after that date.  
40. Revision of fair rate .—On a written application from the manager of a hotel or the owner of a 
lodging house or otherwise, the Rent Authority may, from ti me to time, revise the fair rate to be charged 
for board, lodging or other service in a hotel or lodging house, and fix such rate as he may deem fit 
having regard to any general rise or fall in the cost of living which may have occurred after the fixing of 
fair rate.  
41. Charges in excess of fair rate not recoverable .—When the Rent Authority has determined the 
fair rate of charges in respect of a hotel or lodging house, — 
(a) the manager of the hotel or the owner of the lodging house, as the case may be, sha ll not 
charge any amount in excess of the fair rate and shall not, except with t he previous written permission 
of the Rent Authority, withdraw from the lodger any concession or services allowed at the time when 
the Rent Authority determined the fair rate;  
(b) any agreement for the payment of any charges in excess of such fair rate shall be void in 
respect of such excess and shall be construed as if it were an agreement for payment of the said fair 
rate; 23 
 (c) any sum paid  by a lodger in excess of the fair rate shall be recoverable by him at any time 
within a period of six months from the date of the payment from the manager of the hotel or the 
owner of the lodging house or his legal representatives and may, without prejudi ce to any other mode 
of recovery, be deducted by such lodger from any amount payable by him to such manager or owner.  
42. Recovery of possession by manager of a hotel or the owner of a lodging house .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the mana ger of a hotel or the owner of a lodging house 
shall be entitled to recover possession of the accommodation provided by him to a lodger on obtaining a 
certificate from the Rent Authority certifying — 
(a) that the lodger has be en guilty of conduct which is a  nuisance or which causes annoyance to any 
adjoining or neighbouring lodger.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “nuisance” shall be deemed to include any act which 
constitutes an offence under the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act, 1956  (104 of 1956) ; 
(b) that the accommodation is reasonably and bona fide  required by the owner of the hotel or lodging 
house, as the case may be, either for his own occupation or for the occupation of any person for whose 
benefit the accommodat ion is held, or any oth er cause  which may be deemed satisfa ctory to the Rent 
Authority;  
(c) that the lodger has failed to vacate the accommodation on the termination of the period of the 
agreement in respect thereof;  
(d) that the lodger has done any act which is inconsistent with the purpose for which the 
accommodation was given to him or which is likely to affect adversely or substantially the owner ’s 
interest therein;  
(e) that the lodger has failed to pay the rent due from him.  
CHAPTER VI  
RENT AUTHORITIES  
43. Appointment of Rent Authorities and additional Rent Authorities .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as many Rent Authorities as it thinks fit; 
and define the local limits within which, or the hotels  and lodging houses in respect of which, each Rent 
Authority, shall exercise the powers conferred, and perform the duties imposed, on Rent Authorities by or 
under this Act and in respect of all tenancy matters relating to premises and tenancies covered unde r 
clauses ( c) to ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 by or under the Transfer of  Property Act, 1882                  
(4 of 1882 ). 
(2) The Central Government may also, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint as many 
additional Rent Authorities as it  thinks fit , and an additional Rent Authority shall perform such of the 
functions of the Rent Authority as may , subject to the control of the Central Government, be assigned to 
him in writing by the Rent Authority and , in the discharge of these functions, an additional Rent 
Authority shall have and shall exercise the same powers and discharge the same duties as the Rent 
Authority.  
(3) A person shall n ot be qualified for appointment  as a Rent Authority or an additional Rent 
Authority unless he has for at lea st ten years held a judicial office in India or has for at least ten years 
been practising as an advocate or a pleader in India.  
44. Powers of Rent Authority .—(1) The Rent Authority may — 
(a) transfer  any proceeding pending before him for disposal to any additional Rent Authority, or  
(b) withdraw any proceeding pending before any additional Rent Authority and dispose it of 
himself or transfer the proceeding for disposal to any other additional Rent Aut hority.  
(2) The Rent Authority shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , when trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of an y person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  24 
 (c) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses;  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed,  
and any proceeding before the Rent Authority shall be deeme d to be a Judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section 193 and section 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code (45 
of 1860) , and the Rent Authority shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purpose of section 195 but not 
for the purposes of Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) . 
(3) For the purposes of holding any inquiry or discharging any duty und er this Act, the Rent 
Authority may, — 
(a) after giving not less than twenty -four hours ’ notice in writing, enter and inspect or authorise 
any officer subordinate to him to enter and inspect any premises at any time between sunrise and 
sunset; or  
(b) by written order, require any person to produ ce for his inspection all such accounts, books or 
other documents relevant to the inquiry at such time and at such place as may be specified in the 
order.  
(4) The Rent Authority may, if he thinks fit, appoint one or more persons having special knowledge 
of the matter under consideration as an assessor or assessors to advise him on the proceeding before him.  
(5) Any fine imposed by a Rent Authority under this Act shall be paid by the person fined within such 
time as  may be allowed by the Rent Authority and the Rent Authority may, for good and sufficient 
reason, extend the time, and in default of such payment, the amount shall be recoverable as fine under the 
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 19 74), and the Rent Authority shall be deemed 
to be a magistrate under the said Code for  the purposes of such recovery.  
(6) An order made by a Rent Authority or the Tribunal under this Act or an order made by a 
Controller, or an order passed on appeal, under  the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (59  of 1958) shall be 
executable by a Rent Authority designated by the Tribunal in this behalf and for the purpose the Rent 
Authority so designated shall have all the powers of a civil  court.  
45. Procedure to be followed by Rent Authority .—(1) No order which prejudicially affects any 
person shall be made by the Rent Authority under this Act without giving him a reasonable opportunity of 
showing cause against the order proposed to be made and until his objections, if any, a nd any evid ence he 
may produce in support o f the same have been considered by the Rent Authority.  
(2) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act and the other provisions of this Act, the Rent 
Authority shall, while holding an inquiry in any proce eding before him, follow as far as may be the 
practice and procedure of a court of small causes, including the recording of evidence.  
(3) The Rent Authority shall not ordinarily allow more than three adjournments at the request of a 
party throughout the pr oceedings and in case he decides to do so, he shall inform the Chairman the 
reasons therefor and order to pay the other party the reasonable c ost. 
(4) The Rent Authority shall issue summons in relation to every application under this Act in the form 
specif ied in Schedule IV.  
(5) The Rent Authority shall, in addition to, and simultaneously with the issue of summons for service 
on the opposite party, also direct the summons to be served by registered post, acknowledgment due, 
addressed to the opposite party o r his agent empowered to accept the service at the place where the 
opposite party or his agent actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for 
gain and may, if the circumstances of the case so require, also direct the public ation of the summons in a 
newspaper circulating in the locality in which the opposite party is last known to have resided or carried 
on business or personally worked for gain.  
(6) When an acknowledgment purporting to be signed by the opposite party or his agent is received 
by the Rent Authority or the registered article containing the summons is received back with an 
endorsement purporting to have been made by a postal employee to the effect that the opposite party or 
his agent had refused to take delivery of the registered article, the Rent Authority may declare that there 
has been a valid service of summons.  25 
 (7) (a) An application under section 21 shall be dealt with in  accordance with the procedure specified 
in this sub -section.  
(b) The Rent Authority shall commence the hearing of the application within seven days of the filing 
thereof and shall dispose of the same within thirty days of starting of such hearing, failing such 
commencement of hearing or disposal of application within such time, the Rent A uthority shall inform 
the Chairman of the Tribunal the reasons therefor.  
(8) (a) Every application by a landlord for the recovery of possession of any premises on the ground 
specified in clause ( e) or clause  (f) or clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22, or under section 23, or 
under section 24, or under section 25, or under section 26, or under sect ion 33, shall be dealt with in 
accordance with the procedure specified in this sub -section.  
(b) The tenant on whom the summons is duly served (whether in t he ordinary way or by registered 
post) in the form specified in Schedule IV shall not contest the prayer for eviction from the premises 
unless he files an affidavit stating the grounds on which he seeks to contest the application for eviction 
and obtains l eave from the Rent Authority as hereinafter provided; and in default of his appearance in 
pursuance of the summons or his obtaining such leave, the statement made by the landlord in the 
application for eviction shall be deemed to be admitted by the tenant and the applicant shall be entitled to 
an order for eviction on the ground aforesaid.  
(c) The Rent Authority shall give to the tenant leave to contest the application if the affidavit filed by 
the tenant discloses such facts as would d isentitle the landlor d from obtaining an order for the recovery of 
possession of the premises.  
(d) Where leave is granted to the tenant to contest the application , the Rent Authority shall ordinarily 
commence the hearing of the application within seven days of the grant of suc h leave and shall provide 
day to day hearing and shall dispose of the application within thirty days of starting of such hearing, 
failing such commencement of hearing or disposal of application within such time, the Rent Authority 
shall inform the Chairman  of the Tribunal the reasons therefor.  
(e) Where the leave to contest under clause ( c) is denied to the tenant, he may file an application for 
review before the Rent Authority within ten days of such denial and the Rent Authority shall endeavour  to 
dispose of such application within seven days of its filing.  
(9) Every application made to the Rent Authority shall be heard as expeditiously as possible and, 
subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 7) and ( 8), endeavour shall be made to conclude th e hearing and 
to dispose of the application within six months of it being filed.  
(10) In all proceedings before him, the Rent Authority shall consider the question of costs and award 
such costs to or against any party as that Rent Authority consi ders reaso nable.  
CHAPTER VII  
DELHI RENT TRIBUNAL  
46. Establishment of Delhi Rent Tribunal .—The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, establish a Tribunal, to be known as the Delhi Rent Tribunal , to exercise the jurisdiction, 
powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.  
47. Composition of Tribunal and Benches thereof .—(1) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman 
and such number of other Members, being not less than three, as the Central Government may deem fit 
and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the Tribunal may 
be exercised by the Benches thereof.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one or more Members, as the 
Chairman may decide in accordance with the rules as may be prescribed.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chairman may transfer other Member 
from one Bench to another Bench.  
(4) Subject to the other provi sions of this Act, the Benches of the Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at such 
places in the National Capital Territory of Delhi as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, specify.  26 
 48. Qualifications for appointment as Chairman an d Members .—(1) A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as the Chairman unless he — 
(a) is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) has, for  at least three years, held the office of a Member; or  
(c) is, or has been, a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held, for at least three years, a 
post in Grade I of that Service; or  
(d) has, for at least three years, held the post of a Secretary in the Law Department of a State 
Government.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Memb er, unless he— 
(a) has for at least eight years, held the post of Rent Authority; or  
(b) has, for at least five years, held the post of a District Judge; or  
(c) is, or has been, a Member of the Indian Legal Service in Grade I of that Service; or  
(d) has, f or at least two years, held the post of a Secretary in the Law Department of a State 
Government; or  
(e) has, for at least ten years, been an Advocate.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5), the Chairman and other Members of the 
Tribunal  shall be appointed by the President of India after consultation w ith the Chief Justice of India.  
(4) The Chairman and other Members shall be appointed by the President of India on the 
recommendation of a Selection Committee appointed by the Central Govern ment consisting of the 
following, namely: — 
(a) Chief Justice of the High Court of Delhi or his nominee who shall be a sitting Judge of the 
High Court;  
(b) Chairman of the Tribunal (except in case of the appointment of the Chairman);  
(c) Secretary to the Go vernment of India in the Ministry dealing with Legal Affairs;  
(d) Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry dealing with Urban Development;  
(e) Chief Secretary to the Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi.  
(5) The Selection Commi ttee shall recommend a person for appointment as Chairman or other 
Member from amongst the persons on the list of candidates prepared by the Ministry dealing with Urban 
Development in consultation with the Department dealing with Justice of the Government of India in 
accordance with the procedure as may be prescribed.  
49. Term of office .—The Chairman or any other Member shall hold office as such for a term of five 
years from the date on which he enters upon his office, but shall be eligible for re-appointment for another 
term of five years:  
Provided that no Chairman or any other Member shall hold office as such after he has attained, — 
(a) in the case of the Chairman, the age of sixty -five years; and  
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty -two years.  
50. Seniormost Member to act as Chairman or discharge his functions in certain 
circumstances .—(1) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairman by reason of 
his death, res ignation or otherwise, the seniormost Member shall act as Chairman until the date on which 
a new Chairman, appointed in  accordance with the provisions  of this Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon 
his office.  
(2) When the Chairman is unable to discharge hi s functions owing to his absence, illness or any other 
cause, the seniormost Member shall discharge the function s of the Chairman until the date on which the 
Chairman resumes his office.  27 
 51. Salaries allowances and other terms and conditions of services of  Chairman and other 
Members .—The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service 
(including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefit s) of, the Chairman and other Me mbers shall be 
such as may b e prescribed:  
Provided t hat neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairman or any other Members shall be varied to his disadvantage after his appointment.  
52. Resignation and removal .—(1) The Chair man or any other Member may, by no tice in writing 
under his hand addressed to the President of India, resign his office:  
Provided that the Chairman or any other Member shall, unless he is permitted by the President of 
India to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the  expiry of three months from the date 
of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office or until 
the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest.  
(2) The Chairman or any other Member shall not be  removed from his office except by an order made 
by the President of India on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry made by a 
Judge of the Supreme Court in which such Chairman or other Member had been informed of the charges 
against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges.  
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairman or other Member referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
53. Provision as to the holding of offices by Chairman and Member on ceasing to be such 
Chairman or Member .—On ceasing to hold office, — 
(a) the  Chairman of the Tribunal shall be ineligible for further employment either under the 
Government of India or under the Government of a State;  
(b) a Member, other than the Chairman, of the Tribunal shall, subject to the other provisions of 
this Act, be elig ible for appointment as the Chairman or Member of any other tribunal, but not for any 
other employment either under the Government of India o r under the Government of a State;  
(c) the Chairman or other Member shall not appear, ac t or plead before the Tribu nal. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, employment under the Government of India or under 
the Government of a State includes employment under any local or other authority within the territory of 
India or under the control of the Government of I ndia or under any corporation or society owned or 
controlled by the Government.  
54. Finan cial and administrative powers of Chairman .—The Chairman shall exercise such 
financial and administrative powers over the Benches as may be prescribed:  
Provided that t he Chairman shall have authority to delegate such of his financial and administrative 
powers as he may think fit to any other Member or any officer of the Tribunal, subject to the condition 
that such Member or officer shall, while exercising such delegated  powers, continue to act under the 
direction, control and supervision of the Chairman.  
55. Staff of the Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of 
the officers and other employees required to assist the Tribunal in the discharge of its functions and 
provide the Tribunal with such officers and other employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the 
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescr ibed.  
(3) The officers and other employees of the Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the general 
superintendence of the Chairman.  
56. Distribution of business among the Benches .—The Chairman may make provisions as to the 
distribution of the bus iness of the Tribunal among its Benches.  
57. Jurisdiction, p owers and authority of the Tribunal .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided 
in  this  Act,  the  Tribunal   shall  exercise,   on  and  from  the date with  effect from which it is 28 
 established under section 46, all the jurisdiction, powers and authority exercisable immediately before 
that date by all courts (except the Supreme Court) in relation to — 
(a) all appeals from the orders of the Rent Authority under this Act;  
(b) any  other matter arising from the provisions of this Act;  
(c) review of its own orders and decisions.  
(2) The Tribunal may, either on its own motion or on application of any of the parties and after notice 
to the parties and after hearing such of them as it m ay desire to be heard, call for records of any case 
pending before the Rent Authority under this Act, and either itself try the case or give direction for 
disposal of the case by such Rent Authority.  
(3) The Tribunal shall have powers to effect a conciliat ion between the parties in any case pending 
before it. 
58. Power to punish for contempt .—The Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same jurisdiction, 
powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself or of the Rent Authority under this Act as a High 
Court has and may exercise and, for this purpose, the provisions of the Contempt of Courts  Act, 1971   
(70 of 1971) , shall have effect subject to the modification that — 
(a) the references therein to a High Court shall be construed as including a reference to the 
Tribunal;  
(b) in section 15 of the said Act, the references to the Advocate -General  shall be construed as a 
reference to the Attorney -General or the Solicitor -General or the A dditional Solicitor -General;  
(c) in sections 6, 10, 11A, 12, 15 and 17 of the said Act, the references therein to subordinate 
Court or Court subordinate, shall be c onstrued as including a reference to Rent Authority under this 
Act; and  
(d) the references, in section 14 of the said Act, to Chief Justice, Judge or Judges shall be 
construed as including a reference to Chairman, Member or Members.  
59. Application to Trib unal .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a person aggrieved by 
any order pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal may make an application to the 
Tribunal for the redressal of his grievance.  
(2) Every application under sub-section ( 1) shall be in such form and be accompanied by such 
affidavits, documents or any other evidence and by such fee in respect of the filing or such application 
and by such other fees for the service or execution of processes as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal shall, if satisfied after such inquiry 
as it may deem necessary, that the application is a fit case for adjudication or trial by it, admit such 
application ; but where the Tribunal is not  so satisfied; it may summarily reject the application after 
recording its reasons.  
60. Procedure of Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid down in the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , but shall be guided by the princ iples of natural justice and, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the Central Government, the Tribunal 
shall have power to lay down and regulate its own procedure, including the fixing of places and times of 
its inquiry and  deciding whether to sit in public or in private.  
(2) The Tribunal shall decide every application made to it as expeditiously as possible and on a 
perusal of documents, affidavits and written representations and after hearing such ora l arguments as may 
be advanced:  
Provided that where the Tribunal deems it necessary, for reasons to be recorded in writing, it may 
allow oral evidence to be adduced.  
(3) The Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the same 
powers as ar e vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , while trying a 
suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any parson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring  the discovery and production of documents;  29 
 (c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 12 4 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872                  
(1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its orders and decisions;  
(g) dismissing an application or appeal for def ault or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application or appeal for default or any order 
passed by it ex parte ; 
(i) for the execution of its orders and decisions and orders and decisions of Rent Authority under 
this Act,  like decree of a civil court without reference to any civil c ourt; and  
(j) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(4) No adjournment shall be granted by the Tribunal without recording the reasons justifying the grant 
of such adjournment in the case and  costs shall be awarded, if a party asks for adjournment for third and 
subsequent times.  
61. Appeal to the Tribunal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order passed or a decision made by 
the Rent Authority may, within thirty days from the date of such order or  decision, prefer an appeal in 
writing to the Tribunal in the prescribed form and accompanied by a certified copy of the order or 
decision appealed against and by such fees as may be prescribed:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of t he said period of thirty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within the 
specified period . 
(2) In computing the aforesaid period of thirty days, the time taken in obtaining a certified cop y of the 
order or decision appealed against shall be excluded.  
(3) An appeal shall lie to the Tribunal from every order or decision of Rent Authority made under this 
Act both on question of law and facts:  
Provided that no appeal shall lie from an order or decision of the Rent Authority made under     
section 11, section 12, section 21 or section 33 of this Act.  
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal shall, if satisfied after such inquiry as 
it may deem necessary, that the appeal is a fit case for adjudication by it , admit such appeal; but where the 
Tribunal is not so satisfied, it may summarily reject the appeal after recording its reason.  
(5) The Tribunal shall endeavour to dispose of an appeal against the order or decision of the R ent 
Authority under clause ( e), clause ( f) or clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22 or section 23, 24, 25, 26 
or 33 within one month of filing of such appeal.  
62. Conditions as to making of interim orders .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of 
injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceeding relating to, an 
application or appeal unless — 
(a) copies of such application or appeal and of all documents in support of the plea for such 
interim order are furnished to the party against whom such application is made or appeal is preferred; 
and 
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter:  
Provided that the Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of clauses ( a) and ( b) and make an 
interim order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing that it is 
necessary so to do for preventing any loss being caus ed to the applicant or the appellant, as the case may 
be, which cannot be adequately compensated in money; but any such interim order shall, if it is not sooner 
vacated, cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fourteen days from the date on which  it is made 30 
 unless the said requirements have been complied with before the expiry of that period and the Tribunal 
has continued the operation of the interim order.  
63. Right of applicant to take assistance of legal practitioner .—A person making an applica tion or 
preferring an appeal to the Tribunal under this Act may either appear in person or take the assistance of a 
legal practitioner of his choice to present his case before the  Tribunal.  
64. Power of Chairman to transfer cases from one Bench to another .—On the application of any 
of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, 
or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairman may transfer any case pending before one Bench, 
for disposal, to any other Bench.  
65. Decision to be b y majority .—The decision of a Bench consisting of more than one Member on 
any point shall, where there is a majority, be according to the opinion of the majority, and where there is 
no majority and the Members are equal ly divided in their opinion, they shall draw up a statement of the 
case setting forth the point or points on which they differ and make a reference to the Chairman, and on 
receipt of such reference, the Chairman may arrange for the hearing of such point or  points by one or 
more of the other Members (including, if he did not preside over such Bench, himself) and such point or 
points shall be decided according to the opinion by the majority of the Members who have heard the case, 
including those who had first  heard it.  
66. Exclusion of jurisdiction of courts except the Supreme Court .—On and from the date from 
which any jurisdiction, powers and authority becomes exercisable under this Act by the Tribunal in 
relation to any matter, no court (except the Supreme C ourt) shall have, or be entitled to exercise any 
jurisdiction , powers or authority in rela tion to such matter.  
67. Transfer of pending cases .—On the c ommencement of this Act, all cases pertaining to the 
matters in respect of which the Tribunal shall have jurisdiction under this Act including the ca ses under 
the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882) in respect of premises and tenancies covered under clauses 
(c) to ( i) of sub-section  (1) of section 3 and pending in the High Court and all cases pending i n the Rent 
Control Tribunal or additional Rent Control Tribunal, constituted under the Delhi Ren t Control Act, 1958 
(59 of 1958 ) shall stand transferred to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may proceed with the matter either  
de novo  or from the stage it was so transferred.  
68. Proceedings before the Tribunal to be judicial proceedings .—All proceedings before the 
Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of 
the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
69. Members and staff of Tribunal to be public servants .—The Chairman and other Members and 
the officers and other employees provided under section 55 to the Tribunal shall be deemed to be public 
servants wit hin the meaning of section 21  of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
70. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit , prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or against the Chairman or other Member of the Tribunal, or any other 
person autho rised by such Chairman or other Member, for anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any ru le or order made thereunder.  
71. Criminal Jurisdiction of the Tribunal .—(1) No court other than the Tribunal shall try  any 
offence punishable under this Act.  
(2) The Tribunal shall not take cognizance of an offence punishable under this Act, unless the 
complaint in respect of the offence has been made within three months from the date of the commission 
of the offence.  
(3) Every complaint referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall set forth the facts which constitute the offence 
alleged, the nature of such offence and such other particulars as are reasonably sufficient to summon the 
accused and to give him notice of the offence a lleged to have been committed and to notify the Public 
Prosecutor to conduct the prosecution.  
(4) The Tribunal shall observe the same procedure for the trial of offences under this Act as the High 
Court would observe if it were trying the case under sectio n 474 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  
(2 of 1974)  and for that purpose the Tribunal shall be deemed to be High Court under the said Code . 31 
 72. Amendment of orders .—Clerical or arithmetical mistakes in any order passed by the Tribunal or 
Rent Authority or errors arising therein from any accidental slip or omission may , at any time, be 
corrected by the Tribunal or, as the case may be, the Rent Authority on an applicati on received in this 
behalf from a ny of the parties or otherwise.  
73. Finality of orders .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made by the 
Rent Authority or an order passed on appeal under this Act shall be final and shall not be ca lled in 
question in any original suit, application or execution proceeding.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PENALTIES  
74. Penalties .—(1) In a case where the tenant applies for fixation of standard rent under section 11 
for the premises the standard rent of which had been fix ed in a previous tenancy under the Delhi Rent 
Control Act, 1958 (59 of 1958) or under this Act, the landlord shall, on a request from the tenant , intimate 
in writing to such tenant the standard rent so fixed and in case the landlord fails to do so, he shall be 
punishable with fine of one thousand rupees or double the standard rent, fixed in the previous tenancy, 
whichever is more.  
(2) If any landlord or tenant contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 21, he shall be 
punishable with fine equivalent in amount to the rent for three months or with one month ’s imprisonment, 
or with both, and shall also be liable to fine of one hundred rupees for each day commencing on the date 
of cutting off or withholding essential supply or service till the date the essential supply or service is 
restored.  
(3) If any tenant sub -lets, assigns or otherwise parts with the possession of the whole or part of any 
premises in contravention of the provisions of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22, he shall be  
punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees, or double the rent received by the tenant 
for sub -letting for every month till such time the cause of complaint ceases, whichever is more or with 
imprisonment for a term of one month.  
(4) If a ny landlord  makes a false statement in his affidavit under paragraph ( i) of Explanation I  to 
clause ( r) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
thousand rupees, or double the rent receivable for a period of three years in case it has been re -let, 
whichever is more.  
(5) If any landlord re -lets the whole or any part of any premises in contravention of                        
sub-section ( 1) of section 31, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand rupees , 
or double the rent the landlord receives after re -letting whichever is more, or imprisonment which may 
extend to one month.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section and sub -section ( 3), in cases where it is difficult to 
prove  the rent which the landlord or the tenant, as the case may be, is receiving after re -letting on        
sub-letting, the fine may extend to five thousand rupees.  
(6) If, after the tenant has delivered possession, the landlord fails to comme nce the work of repairs or 
building or re -building, as the case may be, within three months of the specified date under                  
sub-section ( 3) of section 32, he shall be punishable with fine equivalent to rent for three months . 
(7) If a landlord contravenes the provisions of sub-section  (2) of section 32, he shall be punishable 
with fine which may extend to six months ’ rent of the premises.  
(8) If a tenant fails to make re -entry under sub -section ( 2) of section 32 within three mont hs from the 
date of the completion of repairs or building or re -building, as the case may be, intimated in writing by 
the landlord without reasonable excuse, he shall forfeit his right to re -entry and shall be punishable with 
fine equivalent to three month s’ rent of the premises.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
75. Jurisdiction of civil courts barred in respect of certain matters .—Save as otherwise expressly 
provided in this Act, no civil court shall entertain any suit or proceedings in so far as it relates to any 32 
 matter to which this Act applies or to any other matter which the Rent Authority is empowered by or 
under this Act to de cide, and no injunction in respect of any action taken or to be taken by the Rent 
Authority or the Tribunal under this Act shall be granted by any civil court or other authority.  
76. Rent Authorities to be public servants .—All Rent Authorities and addition al Rent Authorities 
appointed under this Act shall b e deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ). 
77. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against any Rent Authority or additional Rent Authority in respect of anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act.  
78. Special provision regarding decrees affected by the Delhi Tenants  (Temporary Protection) 
Act, 1956  and the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958. —Where any decree or order for the recovery of 
possession of any premises to which the Delhi Tenants (Temporary Protection) Act, 1956 (97 of 1956) or 
the Delhi Rent  Control Act, 1958 (59 of 1958 ), applies is sought to be executed on the cesser of operation 
of any of those Acts in relation to those premises, the Rent Authority executing the decree or order  may, 
on the application of the person against whom the decree or order has been passed or oth erwise, reopen 
the case and if it is satisfied that the decree or order could not have been passed if this Act had been in 
force on the date of the decree or order the Rent Author ity may, having regard to the provisions of this 
Act, set aside the decree or  order or pass such other order in relation thereto as he thinks fit.  
79. Transfer of pending cases to Rent Authority .—On the commencement of this Act, all cases 
pertaining to the matters in respect of which the Rent Authority shall have jurisdiction under  this Act and 
pending before the Controller under the Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (59 of 1958) or any other court 
shall stand transfer red to the Rent Authority and th e Rent Authority shall proceed with the matter either 
de novo  or fro m the stage it was tr ansferred.  
80. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving 
effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent wi th the provisions of this Act as may appear to be 
necessa ry for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall,  as soon as may be after it is made, be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
81. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In pa rticular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the period within which agreements shall be registered under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(b) the autho rity before whom, the form and the manner in which and the period within which the 
landlord and the tenant shall separately file the particulars about the tenancy under the proviso to  
sub-section ( 3) of section 4;  
(c) the manner of making application unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(d) the valuer whose assistance may be taken by the Rent Authority and the manner of asses sment 
to be carried out by him u nder sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(e) the manner of depositing rent or other charges under sub-section  (1) of section 16;  
(f) the particulars under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  
(g) the manner of sending copy of application to landlord under sub -section ( 3) of section 16;  
(h) the manner in which the deposited rent or other charges  to be paid to the applicant under     
sub-section ( 4) of section 16;  
(i) the manner of giving notice to the tenant under sub -section ( 3) of section 20;  33 
 (j) the manner in which the application under sub -section ( 2) of section 22 shall  be made to the 
Rent Au thority;  
(k) the manner in which a notice shall be given under proviso to clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 22;  
(l) the manner in which notices to the landlord shall be give n by the tenant or sub -tenant under 
section 29;  
(m) the manner in which permission of th e Rent Authority shall be obtained by  the landlord under 
section 31;  
(n) the time within which applications to be made under sub -section ( 2) of section 31 or          
sub-section ( 3) and sub -section ( 4) of section 32;  
(o) the manner in whic h the permission of the Rent Authority shall be obtained by  the landlord 
under section 33;  
(p) the time within which the application shall be made to the Rent Authority by the landlord 
under section 33;  
(q) the powers of a civil court which may be vested i n the Rent Authority under clause ( d) of  
sub-section ( 2) of section 44;  
(r) the number of Members in the Benches to be decided by the Chairman under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 4 7; 
(s) the procedure in accordance with which a list of candidates shall be prepared by the Ministry 
dealing with Urban Development in consultation with the Department dealing with Justice of the 
Government of India under sub -section ( 5) of section 48;  
(t) the salar ies and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service (including 
pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of , the Chairman and other Members under section 
51; 
(u) procedure under sub -section ( 3) of section 52, for the investigation of misbehaviour or 
incapacity of the Chairman or other Memb er referred to in sub -section ( 2) of the said section;  
(v) the financial and administrative powers of  the Chairman under section 54;  
(w) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of 
the Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of section 55;  
(x) the form of application under sub -section ( 1) of section 59 and the affidavits, documents or 
any other evidence and the fee in respect of filing of the said application and the other fees for the 
service or execution of processe s as mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of the said section;  
(y) the matters  to be prescribed under clause ( j) of sub -section ( 3) of section 60;  
(z) the form of appeal and the f ee payable under sub -section ( 1) of section 61;  
(za) any other matter which ha s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made , before each House 
of Parlia ment, while it is in session,  for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or m ore successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the ru le shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be o f no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under that rule.  
82. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Delhi Rent Control Act, 1958 (59 of 1958 ), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal and subject to the provisions of section 67 and section 79 all cases 
and other proceedings under the said Act pending, at the commencement of th is Act, shall be continued 
and disposed of in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act.  34 
 (3) Notwithstanding such repeal all leases relating to the premises taken by the Government on lease 
under section 47 of the Delhi Ren t Control Act, 1958 (59 of 1958 ) shall cease on the expiration of a 
period of six months from the date of commencement of this Act, unless sooner determined by the 
Government.  
__________ _ 
 
SCHEDULE I  
(See sections 6 and 7)  
The rent enhanceable under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of secti on 6 or sub -section ( 1) of   section 7, 
as the case may be, shall be calculated at the rates shown in column ( 2) of Table I given below, 
compounding on yearly basis, with reference to the date of  agreement in the case of rent agreed to 
between the landlord and the tenant, and the date of commencement of construction in the case of 
standard rent, to arrive at the rent payable for the period for which rent is to be determined:  
Provided that the total amount of enhancement as so c alculated till the commencement of this Act 
shall be restricted in respect of a premises on the basis of its size as indicated in column (1) of Table II to ’ 
such percentage as is specified in the corresponding entry in column (2) of the said Table:  
Provide d further that the enhancement in the case of a tenancy entered into before the commencement 
of this Act shall be effected gradually in  five equal yearly instalments.  
Explanation .—The base for calculation of annual enhancement of rent after the commencemen t of 
this Act shall be the rent payable in a year as if the total enhancement of rent due at the commencement of 
this Act came into effect immediately rather than gradually over a five year period, and such annual 
enhancement of rent shall be payable in ad dition to the graduated enhancement:  
Provided also that in relation to a landlord, referred to in section 26, who is a widow, a handicapped 
person or a person of the age of sixty -five years or more, the enhancement of rent shall not be spread over 
a period  of five years but shall come in to force with immediate effect.  
TABLE I  
 
Date of agreement/commencement of  construction  Rate of e nhancement of rent 
(1) (2) 
1. Up to 31st December, 1949        .          .         .         .      . Two per cent.  
2. On and  from 1st January, 1950 to  31st December, 1960    . Four per cent.  
3. On and from 1st January, 1961 to  31st December, 1970    .  Six per cent.  
4. On and from 1st January, 1971  to 31st December, 1994    . (i) Eight per cent. for  residential 
premises;  
(ii) ten per cent. for non -residential 
premises . 
5. On and from 1st January, 1995  onwards      .       .        .  Seventy -five per cent. of annual inflation 
rate based on Whole sale Price Index in 
the case of residential premises and 
hundred per cent. of s uch rate in the 
case of non -residential premises.  
  35 
 TABLE II  
 
Size of premises (built -up area)  Permitted enhancement of rent  
(1) (2) 
1. Residential premises of 25 square  metres or less      . Twenty -five per cent.  
2. Residential premises of more than  25 square metres 
but 40 squ are metres or less  .     .     .       .       .     .  Fifty per cent . 
3. Residential premises of more than  40 square metres 
but 80 square metres or less  Seventy -five per cent.  
4. Residential premises of more than  80 square metres . Hundred per cent.  
5. Non -residential pr emises    .    .      .      .      .     .    .  
(irrespective of size)  Hundred per cent.  
 
______________  
 
 
SCHEDULE II  
(See section 8)  
1. Air conditioner.  
2. Electrical heater.  
3. Water cooler.  
4. Geyser.  
5. Refrigerator.  
6. Cooking range.  
7. Furniture.  
8. Garden meant to be used by the tenant exclusively.  
9. Playground meant to be used by the tenant exclusively.  
10. Sun-breakers.  
____________  
 
  36 
 SCHEDULE III  
(See sections 19 and 20)  
A. Structural repairs to be got done by the landlord  
1. Structural repairs, except those neces sitated by damage caused by the tenant.  
2. Whitewashing of walls and painting of doors and windows once in three years.  
3. Changing and plumbing pipes, when necessary.  
4. Internal and external wiring and related maintenance.  
B. Day to day repairs to be got done by the tenant  
1. Changing of tap washers and taps.  
2. Drain cleaning.  
3. Water closet repairs.  
4. Wash basin repairs.  
5. Bath tub repairs.  
6. Geyser repairs.  
7. Circuit breakers repairs.  
8. Switches and sockets repairs.  
9. Repairs and replacement  of electrical equipment, except major intern al and external wiring 
changes.  
10. Kitchen fixtures repairs.  
11. Replacement of knobs and locks of doors, cup -boards, windows, etc.  
12. Replacement of flynets.  
13. Replacement of glass panels in windows, doors, etc.  
14. Maintenance of gardens and open spaces let -out to the tenant.  
 
__________  
 
  37 
 SCHEDULE IV  
[See sub-section ( 4) of section 45]  
Form of Summons  
(Name, description and place of residence of the tenant)  
Wherea s Shri ——————  has filed an application (a copy of which is annexed) for  —————  
on the grounds specified in section  —————— . 
You are hereby summoned to appear before the Rent Authority within (*) days of the service hereof 
and file a reply within  ——————  days in default whereof  the matter shall be heard and disposed of   
ex parte . 
(**) You are to obtain the leave of the Rent Authority to contest the application for eviction on the 
ground  —————— , in default whereof, the applicant will be entitled at any time after the expiry of the  
said period of fifteen days to obtain an order for your eviction from the said premises.  
Leave to appear and contest the application may be obtained on an application to the Rent Authority 
supported by an affidavit as is referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 7) of section 45.  
Given under my hand and seal of the Rent Authority/additional Rent Authority:  
This ——————  day of  ——————  19 —————— . 
Rent Authority / 
(Seal)                    additional Rent Authority.  
 
*To be filled in.  
**Strike off portion not applicable.  
Notes:— 
*For cases covered under clauses ( e) and (f) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22 and sections 23, 24, 
25, 26 and 33 indicate fifteen days and for other cases indicate thirty days.  
**For only cases covered under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 8) of section 45.  
 
___________  
--------------------------The Technology Development Board Act, 1995--------------------------
1 
 THE TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT,  1995  
________  
ARRNGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definition s. 
CHAPTER II  
TECHNOLOGY  DEVELOPMEN T BOARD  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board . 
4. Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board .  
5. Committees of the Board . 
6. Functions of the Board.  
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE  
7. Application for grant of financial assistance, etc . 
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
8. Grants and  loans by the Central Government . 
9. Fund for Technology Development and Application.  
10. Transfer of money receipts and liabilities . 
11. Budget.  
12. Annual report . 
13. Accounts and audit . 
14. Annual report and auditor’s report to be laid before Parliament . 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEO US 
15. Returns to be furnished to the Board . 
16. Power of the Central Government to issue directions . 
17. Power of Central Government to supersede the Board . 
18. Delegation.  
19. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servan ts. 
20. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
21. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
22. Power of Board to make regulations.  
23. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
 
  2 
 THE  TECHNOLOGY DEVELOPMENT BOARD ACT,  1995  
ACT NO. 44 OF 1995  
[16thDecember, 1995.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of a Board for payment of equity capital or any other 
financial assistance to industrial concerns and other agencies attempting development and 
commercial application of indigenous technology or adapting imported technology to wider 
domestic a pplications and for matters connected  therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Forty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Technol ogy Development Board 
Act, 1995 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “Board ” means the Technology Development Bo ard consti tuted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3;  
(b) “Chairperson”  means the Chairperson of the Board;  
(c) “Fund” means the Fund for Technology Development and Application constituted under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 9;  
(d) “member”  means a memb er of the Board and  includes the Chairperson;  
(e) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “Secretary”  means the Secretary of  the Board appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(g) words  and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Research and 
Developmen t Cess Ac t, 1986 (32 of 1986 ), shall  have the meanings respectively assigned to them in 
that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
TECHNOLOGY  DEVELOPMEN T BOARD  
3. Constitution and incorporation of the Board. —(1) The Central Government shall , by 
notification in the Official Gazette, constitute, for the purposes of this Act, a Board to be called the 
Technology Development Board.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual successio n and a 
common seal with power , subject to the provisions of this Act, to contract and shall, by the said name, sue 
and be sued.  
(3) The Board sha ll consist of the following members, namely: — 
                                                           
1. 1st November, 1996, vide notification No. S.O. 602 (E), dated 29th August, 1996, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(ii). (a) the Secretary to the Government of India  
incharge of  the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government dealing with Science and Technology   
ex officio  
Chairperson;  
 3 
  
(4) The term of office and other conditions of service of members specified in clause ( g) of                
sub-section ( 3) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) The Chairperso n shall, in addition to presiding over  the meetings of the Board, exerci se and 
discharge such powers and duties of the Board as may be delegated to him by the Board and such other 
powers and duties as may be prescribed.  
(6) No act or proceeding of the Board shall be invalidate d merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board;  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board;  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
4. Secretary and other officers and employees of the Board. —(1) The Board may appoint the 
Secretary and such other officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its 
functions under this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and employees of the 
Board shall be such as may be determined by regulations.  
5. Committees of the Board. —(1) Subject to the rules made in this behalf, the Board may appoint 
such committees as may be necessary for the efficient discharge of its duties and performance of its 
functions under this Act.  
(2) The Bo ard shall have the power to co -opt as members of any committee appointed under sub-
section ( 1), such number of per sons who are n ot members  of the Board as it may think fit, and t he person (b) the Secretary to the Government of India 
incharge of the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government dealing with Scientific and Industrial 
Research   
ex officio;  
 
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India 
incharge of the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government dealing with Finance (Expenditure)   
ex officio;  
 
(d) the Secretary to the Government of India 
incharge of the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government dealing with Defence Research and 
Developmen t  
ex officio;  
 
(e) the Secretary to the Government of India 
incharge of the Ministry or Department of the C entral 
Government dealing with I ndustrial Development   
ex officio;   
(f) the Secretary to the Government of India 
incharge of the Ministry or Department of the Central 
Government dealing with Rural Development   
ex officio;  
 
(g) such number of persons, not exceeding four as 
may be prescribed, to be appointed by the Central 
Government from amongst persons having experience 
in technology development and application, banking 
and finance, industry, agriculture and rural 
development; and   
(h) Secretary of the Board . ex officio.  
 4 
 so co -opted shall have the right to attend the meetings of the committee, and take part in the proceedings 
of the committee, but shall not have the right to vote.  
6. Functions of the Board. —The Board may — 
(a) provide equity capital, subject to such conditions as may be determind by regulations, or any 
other financ ial assistance to industrial concerns and other agencies attempting commercial applicat ion 
of indigenous technology or  adapting imported t echnology to  wider domestic ap plications;  
(b) provide financial as sistance to such research and development institutions engaged in 
developing indigenous technology or adaptation of imported technology for commercial application, 
as may be recognised by the Central Government;  
(c) perform such other functions as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government.  
CHAPTER III  
APPLICATION FOR GRANT OF FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE  
7. Application for grant of financial assistance , etc.—(1) An application for grant of financial 
assistance for the purposes men tioned under section 6 shall be made to the Board in such form as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The Board may, after examining the application and after making such enquiries  as it deems 
necessary by order  in writing, either grant the financial assistan ce or refuse to grant the same:  
Provided that no refusal of grant shall be made unle ss an opportunity is given to the applicant of 
being heard.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
8. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made  by Parliament by law, in this behalf, make to the Board grants and loans of such sums 
of money as that Government may consider necessary.  
9. Fund for Technology Development and Application .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to 
be called the Fund for Technology Development and Application and ther e shall be credited to the 
Fund— 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Central Government under section 8;  
(b) all sums received by the Board from any other source;  
(c) recoveries made of the amounts granted from the Fund; and  
(d) any income from investment of the amount of the Fund.  
(2) The Fu nd shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) expenses on the object s and for the purposes authorised by this Act;  
(b) salaries, allowances and other expenses of officers and other employees of the Board; and  
(c) expenses of the Board in the discharge of its functions under this Act.  
10. Transfer of money receipts and liabilities. —On and from the commenc ement of this Act, — 
(a) the moneys standing at the credit of the Venture Capital Fund formed under section 5 of the 
Research and Developm ent Cess Act, 1986 (32 of 1986 ) which is part of the Dev elopment Assistance 
Fund established by the Development Bank under section 14 of the Industrial Development Bank of 
India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964 ) shall stand transferred to and vest in the Board;  
(b) all sums of money due to the Development Bank immediately before such commencement 
shall be deemed to be due to the Board;  
(c) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts or agreements en tered into and all 
matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Development Bank immediately before 5 
 such commencemen t for or in connection with the  purpose of the Venture Capital Fundshall be 
deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engag ed to be done by, with or for the Board; and  
(d) all suits and other  legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Development Bank immediately before such commenceme nt may be continued or 
instituted by or against the Board.  
11. Budget .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, as may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financia l year, showing  the estimated  receipts and expenditure of  
the Board and forward the  same to the Central Government.  
12. Annual r eport .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year, 
as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
13. Accounts and audit.—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may  be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation wi th the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any  other person appointed by him in 
connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Board under thi s Act shall have the same rights and 
privileges and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India has in connection with the auditing of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the 
right to deman d the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect any of the offices of the Board under this Act.  
(3) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board t o the 
Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India.  
(4) The Board sh all furnish to the Central Government before such date as may be prescribed its 
audited copy of accounts together with auditor’ s report.  
14. Annual report and auditor ’s report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government 
shall cause the annual report and auditor ’s report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, 
before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Returns to  be furnished to the Board .—(1) An industrial concern or an institution receiving 
financial assistance from the Board shall furnish returns to the Board in such form and at such time as 
may be determined by regulations.  
(2) The Board may authoris e an officer to visit any industrial concern or institution referred to in sub-
section ( 1) at any time to verify the accuracy of any return made under this secti on. 
16. Power of the Central Government to issue direction s.—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties under this Act, be 
bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in w riting to it from 
time to time:  
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to  express its views 
before any dir ection is given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of the policy or not shall be 
final.  
17. Power of Central Government to supersede the Board. —(1) If at any time the C entral 
Government is of opinion — 
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Board is unable to discharge the functions and the 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  6 
 (b) that the Board has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the financial position of the Board or 
the adm inistration of the Board has deteriorated; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary i n the public interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, be notification in the Official Gazette, s upersede the Board for such period, 
not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Upon the publicati on of a notification under sub -section (1) superseding the Board, — 
(a) all the members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted under sub-
section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or pe rsons as the Central Government may 
direct; and  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Board shall, until the Board is reconstituted under        
sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under sub-
section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Board by a fresh appointment and in such case 
any p erson or persons who vacated their o ffices under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), shall not be deemed 
to be disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the period of 
supersessi on, take action under this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a  notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action  taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such ac tion to be laid before each 
House of Parliament at the earliest.  
18. Delegation. —The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson 
or any other member or to any officer o f the Board ,subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as 
may be specified in the order, such of its powers and f unctions under this Act (except  the power under 
section 22 ) as it may deem necessary.  
19. Members, officers and employees of the Board to be public servants .—All members, off icers 
and another employees of the Board shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of 
any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants within the meaning of secti on 21 of the Indian                    
Penal Code (45 of 1860) . 
20. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Gove rnment, or the Board or any committee appointed by it , or any member of the Board or 
such committee, or any officer or employee of the Government or the Board or any other person 
authorised by the Government or the Board, for anything which is in good fait h done or intended to be 
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
21. Power of Central Gov ernment to make r ules.—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the g enerality of the forgoing power, such rules may provide for all or any of  
the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of members of the  Board under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
(b) the term  of office and other conditions of serv ice of the members of the Board  under              
sub-section ( 4) of section 3;  
(c) the powers and dutie s of the Chairperson under sub -section ( 5) of section 3;  
(d) the consti tution of committees under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  7 
 (e) theform  of application under sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(f) the form in which, and the time at which , the Board shall prepare its budget under section 11 
and its annual report under section 12;  
(g) the form of annual s tatement  of accounts under sub -section ( 1) of section 13 and the date 
befor e which the audited copy of the  accounts may be furnished to th e Central Government under 
sub-section ( 4) of that section;  
(h) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed or in respect of which provision s is to 
be, or may be, made by rules.  
22. Power of Board to make regulations. —(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and 
the rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely :— 
(a) the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary and other officers and em ployees of the 
Board under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(b) the conditions subject to which equity capital may be provided by the Board under clause ( a) 
of section 6;  
(c) the f orm in which and the time at which the returns may be furnished to the Board under          
sub-section ( 1) of section 15.  
23. Rules and regul ations to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the ru le or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulmen t shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
 
--------------------------The Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Act, 1995--------------------------
1 
 THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS (NATIONALISATION) ACT, 1995  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
3. Acquisition of rights of owners and vesting of the textile undertakings.  
4. General effect of vesting.  
5. Owner to be liable for certain prior liabilities.  
6. Transfer of any textile undertaking or part thereof to a subsidiary textile corporation.  
7. Shares to be issued by the National Textile Corporation for the value of the assets transferred to it 
by the Central Government.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount to owners of textile undertakings.  
9. Payment of further amount.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT, ETC., OF TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
10. Management, etc., of textile undertakings.  
11. Special provision for disposal of assets of the textile undertakings in certain circumstances.   
12. Duty of persons in charge of management of textile undertakings to deliver a ll assets, etc.  
13. Accounts.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EMPLOYEES OF TEXTILE UNDE RTAKINGS  
14. Employment of certain employees to continue.  
15. Provident and other funds.  
16. Transfer of employees to a subsidiary textile corporation.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONERS OF PAYMENTS  
17. Appointment of Commissioners of Payments.  
18. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
19. Certain powers of the National Textile Corporation.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Claims to be made to the Commissioner.  
21. Priority of claims.  
22. Examination of claims.  
23. Admissio n or rejection of claims.  
24. Disbursement of money by the Commissioner to claimants.  
25. Disbursement of amounts to the owners.  
26. Undisbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited to the general reserve account.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Assumption of liability.  
28. Management to continue to vest in the custodian until alternative arrangements are made.  
29. Act to override all other enactments.  
30. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by the National Textile Corporation.  
31. Penalties.  
32. Offences by companies.  
33. Protection  of action taken in good faith.  
34. Textile companies not to be wound up by the court.  
35. Delegation of powers.  
36. Power to make rules.  
37. Power to remove difficulties.  
38. Repeal and saving.  
39. Validation.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS (NATIONALISATION)  
ACT, 1995  
ACT NO. 39 OF 1995  
[8th September , 1995.]  
An Act to provide for the acquisition and transfer of the textile undertakings, and the right, title 
and interest of the owners in respect of the textile undertakings, specified in the First 
Schedule with a view to augmenting the production and distribution of different varieties of 
cloth and yarn so as to subserv e the interests of the general p ublic and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the textile companies specified in column ( 3) of the First Schedule have, through their 
undertakings specified in column ( 2) of the said Schedule, been engaged in the manufacture and 
production of differe nt varieties of cloth and yarn;  
AND WHEREAS , pendin g acquisition, the management of the said textile undertakings was taken over 
by the Central Government under section 3 of the Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of Man agement) 
Act, 1983 (40 of 1983 ) or under section 3 of the Laxmirattan and Atherton West C otton Mills (Taking 
Over of Management) Ac t, 1976 (98 of 1976 ), as the case may be;  
AND WHEREAS large sums of money have been invested with a view to making the said textile 
undertakings viable;  
AND WHEREAS further investment of very large s ums of money is necessary for the purpose of 
securing the optimum utilisation of the available facilities f or the manufacture, production and 
distribution of cloth and yarn by the said textile  undertakings of the companies;  
AND WHEREAS such investment is also necessary  for securing the continued employment of the 
workmen employed in  the said textile undertakings;  
AND WHEREAS it is necessary in the public interest to acquire the said textile undertakings of the 
textile companies to ensure that the interest of the general  public are served by the continuance by the said 
undertakings of the companies of the m anufacture, p roduction and distribution of different varieties of 
cloth and yarn which are vit al to the needs of the country;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as fo llows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Textile Undertakin gs 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1995.  
(2) The provisions of sections 31 and 32 shall come into force a t once and the remaining provisions of 
this Act shall be deemed to have come into force  on the 1st day of April, 1994.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act , unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day” means the 1st day of April, 1994;  
(b) “bank”  means — 
(i) the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955 ); 
(ii) a subsidiary Bank as defined in the State Bank of India (Subsidiary Banks) Act, 1959   
(38 of 1959) ; 
(iii) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfe r of Under takings) Act, 1970  (5 of 1970);  
(iv) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Under takings) Act, 1980 (40 of 1980 );  4 
 (v) any other bank, being a scheduled bank as defined in clause ( e) of section 2 of the Reserve 
Bank o f India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934 ); 
(c) “Commissioner”  means a Commissioner of Payme nts appointed under section 17;  
(d) “Custodian”  means a Custodian appointed under section 4 of the Textile Undertakings 
(Taking Over of Ma nagement) Act, 1983 (40 of 1983 ) or under section 4 of the Laxmirattan and 
Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking  Over of Management) Act, 1976 (98 of 1 976), as the case  may 
be;  
(e) “National Texti le Corporation”  means the National Textile Corporation Limited formed and 
registered under the Co mpanies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ); 
(f) “notification”  means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(g) “owner” , when used in relation to a textile undertaking, means any person or firm who or 
which is, immediately before the appointed day, the immediate proprietor or lessee or occupier of the 
textile undertaking or any part thereof, and in the case of a textile company which is being wound up  
or the bus iness whereof is being carried on by a liquidator or receiver, includes such liquidator or 
receiver, and also includes any agent or manager of such owner but does not include any person or 
body of persons authorised under the Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of Ma nagement) Act, 1983 
(40 of 1983 ) or under the Laxmirattan and Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking Over of Ma nagement) 
Act, 1976 (98 of 1976 ) to take over the management of the whole or any part of the textile  
undert aking;  
(h) “prescribed”  means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “specified date”  means such date as the Central Government may, for the purpose of any 
provision of this Act, by notification, specify; and different dates may be specified f or diff erent 
provision s of this Act;  
(j) “subsidiary textile corporation”  means the National Textile Corporation (South Maharashtra) 
Limi ted, the National Textile Cor porat ion (Uttar Pradesh) Limited or any other textile corporation 
formed by the National T extile  Corporation as its subsidiary;  
(k) “textile”  includes yarn or fabrics made either wholly or partly of cotton, wool, jute, synthetic 
and artificial (man -made) fibres;  
(l) “textile company”  means a company (being a company a s defined in the Companies Act, 
1956) (1 of 1956 ) specified in column ( 3) of the First Schedule as owning the textile undertaking 
specified in the corresponding entry in column ( 2) of that Schedule;  
(m) “textile undertaking” or “the textile undertaking”  means an undertaking specifie d in  
column ( 2) of the First Schedule, the management of which was before the appointed day, taken over 
by the Central Government under the Textile Undertakings (Taking  Over of Management) Act, 1983  
(40 of 1983 ), or as the  case may be , under the Laxmirattan and Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking 
Over of Manag ement) Act, 1976 (98 of 1976 ). 
(2) Words a nd expressions used herein and n ot defined but defi ned in the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956 ), shall have the meanings respectively assigne d to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ACQUISITION AND TRANSFER OF THE TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
3. Acquisition of rights of owners and vesti ng of the textile undertakings .—(1) On the appointed 
day, the right, title and interest of the owner in relation to every textile undertaking shall stand transferred 
to, and shall vest absolut ely in, the Central Government.  
(2) Every textile undertaking which stands vested in the Central Government by virtue of  
sub-section ( 1) shall , immediately after it has so vested, stand  transferred to, and vested in, th e National 
Textile Corporation.  5 
 1[(3) Notwithstanding the transfer and vesting of any textile undertaking to the National Textile 
Corporation by virtue of sub -section ( 2), the lease -hold rights of the textile undertakings shall continue to 
remain vested in the Central Government on payment of lease -hold rents and shall be discharged, for and 
on behalf of that Government, by the National Textile Corporation as and when pay ment of such  
lease -hold rents or any amount becomes due and payable.  
(4) Subject to sub -section ( 3), no court shall have jurisdiction to order divestment from the National 
Textile Corporation of the property vested in it by the Central Government.]  
4. Gen eral effect of vesting .—(1) The textile undertakings referred to in section 3 shall be deemed to 
include all assets, rights, lease -holds, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and 
immovable, including lands, buildings, workshops, stores, instruments , machinery and equipment, cash 
balances, cash on hand, reserve funds, investments and book debts pertaining to the textile undertakings 
and all other rights and interests in, or arising out of, such property as were immediately before t he 
appointed day in the ownership, possession, power or control of the textile company in relation to the said 
undertakings, whether within or outside India, and all books of account, registers and all other documents 
of whatever nature relating thereto an d shall also be deemed to include the liabilities and obligations 
specified i n sub -section ( 2) of section 5.  
(2) All property as aforesaid which have vested in the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3 shall, by force of such vesting, be fr eed and discharged from any trust, obligation , mortgage, 
charge, lien and all other incumbrances  affecting it , and any attachment, injunction or decree or order of 
any court or other authority restricting, the use of such property in any manner shall be  deemed to have 
been withdrawn.  
(3) Where any licence or other instrument in relation to a textile undertaking had been granted , at any 
time before the appointed day to the owner by the Central Government or a State Government or any 
other authority, the National Textile Corporation shall, on and from such date, be deemed to be 
substituted in such licence or other instrument in pla ce of the owner referred to therein as if such licence 
or such other instrument had been granted to it and shall hold such licence or the textile undertaking 
specified in such other instrument for the remainder of the period for which the owner would have held 
such licence or the textile undertaki ng under such other instrument.  
(4) Every mortgagee of any proper ty which has vested under this A ct in the Central Government and 
every person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to, any s uch property shall give, 
within such time and in such manner  as may be prescribed, an intimation to the Commissioner of such 
mortgage, charge, lien or other inter est. 
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the mortgagee of any property r eferred to in 
sub-section ( 2) or any other person holding any charge, lien or other interest in, or in relation to , any such 
property shall be entitled to claim, in accordance with his rights and interest , payment of the mortgage 
money or other dues, in wh ole or in part, out of the amounts specified in relation to such property in the 
First Schedule, but no such mortgage, charge, lien or other interest shall be enforceable against any 
property which has ve sted in the Central Government.  
(6) If, on the appointed day, any suit, appeal or other proceeding of whatever nature in relation to any 
property which has vested in the Central Government under section 3, instituted or preferred by or against 
the textile company is pending, the same shall not abate, b e discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially 
affected by reason of the transfer of the textile undertakings or  of anything contained in this A ct, but the 
suit, appeal or other proceeding may be continued, prosecuted or enforced by or against th e Nationa l 
Textile Corporation.  
(7) Any person who, on the date on which the Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 
1995 (Ord. 6 of 1995 ) was promulgated, was in possession of, or had under his custody or control, the 
whole or any part of any textile und ertaking referred to in section 3, the management of which could not 
be taken over by the Central Government by reason of any decree, order or injunction of any court or 
otherwise, shall deliver for thwith the possession of such undertaking or part and all books of account, 
                                                           
1. Ins . by Act 36 of 2014, s. 5 (w.e.f. 24 -10-2014).  6 
 registers and all other documents of whatever nature relating to such undertaking or part to the Central 
Government or the National Textile Corporation  or such other person as the Central Government or the 
National Textile Corporati on, as the case may be, may specify in this behalf.  
1[(8) Notwithstanding the fact that the textile operations have been discontinued in any textile 
undertaking being revived, shall for all effects and  purposes be deemed that the textile operations are 
being continued and no suit or proceeding shall be instituted or if instituted be maintainable against the 
National Textile Corporation on the ground that it has discontinued such activity in the textile 
undertaking.  
(9) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby d eclared that the continued deemed vesting of the  
lease -hold land in the Central Government shall not affect, impair or in any manner prejudice the rights of 
the National Textile Corporation to prosecute or defend any proceedings as a subsequent vestee in respect 
of any such lease -hold rights and no such proceedings shall fail only on account of the non -impleadment 
of that Government.]  
5. Owner to be liable  for cer tain prior liabilities .—(1) Every liability, other than the liability 
specified in sub -section  (2), of the owner of a textile undertaking, in relation to the textile undertakings in 
respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be the liability of such owner and shall be 
enforceable against him and not against the Central Government or the National Textile Corporatio n. 
(2) Any l iability arising in respect of — 
(a) loans advanced by the Central Government, or a S tate Government, or both, to a textile 
undertaking (together with interest due thereon) after the management of such undertaking had been 
taken over by the Central Government under section 3 of the Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of 
Management) Act, 1983, (40 of 1983 ) or as the case may be, under section 3 of the Laxmirattan and 
Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking Over of Manag emen t) Act, 1976 (98 of 1976 ); 
(b) amounts advanced to a textile undertaking [after the management of such undertaking had 
been taken over by the Central Government under section 3 of the Textile Undertakings (Taking  Over 
of Management) Act, 1983 (40 of 1983 ), or as the case may be, under section 3 of the Laxmirattan 
and Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking Over of mana gement) Act, 1976  (98 of 1976) ] by the 
National Textile Corporation or by a State Textile Corporation, or by both, toge ther with interest due 
thereon;  
(c) wages, salaries and other dues of employees of the textile undertaking, in re spect  of any 
period after the management of such undertaking had been taken over by the Central Government,  
shall, on and from the appointed day, be the liability of the Central Government and shall be discharged , 
for and on behalf of that Government, by the National Textile Corporation as and when repayment of  
such loans or amounts becomes due or as and when such wages, salaries or oth er dues become due and 
payable.  
(3) For the removal of doubts , it is hereby declared that, — 
(a) save as otherwise expressly provided in this section or in any other section of t his Act, no 
liability, other tha n the liability specified in sub -section ( 2), in relation to a textile undertaking, in 
respect of any period prior to the appointed day, shall be enforceable against the Central Government 
or the National Textile Corporation;  
(b) no award, decree or order of any court, tribunal or other authority in relation to any textile 
undertaking, passed after the appointed day, in respect of any matter, claim or dispute in relation to 
any matter not referred to in sub -section ( 2), which arose  before that day shall be enforceable against 
the Central Government or th e National Textile Corp oration;  
(c) no liability of any textile undertaking or any owner thereof in relation to any textile 
undertaking before the appointed day, for the contravention of any provision of law for the time being 
in force, shall be enforceable against the Central G overnment or the National Textile Corporation.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 2014, s. 6 (w.e.f. 24 -10-2014).  7 
 6. Transfer of any textile undertaking or part thereof to a subsidiary textile Corporation .— 
(1) The National Textile Corporation may, by order in writing, transfer any textile undertaking specified 
at serial numbers 1 to 13 in the First Schedule or part of any such textile undertaking to the National 
Textile Corporation (South Maharashtra) Limited and any textile undertaking specified at serial numbers 
14 and 15 in the First Schedule or part of any such textil e undertaking to the National Textile Corporation 
(Uttar Pradesh) Limited, as the case may be, or to any other subsidiary textile corporation and any such 
transfer shall be subject to such terms and conditions as may b e specified in the said order.  
(2) The  subsidiary textile corporation shall, on and from the date of such transfer, be deemed to be 
substituted in the licence or other instrument referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 4 in place of the 
National Textile Corporation as if such licence or othe r instrument had been granted to the subsidiary 
textile corporation, and shall hold such licence or other instrument for the remainder of the period for 
which the National Textile Corporation would have held su ch licence or other instrument.  
(3) On the tr ansfer to a subsidiary textile corporation of any textile undertaking or any part thereof, 
the liabilities of the National Textile Corporation, referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 5, shall, in so 
far as they relate to the textile undertaking or part thereof so transferred to the subsidiary textile 
corporation, become , on and from the date of such transfer, the liabilities of the subsidiary textile 
corporation and shall be discharged by the subsidiary texti le corporation as and when any such liabilit y is 
required to be discharged.  
(4) Save as otherwise expressly provided i n this Act, references in this A ct to the National Textile 
Corporation shall, in respect of any textile undertaking or any part thereof which is transferred to a 
subsidiary textile cor poration, be construed as references to the subsidiary textile corporation.  
7. Shares to be issued by the National Textile Corporation for the value of the assets transferred 
to it by the Central Government .—(1) An amount equal to the value of the assets of a textile 
undertaking transferred to, and vested in, the Nationa l Textile Cor poration under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 3, shall be deemed to be contribution made by the Central Government to the equity capital of the 
National Textile Corporation; and fo r the contribution so made, the National Textile Corpora tion shall 
issue (if necessary after amending its memorandum and articles of association) to the Central Government 
paid-up shares, in its equity capital, having a face value equal to the amount speci fied against the textile 
undertaking in the corresponding entry in column ( 4) of the First Schedule.  
(2) Where any liability assumed by the Cen tral Government under this Act is taken over by the 
National Textile Corporation under section 27, the Central Go vernment shall surrender to that 
Corporation the shares issued to it under sub -section ( 1) having the face value equal to the amount to the 
extent to which the liability has been so taken over by the National Textile Corporation and thereupon the 
share cap ital of the National Textile Corporation shall, to the extent of the face value of the shares  so 
surrendered, stand reduced.  
CHAPTER III  
PAYMENT OF AMOUNTS  
8. Payment of amount to owners of textile undertakings .—The owner of every textile undertaking 
shall be given by the Central Government, in c ash and in the manner specified in Chapter VI, for the 
transfer to, and vesting in, it, under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, of such textile undertaking and the right, 
title and int erest of the owner in relation t o such textile undertaking, an amount equal to the amount 
specified against it in the corresponding entry in co lumn ( 4) of the First Schedule.  
9. Payment of further amount .—(1) In consideration of the retrospective operation of t he provisions 
of sections 3, 4 and 5, there shall be given, in cash, by the Central Government to the owner of every 
textile undertaking, the management of which was taken over by the Central Government , an amount 
equal to an amount calculate d at the rate specified in section 5 of the Textile Undertakings (Taking Over 
of Management) Act, 1983  (40 of 1983) , or as the case may be, as specified in section 5 of the 
Laxmirattan and Atherton West Cotton Mills (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1976  (98 of 1976)  for 
the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which the Textile  Undertakings 
(Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1995  (Ord. 6 of 1995)  was promulgated.  8 
 (2) In addition to the amount referred to in section 8 , there shall be gi ven by the Central Government, 
in cash, to the owner of every textile undertaking, simple interest at the rate of four per cent . per annum 
on the amount specified against such owner in the corresponding entry in column ( 4) of the First Schedule 
for the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on the date on which payment of such 
amount is made by the Central Government to the Commissioner.  
(3) The amount representing interest calculated at the rate specified in sub -section ( 2) shall be given 
in addition t o the amount s pecified in the First Schedule.  
(4) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the liabilities of the owners in relation to the 
textile undertakings which have vested in the Central Governmen t under section 3 shall be dis charged 
from the amount referred to in the First Schedule and also from the amounts determined under  
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2) in accordance with the rights and interests  of the creditors of the owner.  
CHAPTER IV  
MANAGEMENT , ETC.,  OF TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
10. Management , etc., of textile undertakings .—The National Textile Corporation or any person 
which that Corporation may, by order in writing, s pecify, shall be entitled to exercise the powers of 
general superi ntendence, direction,  control and management of the affairs and business of a textile 
undertaking, th e right, title and interest of a n owner in re lation to which have vested in that Corporation 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, and do all such things as the owner of the text ile undertaking is  
authorised to exercise and do.  
11. Special provision for disposal of assets of the textile undertakings in certain 
circumstances .—If the National  Textile Corporation considers i t necessary or expedient for  the better 
management, modernis ation, restructuring or revival of a textile undertaking so to do, it may, with the 
previous sanction of the Central Government, transfer, mortgage, sell or otherwise dispose of any land, 
plant, machinery or any other assets of a ny of the textile undertakings:  
Provided that the proceed s of no such transfer, mortgage, sale or disposal of assets shall be utilis ed for 
any purpose other than the purpose for which the sanction of the Central  Government has been obtained.  
12. Duty of persons in charge of  management of textile undertakings to deliver al l assets , etc.,—
On the vesting of the management of a textile undertaking in the National Te xtile Corporation, all persons 
in charge of the management of such textile undertaking immediately before such vest ing shall be bound 
to deliver to the National Textile Corporation all assets,  books of account, registers or other documents  in 
their custody relat ing to the textile undertaking.  
13. Accounts .—The National Textile Corporation shall maintain the accounts of  the textile 
undertakings in accordance with the provisions of the Compani es Act, 1956  (1 of 1956).  
CHAPTER V  
PROVISIONS RELATING TO EM PLOYEES OF TEXTILE UNDERTAKINGS  
14. Employment of  certain employees to continue .—(1) Every person who is a workman within the 
meaning of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ), and has been, immediately before the 
appointed day, in the employment of a textile undertaking shall become, on and from the appointed day, 
an employee of  the National Textile Corporation, an d shall hold office or service in the National Textile 
Corporation with the same rights and privileges as to pension, gr atuity and other matters as would have 
been admissible to him if the rights in relation to such tex tile undertaking had not been transferred to, and 
vested in, the National Textile Corporation, and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment 
in the National Textile Corporation is duly terminated or until his remuneration, terms and condition s of 
employment are duly altered by th e National Textile Corporation.  
(2) Every person who is not a workman within the meaning of th e Industrial Disputes Act, 1947   
(14 of 1947 ), and who has been, immediately before the appointed day, in the employment of a textile 
undertaking shall, in so far as such person is employed in connection with the textile undertaking which 
has vested in the National Textile Corpo ration, become, as from the appointed day, an employee of the 
National Textile Corporation and shall hold his office or service therein by the same tenure, at the same 9 
 remuneration and upon the same terms and conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to 
pension and g ratuity and other matters as he  would have held the same under the textile undertaking if it 
had not vested in the National Textile Corporation and shall continue to do so unless and until his 
employment in the National Textile Corporation is duly terminated or until his remuneration, t erms and 
conditions of employment are duly altered by th e National Textile Corporation.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or other employee of a 
textile undertaking to the National Textile Corporation shall not entitle such officer or other employee to 
any compensation under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no such claim shall be 
entert ained by any court, tribunal or other authori ty. 
(4) Where, under the terms of any contract of service or otherwise, any person whose services 
become terminated or whose services become transferred to the National Textile Corporation by reason of 
the provi sions of this Act is entitled to any arrears of salary or wages or any payment for any leave not 
availed of or other payment, not being payment by way of gratuity or pension, such person may, except to 
the extent such liability has been taken over by the C entral Government under section 5, enforce his claim 
against the owner of the textile undertaking but not against the Central Government or th e National 
Textile Corporation.  
15. Provident and other funds .—(1) Where the owner of a textile undertaking has es tablished a 
provident fund, superan nuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the persons employed in such 
textile undertaking , the monies relatable to the employees, whose services have become transferred by or 
under this Act to the National Textile Corporation shall, out of the monies standing, on the appointed day, 
to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare o r other fund, stand transferred to, and shall 
vest in, th e National Textile Corporation.  
(2) The monies which stand transferred, under sub -section ( 1), to the National Textile Corporation 
shall be dealt with by that Corporation in such manner as may  be pre scribed.  
16. Transfer of employees to a  subsidiary textile corporation .—Where any textile undertaking or 
any part thereof is transferred under this Act to a subsidiary textile corporation, every person referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2), of section 14 shall, on and from the date of such transfer, become an 
employee of the subsidiary textile corporation, and the provisions of sections 14 and 15 shall apply to 
such employee as they apply to an employee of the National Textile Corporation as  if references in the 
said sections to the National Textile Corporation were references to the subsidiary textile corporation.  
CHAPTER VI  
COMMISSIONERS OF PAYMENTS  
17. Appointmen t of Commissioners of Payments .—(1) For the purpose of disbursing the amount s 
payable to the owner of each textile undertaking, the Central Government shall, by notific ation in the 
Official Gazette, — 
(a) appoint such number of persons as it may think fit to be Commissioners of Payments; and  
(b) define the local limits wi thin which the Commissioners of Payments shall exercise the powers 
conferred, and perform the duties imposed , on them by or under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other persons at it may think fit to assist the 
Commissioner and thereupon the Comm issioner may authorise one or more of such persons also to 
exercise all or any of the powers exercis able by him under this Act, and different persons may be 
authorise d to exercise different powers.  
(3) Any person authorised by the Commissioner to exercise any powers may exercise those powers in 
the same manner and with the same effect as if they have been conferred on that person directly by this 
Act a nd not by way of authorisation.  
(4) The salaries and allowances of the Commissioner and other persons appoi nted under this section 
shall be defrayed out of the Consolidated Fund of India.  10 
 (5) References in this Act to the Commissioner shall, where more than one Co mmissioner has been 
appointed, be construed as references to the Commissioner in relation to the te xtile undertaking within the 
local limits of the jurisdiction specified under  clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1). 
18. Payment by the Central Government to the Commissioner .—(1) The Central Governmen t 
shall, within thirty days from the specified date, pay in cash to the Commissioner, for payment to the 
owner of a textile undertaking, an amount equal to the amount specified against the textile undertaking in 
the First Schedule and shall also pay to the Commissioner such sums as may be due to the owner of a 
textile undertaking under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 9.  
(2) In relation to the textile undertakings, the management of which was taken over by the Central 
Government under the Textile Undertakings (Taking Over of Man agement) Act, 1983 (40 of 1983 ), there 
shall be paid by the Central Government [in addition to the amount referred to in sub -section ( 1)], to the 
Commissioner, in cash, such amount payable under section 5 of that Act as remains  unpaid in relation t o 
the period commencing on the date on whi ch such management was taken over by the Central 
Government a nd ending on the appointed day.  
(3) In relation to the textile undertakings, the management of which was taken over by the Central 
Government under the Laxmirattan and Atherton W est Cotton Mills (Taking Over of  Management) Act, 
1976 (98 of 1976 ), there shall be paid by the Central Government [in addition to the amount referred to in 
sub-section ( 1)], to the Commissioner, in cash, such amount payable under secti on 5  of that Act as 
remains unpaid in  relation to the period commencing on the date on which such management was taken 
over by the Central Government a nd ending on the appointed day.  
(4) A deposit account shall be opened by the Central Government, in favour of the Commissioner, in 
the Public Account of India, and every amount paid under this Act to the Commissioner shall be 
deposited by him to the credit of the said deposit account in the Public Account of India, and thereafter 
the said deposit account shall b e operated by the Commissioner.  
(5) Separate records shall be maintained by the Commissioner in respect of each textile undertaking 
in relation to which payments have been made to him under this Act.  
(6) Interest accruing on the amounts standing to the credit of the deposit account referr ed to in  
sub-section ( 4) shall inure to the benefit of the owne rs of the textile undertakings.  
19. Certain powers of the National Texti le Corporation .—(1) The National Textile Corporation 
shall be entitled to receive, up to the specified date, to the exclusion of all other persons, any money due 
to the textile undertaking,  realised after the appointed day, notwithstanding that the realisations pertain to 
a per iod prior to the appointed day.  
(2) The National Textile Corporation may make a claim t o the C ommissioner with regard to every 
payment made by the Custodian after the appointed day but before the date on which the Textile 
Undertakings (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1995 (Ord. 6 of 1995 ) was promulgated for discharging any 
liability of the owner of te xtile undertaking in relation to any period prior to the appointed day, and every 
such claim shall have pr iority, in accordance with the p riorities attaching, under this Act, to the matter in 
relation to which such liability has be en discharged by the Cust odian.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the liabilities in relation to a textile undertaking in respect 
of any period prior to the appointed day which have not been discharged by the Custodian shall be the 
liabilities of the own er of that textil e undertaking.  
20. Claim s to be made to the Commissioner .—Every person having a claim against the owner of a 
textile undertaking shall prefer such claim before the Commissioner within thirt y days from the specified 
date:  
Provided that if the Commissioner is satisfied that the claimant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from preferring the claim within the said period of thirty days, he may entertain the claim within a further 
period of thirty days but not thereafter.  
  11 
 21. Priority of claims .—The claims arising out of the matters specified in the Second Schedule shall 
have priorities in accordance with the  following principles, namely: — 
(a) category I shall have precedence over all other categories and category II shall have  
preceden ce over category III and so on;  
(b) the claims specified in each of the categories, except category IV, shall rank equally and be 
paid in full, but if the amount is insufficient to meet such claims in full, they shall abate in equal 
propor tions an d be paid accordingly;  
(c) the liabilities specified in category IV shall be discharged, subject to the priorities specified in 
this section, in accordance with the terms of the secured loans and the priorit y, inter se , of such loans; 
and 
(d) the question of payment of a liability with regard to a matter specified in a lower category 
shall arise only if a surplus is left after meeting all the liabilities specified in t he immediately higher 
category.  
22. Examination of claims .—(1) On receipt of the claims un der section 20, the Commissioner shall 
arrange the claims in the order of priority specified in the Second Schedule and examine the same in 
accordance with the said order.  
(2) If, on examination of the claims, the Commissioner is of the opinion that the am ount paid to him 
under this Act is not sufficient to meet the liabilities sp ecified in any lower category, he shall not be 
required to examine the liabilities in respect of such lower category.  
23. Ad mission or rejection of claims .—(1) After examining the claims with reference to the priority 
set out in the Second Schedule, the Commissioner shall fix a certain date on or before which every 
claimant shall file the proof of his claim or be excluded from the benefit of the disburs ement made by the 
Commissioner . 
(2) Not less than fourteen days ’ notice of the date so fixed shall be given by advertisement in one 
issue of the daily newspaper in the English language and one issue of the daily newspaper in the regional 
language as the Commissioner may consider suitab le, and every such notice shall call upon the claimant 
to file the proof of his claim with the Commissioner within the time specified in the advertisement.  
(3) Every claimant who fails to file the proof of his claim within the time specified by the 
Commiss ioner shall be excluded from the disburse ments made by the Commissioner.  
(4) The Commissioner shall, after such investigation as may, in his opinion, be necessary and after 
giving the owner of the textile  undertaking an opportunity of refuting the claim an d after giving the 
claimants a reasonable opportunity of being heard, in writing, admit or reject the claim in whole or in 
part.  
(5) The Commissioner shall have the power to regulate his own procedure in all matters arising out of 
the discharge of his fun ctions including the place or places  at which h e may hold his sittings and shall, for 
the purpose of making any investigation under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Ci vil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908 ), while trying a suit, in respect of the foll owing 
matters, namely: — 
(a) the summoning and enforcing the attendance of any wit ness and examining him on oath;  
(b) the discovery and production of any document or other material  object producible as 
evidence;  
(c) the reception of evidence on affidavits; and 
(d) the issuing of any commission f or the examination of witnesses.  
(6) Any investigation before the Commissioner shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228 of th e Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) and the Commissioner shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Crimina l 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  12 
 (7) A claimant who is dissatisfied with the decision of the Commissioner may prefer an appeal 
against the decision to the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose 
jurisdiction the t extile undertaking is situated:  
Provided that where a person who is a Judge of a High Court is appointed to b e the Commissioner, 
such appeal shall lie to the High Court for the State in which the textile undertaking is situated, and such 
appeal shall be heard and disposed of by not less than two Judges of that High Court.  
24. Disbursement of money by  the Commissioner to claimants .—After admitting a claim under 
this Act, the amount due in respect of such claim shall be credited by the Commissioner to the relevant 
fund or be paid to the person or persons to whom such sums are due and on such credit or p ayment the 
liability of the owner in respect of suc h claim shall stand discharged.  
25. Disbur sement of amount to the owners .—(1) If, out of the monies paid to him in relation to a 
textile undertaking , there is a balance left after meeting the liabilities a s specified in the Second Schedule, 
the Commissioner shall disburse such balance to the own er of such textile undertaking.  
(2) Before making any payment to the owner of any textile under taking under sub -section ( 1), the 
Commissioner shall satisfy himself as to the right of such person to receive the whole or any part of such 
amount, and in the event of there being a doubt or dispute as to the right of the person to receive the 
whole or any part of the amount referred to in sections 8 and 9, the Commissione r shall refer the matter to 
the court and make the disbursement in accordance w ith the decision of that court.  
(3) For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the entries in column ( 3) of the First Schedule 
shall not be deemed to be conclusive as  to the right, title and interest of any person in relation to any 
textile undertaking specified in the corresponding entries in column ( 2) of the said Schedule and evidence 
shall be admissible to establish the right, title and interest of any person in re lation to such textile 
undertaking.  
(4) Where any machinery, equipment or other property in a textile undertaking has vested in the 
National Textile Corporation, but such machinery, equipment or other property does not belong to the 
owner of such textile u ndertaking, the amount specified in column ( 4) of the First Schedule against such 
textile undertaking shall, on a reference made to it by the Commissioner, be apportioned by the court 
between the owner of such textile undertaking and the owner of such mach inery, equipment or other 
property having due regard to the value of such machinery, equipment or other  property on the appointed 
day. 
Explanation .—In this sect ion, “court” , in relation to a textile undertaking, means the principal civil 
court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the t extile undertaking is 
situated.  
26. Undisbursed or unclaimed amounts to be deposited to the general reserve account .—Any 
money paid to the Commissioner which remains undisbursed or unclaimed f or a period of three years 
from the last day on which the disbursement was made, shall be transferred by the Commissioner to the 
general revenue account of the Central Government ; but a claim to any money so transferred may be 
preferred to the Central Gove rnment by the person entitled to such payment and shall be dealt with as if 
such transfer had not been made, the order , if any, for payment of the claim being treated as an o rder for 
the refund of revenue.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
27. Assumption of liability .—(1) Where any liability of the owner of a textile undertaking arising 
out of any item specified in category I of the Second Schedule is not discharged fully by the 
Commissioner out of the amount paid to him under this Act, the Commissioner shall  intimate in writing 
to the Central Government the extent of the liability which remains undischarged, and that liability shall 
be ass umed by the Central Government.  13 
 (2) The Central Government may, by order, direct the National Textile Corporation to take over any 
liability assumed by that Govern ment under sub -section ( 1), and on receipt of such direction, it shall be 
the duty of the National Textile Corporati on to discharge such liability.  
28. Management to continue to vest in the Custodian until al ternati ve arrangements are 
made .— Notwithstanding the vesting, under this Act, of a textile undertaking in the  National Textile 
Corporation, — 
(a) the Custodian who has been managing the affairs of such undertaking before the date on 
which the Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1995 (Ord. 6 of 1995 ) was promulgated 
shall, until alternative arrangements have been made by the National Textile Corporation, continue to 
manage the affairs of such undertakings as if the Custodian had been authorised by the National 
Textile Corporation to manage the a ffairs of such undertaking; and  
(b) the Custodian or any person authorised by him for this p urpose shall , until alternative 
arrangements have been made by the National Textile Corporation, continue to be authorised to 
operate, in relation to the textile undertaking, any account of such undertaking in a bank as if such 
Custodian or the person auth orised by the Custodian had been authorised by the National Textile 
Corporation to operate such account.  
29. Act to  override all other enactments .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any  other law for the time being in force or 
in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act or in any decree or order of an y 
court, tribunal or authority.  
30. Contracts to cease to have effect unless ratified by th e National Textile Corporation .—(1) 
Every contract entered into by the owner or occupier of any textile undertaking for any service, sale or 
supply and in force immediately before the appointed day shall, on and from the expiry of one hundred 
and twenty days from the date on  which the Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1995  
(Ord. 6 of 1995 ) was promulgated, cease to have effect unless such contract is before the expiry of that 
period, ratified, in writing, by the National Textile Corporation and in ratifying s uch contract the National 
Textile Corporation may make such alterations or modificatio ns therein as it may think fit:  
Provided that the National Textile Corporation shall not omit to ratify a contract, and shall not make 
any alteration or modification in a  contract, unless it is satisfied that such contract is unduly onerous or 
has been entered into in bad faith or is detrimental to the intere sts of the textile undertaking.  
(2) The National Textile Corporation shall not omit to ratify a contract or make any  alteration or 
modification therein except after giving to the parties to the contract a reasonable opportunity of being 
heard and except after recording in writing its reasons for refusal to ratify the contract or for making any 
alteration or modification  therein.  
31. Penalties .—Any person who, — 
(a) having in his possession, custody or control any property forming part of a textile 
undertaking, wrongfully withholds such property from the Central Government or the National 
Textile Corporation, or any person  authorised by that Government or Corporation, as the case may be, 
in this behalf, or  
(b) wrongfully obtains possession of, or retains, any property forming part of the textile 
undertaking or wilfully withholds or fails to furnish to the Central Government, the National Textile 
Corporation or any person specified by that Government, or Corporat ion, as the case may be, any 
document relating to such textile undertaking which may be in his possession, custody or control or 
fails to deliver to the National Textile Corporation or any person specified by that Corporation any 
assets, books of account , registers or other documents in his custody relating  to the textile 
undertaking, or  
  14 
 (c) wrongfully removes or destroys any property forming part of any textile undertaking or 
prefers any claim under this Act which he knows or has reasonable cause to beli eve to be false or 
grossly inaccurate,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten  thousand rupees, or with both.  
32. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has be en committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was r esponsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had ex ercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the c onsent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this se ction, — 
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) "director", in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
33. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer of that Government or the Custodian or the National 
Textile Corporation or any subsidiary textile  corporation or any officer or other person authorised by 
either of such Corporations  for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this 
Act.  
34. Textile companies n ot to be wound up by the Court .—No proceeding for the winding up o f a 
textile company, the right, title and interest in relation to the textile undertaking owned by which have 
vested in the National Textile Corporation under this Act or for the appointment of a receiver in respect of 
the business of the textile undertaki ng shall lie or be proceeded with in any court except with con sent of 
the Central Government.  
35. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers exercisable by it under this Act, other than the power under section 36, may also be 
exercised by any person or persons as may be sp ecified in the notification.  
(2) Whenever any delegation of power is made under sub -section ( 1), the person to whom such power 
has been delegated shall act under the directi on, control and supervision of the Central Government.  
36. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central G overnment may, by notification , make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time within which and the manner in which an intimation referred to in sub -section ( 4) of 
section 4 sha ll be given;  
(b) the manner in which monies in any prov ident or other fund referred to in section 15 shall be 
dealt with;  
(c) any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescribed.  15 
 (3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made before ea ch House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sess ions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything pr eviously done u nder 
that rule.  
37. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may , by order not inconsistent with the provisions of t his Act, remove 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date on 
which  the Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Ordinance, 1995 (Or d. 6 of 1995 ) was promulgated.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
38. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Textile Undertakings (N ationalisation) Ordinance, 1995   
(Ord. 6 of 1995),  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstand ing such repeal, anything done o r any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corres ponding provisions of this Act.  
1[39. Validation .—Notwithstanding anything contained  in any judgment, decree or order of any 
court, tribunal or other authority, — 
(a) the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) Laws 
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2014  (36 of 2014) , shall have and shall be deemed always to have 
effect for all purposes as if the provisions of this Act, as amended by the said Act, had been in force at 
all material times;  
(b) any lease -hold property divested from the National Textile Corporation to any person under 
the provisions of t his Act, as it stood immediately before the commencement of the Textile 
Undertakings (Nationalisation) Laws (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2014  (36 of 2014) , shall 
stand transferred to and vest or continue to vest, free from all encumbrances, in the Natio nal Textile 
Corporation in the same manner as it was vested in the National Textile Corporation before such 
divesting of that property under the provisions of this Act as if the provisions of this Act, as amended 
by the aforesaid Act, were in force at all material times;  
(c) no suit or other proceedings shall, without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
provisions, be maintained or continued in any court or tribunal or authority for the enforcement of any 
decree or order or direction given by such court or tribunal or authority, notwithstanding any 
undertaking filed by the National Textile Corporation in any court or tribunal or authority, directing 
divestment of such lease -hold property from the National Textile Corporation vested in it under 
section 3 of this Act, as it stood before the commencement of the Textile Undertakings 
(Nationalisation) Laws (Amendment and Validation) Act, 2014  (36 of 2014) , and such lease -hold 
property shall continue to vest in the National Textile Corporation under sectio n 3 of this Act, as 
amended by the aforesaid Act, as if the said section was in force at all material times;  
(d) any transfer of any property, vested in the National Textile Corporation, by virtue of any order 
of attachment, seizure or sale in execution of  a decree of a civil court or orders of any tribunal or 
other authority in respect of lease -hold property vested in the National Textile Corporation which is 
contrary to the provisions of this Act, as amended by the Textile Undertakings (Nationalisation) L aws 
(Amendment and Validation) Act, 2014  (36 of 2014) , shall be deemed to be null and void and 
notwithstanding such transfer, continue to vest in the National Textile Corporation under this Act.]   
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 2014, s. 7 (w.e.f. 24 -10-2014).  16 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sections 2( l) and ( m), 8 and 18( 1)] 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of the textile undertaking  Name of the owner  Amount  
(in rupees)  
(1) (2) (3) (4) 
 
1. Elphinstone Spinning and Weaving 
Mills, Elphinstone Road, Bombay.  The Elphinstone Spinning and Weaving 
Mills Co. Ltd., Kamani Chambers, 32, 
Ramji Bhai Kamani Marg, Bombay -38. 
 4,56,98,000  
2. Finlay Mills, 10/11, Dr. S.S. Rao 
Road, Bombay.  The Finlay Mills Ltd., Chartered Bank 
Building Fort, Bombay -23. 
 8,14,87,000  
3. Gold Mohur Mills, Dadasaheb 
Phalke Road, Dadar, Bombay.  The Gold Mohur Mills Ltd ., Chartered Bank 
Building, Fort, Bombay -23. 
 5,45,55,000  
4. Jam Manufacturing Mills, Lalbaug, 
Parel, Bombay.  The Jam Manufacturing Co. Ltd., Lalbaug, 
Parel, Bombay -12. 
 2,79,62,000  
5. Kohinoor Mills (No. 1), Naigaum 
Cross Road, Dadar, Bombay.    
6. Kohinoor Mills (No. 2), Naigaum 
Cross Road, Dadar, Bombay.  The Kohinoor Mills Co. Ltd., Killick 
House, Charanjit Rai Marg (Home Street), 
Fort, Bombay -1. 2,33,38,000  
7. Kohinoor Mills (No. 3), Lady 
Jamshedji Road, Dadar, Bombay.  
   
8. New City of Bombay M anufacturing 
Mills, 63, Tukaram B. Kadam Marg, 
Bombay.  The New City of Bombay Manufacturing 
Co. Ltd., 63, Tukaram Baisaji Kadam Path, 
Bombay -33. 
 4,23,57,000  
9. Podar Mills, N.M, Joshi Marg, 
Bombay . The Po dar Mills Ltd., Podar Chambers, 
Syed Abdulla Brelvi Road, Fort, Bombay -1. 
 7,46,30,000  
10. Podar Mills (Process House), Ganpat 
Rao Kadam Marg, Bombay.  The P odar Mills Ltd., Podar Chambers,  
Syed Abdulla Brelvi Road, Fort, Bombay -1. 
 1,91,94,000  
11. Shree Madhusudan Mills, Pandurang 
Budhkar Marg, Bombay.  Shree Madhusudan Mills Ltd., 31, 
Chowringhee Road, Calcutta -16. 
 2,70,85,000  
12. Shree Sitaram Mills, N.M. Joshi 
Marg, Bombay.  Shree Sitaram Mills Ltd., N.M. Joshi Marg, 
Bombay -11. 
 1,95,20,000  
13. Tata Mills, Dr. Ambedkar Road, 
Dadar, Bombay.  The Tata Mills Ltd., Bombay House, 24 
Homi Mody Street, Fort, Bombay - 23. 
 9,33,47,000  
14. Laxmirattan Cotton Mills, Kalpi 
Road Kanpur.  Laxmirattan Cotton Mills Company 
Limited, Behari Niwas, Chatai Mahal, 
Kanpur.  
 2,22,39,000  
15. Atherton West Cotton Mills, Anwar 
Ganj, Kanpur.  Atherton West and Company Limited, 
Anwarganj, Kanpur.  1,10,95,000  17 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See sections 21, 22, 23 and 27)  
Order of priorities for discharge of liabilities in r espect of a textile undertaking  
PART A  
Post-take-over management period  
Category I .— 
(a) Loans advanced by a Bank.  
(b) Loans advanced by an  institution other than a Bank.  
(c) Any other loan.  
(d) Any credit availed of for purpose of tra de or manufacturing operations.  
Category II.— 
(a) Revenue, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Government or a State Government.  
(b) Any other dues.  
PART B  
Pre-take-over management period  
Category III .— 
Arrears in relation to provident fund, salaries and wages, and other amounts, due to an employee.  
Category IV .— 
Secured loans.  
Category V .— 
Revenues, taxes, cesses, rates or any other dues to the Central Government, a State Government, a 
local authorit y or a State Electricity Board.  
Category VI .— 
(a) Any credit availed of for purpose of trade or manufacturing operations.  
(b) Any other dues.  
--------------------------The Waqf Act, 1995--------------------------
1 
 THE WAQF  ACT, 1995  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS   
1. Short  title, extent and commencement . 
2. Application  of the Act . 
3. Definition s. 
 
CHAPTER II  
SURVEY OF AUQAF  
4. Preliminary survey of auqaf. 
5. Publication  of list of auqaf. 
6. Disputes regarding auqaf. 
7. Power of  Tribunal to determine disputes regarding auqaf. 
8. State Government to bear cost of survey.  
 
CHAPTER III  
CENTRAL WAQF  COUNCIL  
9. Establishment and constitution of Central Waqf Council . 
10. Finance of Council . 
11. Accounts and audit . 
12. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND THEIR FUNC TIONS  
13. Incorporation . 
14. Composition  of Board . 
15. Term of office . 
16. Disqualification for being appointed,  or for continuing as, a member of the Board . 
17. Meetings of the Board . 
18. Committees of the Board . 
19. Resignation of Chairperson and members . 
20. Removal of Chairperson and member . 
20A. Removal of Chairperson by vote of no confidence.  
21. Filling of a vacancy . 
22. Vacancies , etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board . 
23. Appointment of Chief Executive Officer and his term of office and other conditions of service . 
24. Officers  and other employees of the Board . 
25. Duties and powers of Chief Executive Officer . 
26. Powers of Chief Executive Officer in respect of orders or resolutions of Board . 
27. Delegation of powers by the Board . 
28. Power of District Magistrate , Additional District Magistrate  or Sub -Divisional Magistrate to 
implement the directions of the Board.  
29. Powers of Chief Executive Officer to inspect records,  registers, etc . 2 
 SECTIONS  
30. Inspection of records . 
31. Prevention of disqualification for membership of Parliament . 
32. Powers and function s of the Board . 
33. Powers of inspection by Chief Executive Officer or persons authorised by him . 
34. Recovery  of the  amount determined under section 33 . 
35. Conditional attachment by Tribuna l. 
 
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION OF AUQAF  
36. Registration . 
37. Register of auqaf. 
38. Powers of  Board to appoint Executive Officer . 
39. Powers of Board in relation to auqaf  which have ceased to exist . 
40. Decision if a property is waqf  property . 
41. Power to cause registration of waqf  and to amend register . 
42. Change in the management of auqaf  to be notified . 
43. Auqaf  registered before the commencement of this Act deemed to be registered . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUN TS OF AUQAF 
44. Budget . 
45. Preparation of budget of auqaf  under direct management of the Board . 
46. Submission of  Accounts of  auqaf . 
47. Audit of accounts of  auqaf . 
48. Board to pass orders on auditor’s report . 
49. Sums certified to be due recoverable as arrears of land revenue . 
50. Duties of mutawalli . 
51. Alienation of waqf  property without sanction of Board to be void . 
52. Recovery of waqf  property transferred in contravention of s ection 51 . 
52A. Penalty for alienation of waqf property w ithout sanction of Board.  
53. Restriction on pur chase of property on behalf of waqf . 
54. Removal of encroachment from waqf  property . 
55. Enforcement of orders  made under section 54 . 
55A. Disposal of property left on waqf property by unauthorised occupa nts. 
56. Restriction on power to grant l ease of waqf  property . 
57. Mutawalli entitled to pay certain costs from income of waqf   property . 
58. Power of Board to pay dues in case of default by mutawalli . 
59. Creation of reserve fund . 
60. Extension of time . 
61. Pena lties. 
62. Mutawalli not to spend any money belonging to waqf  for self defence . 
63. Power to appoint mutawallis in certain cases . 
64. Removal of mutawalli . 
65. Assumption of direct management of certain  auqaf  by the Board . 
66. Powers of appointment and removal of mutawalli when to be exercised by the State Government . 
67. Supervision an d supersession of committee of m anagement . 
68. Duty of mutawalli or committee to deliver possession of records , etc. 
69. Power of Board to  frame scheme for administration of waqf . 
70. Inquiry relating to administration of waqf . 
71. Manner of holding inquiry . 
 3 
 CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE OF THE BOARD  
SECTIONS  
72. Annual  contribution payable to Board . 
73. Power of Chief Executive Officer to direct banks or other person to make payments . 
74. Deduction of contribution from perpetual annuity payable to the waqf . 
75. Power of board to borrow . 
76. Mutawalli not to lend or borrow moneys without sanction . 
77. Waqf Fund . 
78. Budget of Board . 
79. Accounts of Board . 
80. Audit of accounts of Board . 
81. State Government to pass orders on auditor’s report . 
82. Dues of  Board to be rec overed as arrears of land revenue . 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS  
83. Constitution of Tribunals, etc.  
84. Tribunal to hold proceedings expeditiously and to furnish to the parties copies of its de cision . 
85. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts . 
86. Appointment of a receiver in certain cases . 
87. [Omitted. ] 
88. Bar to challenge  of validity of any notification, etc . 
89. Notice of suits by parties against Board . 
90. Notice of suits, etc., by courts . 
91. Proceedings  under the Act 1 of 1894 . 
92. Board to be party to suit or proceeding . 
93. Bar to compromise of suits by or against mutawall i. 
94. Power  to make application to the Tribunal in case of failure of mutawalli to disch arge his duties . 
95. Power of appellate authority to entertain appeal after expiry of specified period . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
96. Power of Central Government to regulate secular activities of  auqaf . 
97. Directions by State Government . 
98. Annual report b y State Government . 
99. Power to supersede Board . 
100. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
101. Survey Commissioner, members and officers of the Board , deemed to be public servants . 
102. Special provision  for reorganisation of certain Boards . 
103. Special provision for establishment of Board for part of a State . 
104. Application of Act to properties given or donated by persons not professing Islam for support of  
certain waqf . 
104A. Prohibition of sale, gift, exchange, mortgage or transfer of waqf property.  
104B. Restoration of waqf properties in occupation of Government agencies to waqf Board.  
105. Power of Board and Chief Executive Officer to require copies of documents, etc. , to be 
furnished . 
106. Powers of Central Gov ernment to constitute common Boards . 
107. Act 36 of 1963 not to apply for recovery of waqf  properties . 
108. Special provision as  to evacuee waqf  properties . 
108A. Act to have overriding effect.  4 
 SECTIONS  
109. Power to make  rules. 
110. Powers to make regulations by the Board . 
111. Laying of rules and regulations before State Legislature . 
112. Repeal and savings . 
113. Power to remove difficulties . 
 
  5 
 THE 2[WAQF]  ACT, 1995  
ACT NO. 43 OF 1995  
[22nd November , 1995 .] 
An Act to provide for the better administration of 1[Auqaf]  and for matters connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -sixth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  2[Waqf]  Act, 1995.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force in a State on such date3 as the Central Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint ; and different dates may be appointed for different areas within a State and 
for different provisions of  this Act, and any reference in any provision to the commencement of  this Act, 
shall , in relation to any State or area ther ein, be construed as reference to the commencement of  that 
provision in such State or area.  
2. Application of the Act .—Save as otherwise expressly provided under this Act, this Act shall apply 
to all  1[auqaf ] whether created before or after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that nothing in this Act shall apply to Durgah Khawaja Saheb, Ajmer to which the Durgah 
Khawaja Saheb Act, 1955  (36 of 1955) applies.  
3. Definition s.—In this Act, unless the context ot herwise requires ,— 
(a) “beneficiary” means a person or object for whose benefit a 2[waqf]  is created and includes 
religious, pious and charitable objects and any other objects of public utility sanctioned by the 
Muslim law:  
(b) “benefit” does not include any benefit which a mutawalli is entitled to claim solely by reason 
of his being such mutawalli;  
(c) “Board” means a Board of 2[Waqf] established under sub -section ( 1), or as the case may be, 
under sub -section ( 2) of section  13 and shall include a common 2[Waqf] Board established 
under  section  106; 
(d) “Chief Executive Officer” means the Chief Executive Officer appointed under  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 23 ; 
(e) “Council” means the Central 2[Waqf] Council established under  section 9 ; 
4[(ee) “encroacher” means any person or institution, public or private, occupying waqf property, 
in whole or part, without the authority of law and includes a person whose tenancy, lease or lic ence 
has expired or has been terminated by mutawalli or the Board; ] 
(f) “Executive Officer” means the Executive Officer appointed by the Board under  sub-section ( 1) 
of section 3 8; 
5[(g) “list of auqaf” means the list of auqaf published under sub -section ( 2) of section 5 or 
contained in the register of auq af maintained under section 37; ] 
(h) “member” means a member of the Board and includes the Chairperson;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s.  2, for “ wakfs ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s.  3, ibid., for “wakf ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. 1st January, 1996, vide notification No. S.O. 1007 (E), dated 27 th December, 1995, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 
4. Ins. by s.  5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s.  5, ibid., for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  6 
 (i) “mutawalli” means any person appointed, either verbally or under any deed or instrument by 
which a 1[waqf]  has been created, or by a competent authority, to be the mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  and 
includes any person who is a mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  by virtue of any custom or who is a                        
naib-mutawalli, kha ndim, mujawar, sajjadanashin, amin or oth er person appointed by a mutawalli 
to perform the duties  of a mutawalli and save  as otherwise provided  in this Act, any  person, 
committee or corporation for the time being, managing or administering an y 1[waqf]  or 1[waqf]  
property:  
Provided that no member of a committee or corporation shall be deemed to be a mutawalli unless 
such member is an office -bearer of such committee or corporation : 
2[Provided further that the mutawalli shall be a citizen of India and shall fulfil such other 
qualifications as may be prescribed:  
Provided also that in case a waqf has specified any qualifications, such qualifications may be 
provided in the rules as may be made by the State Government; ] 
(j) “net annual income”, in relation to a 1[waqf] , means net annual income determined in 
accordance with the provisions of the  Explanations  to sub -section ( 1) of section 72 ; 
(k) “person interested in a 1[waqf] ” means any pe rson who is entitled to receive any pecuniary or 
other bene fits from the 1[waqf]  and includes — 
(i) any person who has a right to 3[offer prayer]  or to perform any religious rite in a mosque, 
idgah,  imambara,dargah, 4[khanqah, peerkhana and karbala] , maqbara, graveyard or any other 
religious institution connected with the 1[waqf]  or to participate in any religious or charitable 
institution under the 1[waqf] ; 
(ii) the 5[waqif]  and any descendant of the 5[waqif]  and the mutawalli;  
(l) “prescribed”, except in Chapter III, means prescribed by rules made by the State Governments;  
(m) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Board under this Act;  
(n) “Shia 1[waqf] ” means a 1[waqf]   governed by Shia Law;  
(o) “Sunni 1[waqf] ” means a 1[waqf]  governed  by Sunni Law;  
(p) “Survey Commissioner” means the Survey Commissioner of 1[Waqf] appointed under            
sub-section ( 1) of section  4 and includes any Additional or Assistant Survey Commissioners of 
6[Auqaf]  under sub -section ( 2) of section  4; 
(q) “Tribunal”, in relation to any area, means the Tribunal constit uted under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section  83, having jurisdiction in relation to that area;  
7[(r) “waqf” means the permanent dedication by any person, of any movable or immovable 
property for any purpose recognised by the Muslim law as pious, religious or charitable and 
inclu des— 
(i) a waqf by user but such waqf shall not cease to be a waqf by reason only of the user 
having ceased irrespective of the period of such cesser;  
(ii) a Shamlat Patti, Shamlat Deh, Jumla Malkkan or by any other name entered in a revenue 
record;  
(iii) “grants”, including mashrat -ul-khidmat for any purpose recognised by the Muslim law as 
pious, religious or charitable; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “ wakf ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s.  5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for “worship ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for “khangah ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s.  4, ibid., for “wakif ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Subs. by s.  4, ibid., for “wakfs ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
7. Subs. by s.  5, ibid., for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  7 
 (iv) a waqf -alal-aulad to the extent to which the property is dedicated for any purpose 
recognised by Muslim law as pious, religious or charitable, provided when the line of succession 
fails, the income of the waqf shall be spent for education, development, welfa re and such other 
purposes as recognised by Muslim law,  
and “waqif” means any person making such dedication ;] 
 (s) “1[waqf]  deed” means any  deed or instrument by which a 1[waqf]  has been created and 
includes any  valid subsequent deed or instrument by which  any of the terms of the original dedication 
have been varied;  
(t) “1[Waqf] Fund” means a 1[waqf]  fund formed under  sub-section ( 1) of section 77 . 
CHAPTER II  
SURVEY OF 2[AUQAF]  
4. Pr eliminary survey of 2[auqaf] .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, appoint for the State a Survey Commissioner of 2[Auqaf]  and as many Additional or Assistant 
Survey Commissioners of 2[Auqaf]  as may be necessary for the purpose of making a survey of 3[auqaf  in 
the State ]. 
4[(1A) Every State Government shall maintain a list of auqaf referred to in sub -section ( 1) and the 
survey of auqaf shall be completed within a period of one year from the da te of commencement of the 
Wakf (Amendment) Act, 2013  (27 of 2013) , in case such survey was not done before the commencement 
of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 2013:  
Provided that where no Survey Commissioner of Waqf has been appointed, a Survey Commissioner 
for auqaf shall be appointed within three months from the date of  such commencement.]  
(2) All Additional and Assistant Survey Commissioner of 2[Auqaf]  shall perform their functions 
under this Act under the general supervision and control of the Survey Commissioner of 2[Auqaf] . 
(3) The Survey Commissioner shall, after making such inquiry as he may consider necessary, submit 
his report, in respect of 2[auqaf] existing at the date of the commencement of this Act in the State or any 
part thereof, to the State Government containing the  following particulars, namely: — 
(a) the number of 2[auqaf]  in the State showing the Shia 2[auqaf]  and Sunni 2[auqaf]  separate ly; 
(b) the nature and objects of each 1[waqf] ; 
(c) the gross income of the property comprised in each 1[waqf] ; 
(d) the amount of land revenue, cesses, rates and taxes payable in respect of each 1[waqf] ; 
(e) the expenses incurred in the realisation of the income and the pay or other remuneration of the 
mutawalli of each 1[waqf] ; and 
(f) such other particulars relating to each 1[waqf] as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Survey Commissioner shall, while making any inquiry, have the same powers as are vested in 
a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) in respect of  the following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) summoning and examining any witness;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of any witness or accounts;  
(e) making any local inspection or local investigation;  
(f) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “ wakf ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “ wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “wakfs existing in the State at the date of the commencement of this Act” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  8 
 (5) If, during any such inquiry, any dispute arises as to whether a particular 1[waqf]  is a Shia 
1[waqf]  or Sunni 1[waqf]  and there are clear indications in the deed of   1[waqf]  as to its nature, the dispute 
shall be decided on the basis of such deed.  
(6) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct the Survey 
Commissioner to make a second or subsequent survey of  1[waqf ] properties in the State and th e 
provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) shall apply to such survey as they apply to a survey 
directed under sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that no such second or subsequent survey shall be made until the expiry of a period of            
2[ten years ] from the date on which the report in relation to the immediately previous survey was 
submitted under sub -section ( 3): 
3[Provided further that the waqf properties already notified shall not be reviewed again in subsequent 
survey except where the status of such property has been changed in accordance with the provisions of 
any law. ] 
5. Public ation of list of 4[auqaf] .—(1) On receipt of a report under  sub-section  (3) of s ection 4 , the 
State Government shall forward a copy of the same to the Board.  
(2) The Board shall examine the report forwarded to it under sub -section ( 1) and 5[fordward it back to 
the Government within a period of six months for publi cation  in the Official Gazette ] a list of  Sunni 
4[auqaf]  or Shia 4[auqaf]  in the State, whether in existence at the commencement of this Act or coming 
into existence thereafter, to which the report relates, and containing such other particulars as may be 
prescribed.  
6[(3) The revenue authorities shall —  
(i) include the list of auqaf referred to in sub -section ( 2), while updating the land records; and  
(ii) take into consideration the list of auqaf referred to in sub -section ( 2), while deciding mutation 
in the land records.  
(4) The State Government shall maintain a record of the lists published under sub -section ( 2) from 
time to time. ] 
6. Dis putes regarding 4[auqaf] .—(1) If any question arises whether a particular property specified as 
1[waqf]  property in the list of 4[auqaf]  is 1[waqf]  property or not or whether a 1[waqf]  specified in such list 
is a Shia 1[waqf]  or Sunni 1[waqf] , the Board or the mutawalli of the 1[waqf ] or 7[any person aggrieved]  
may institute a suit in a Tribunal for the decision of the question and the decision of the Tribunal in 
respect of such matter shall be final:  
Provided that no such suit shall be entertained by the Tribunal after the expiry of one year from the 
date of the publication of the list of 4[auqaf] : 
8[Provided further that no suit shall be instituted before the Tribunal in respect of such properties 
notified in a second or subsequent survey pursuant to the provisions contained in sub-section ( 6) of 
section 4. ] 
9*   *   *   *   * 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no proceeding under this Act in respect of 
any 1[waqf]  shall be stayed by reason only of the pendency of any such suit or of any appeal or other 
proceeding arising out of such suit.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “twenty years” (w.e. f. 1-11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “publish in the Official Gazette” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
7. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “any person interested therein” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
8. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
9. The Explanation omitted by s. 8, ibid.(w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  9 
 (3) The Survey Commissioner shall not be made a party to any suit under sub -section ( 1) and no suit, 
prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against him in respect of anything which is in good faith 
done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act or any rules made thereunder.  
(4) The list of  1[auqaf]  shall, unless it is modified in pursuance of a decision of the Tribunal under  
sub-section ( 1), be final and conclusive.  
(5) On and from the commencement of  this Act in a State, no suit or other legal proceeding shall be 
instituted or commenced in a court in that State in relation to any question referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
7. Power of Tribunal to determine disputes regarding 1[auqaf] .—(1) If, after the commencement 
of this Act, 2[any question  or dispute]  arises, whether a particular property specified as 3[waqf]  property in 
a list of 1[auqaf]  is 3[waqf]  property or not, or whether a 3[waqf]  specified in such list is a Shia 3[waqf]  or 
a Sunni 3[waqf] , the Board or the mutawalli of the 3[waqf] , 4[or any person aggrieved by the publication 
of the list of auqaf under section 5]  therein, may apply to the Tribunal having jurisdiction in relation to 
such property, for the decision of the question and the decision of the Tribunal thereon shall be final:  
Provided that — 
(a) in the case of the list of 1[auqaf]  relating to any part of t he State and published after the 
commencement of this Act no such application shall be entertained after the expiry of one year from 
the date of publication of the list of 1[auqaf] ; and  
(b) in the case of the list of 1[auqaf]  relating to any part of the St ate and published at any time 
within a period of one year immediately preceding the commencement of this Act, such an 
application may be entertained by Tribunal within the period of one year from such commencement:  
Provided further that where any such ques tion has been heard and finally decided by a civil court in a 
suit instituted before such commencement, the Tribunal shall not re -open such question.  
(2) Except where the Tribunal has no jurisdiction by reason of the provisions of sub -section ( 5), no 
proceeding under this section in respect of any 3[waqf]  shall be stayed by any court, tribunal or other 
authority by reason only of the pendency of any suit, application or appeal or other proceeding arising out 
of any such suit, application, appeal or other proceeding.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall not be made a party to any application under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) The list of  1[auqaf]  and where any such list is modified in pursuance of a decision of the Tribunal 
under sub -section ( 1), the list  as so modified, shall be final.  
(5) The Tribunal shall not have jurisdiction to determine any matter which is the subject -matter of any 
suit or proceeding instituted or commenced in a civil court under  sub-section ( 1) of section 6 , before the 
commencement of the Act or which is the subject -matter of any appeal from the decree passed before 
such commencement in any such suit or proceeding or of any application for revision or review arising 
out of such suit, proceeding or appeal, as the case may be.  
5[(6) The Tribunal shall have the powers of assessment of damages by unauthorised occupation of 
waqf property and to penalise such unauthorised occupants for their illegal occupation of the waqf 
prope rty and to recover the damages as arrears of land revenue through the Collector:  
Provided that whosoever, being a public servant, fails in his lawful duty to prevent or remove an 
encroachment, shall on conviction be punishable with fine which may extend to  fifteen thousand rupees 
for each such offence. ] 
6[8. State Government to bear cost of survey .—The total cost of making a survey including the cost 
of publication of the list or lists of auqaf under this Chapter shall be borne by the State Government. ] 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf s” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “any question”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for “ or any person interested ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for section 8  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  10 
 CHAPTER III  
CENTRAL 1[WAQF] COUNCIL  
9. Establishment and constitution of Central 1[Waqf] Council .—2[(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a Council to be called the Central Waqf Council, for 
the purpose of advising the Central Government, the State Governments and the Boards on matters 
concerning the working of Boards and the due administ ration of auqaf.  
(1A) The Council referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall issue directives to the Boards, on such issues and 
in such manner, as provided under sub -sections ( 4) and ( 5).] 
(2) The Council shall consist of — 
(a) the Union Minister in -charge of   1[waqf]—ex officio  Chairperson;  
(b) the following members to be appointed by the Central Governmen t from amongst Muslims, 
namely: — 
(i) three persons to represent Muslim organisations having all India character and national 
importance;  
3[(ii) four persons of national eminence, one each from the fields of administration or 
management, financial management, engineering or architecture and medicine; ] 
(iii) three Members of Parliament of whom two shall be from the House of the People and 
one from the Council of States;  
(iv) Chairpersons of  three Boards by rotation;  
(v) two persons who have been Judges of the Supreme Court or a High Court;  
(vi) one Advocate of national eminence;  
(vii) one person to represent the mutawallis of the 1[waqf]  having a gross annual income of 
rupees five lakhs and above;  
(viii) three persons who are  eminent scholars in Muslim Law:  
4[Provided that at least two of the members appointed under sub -clauses ( i) to ( viii) shall be 
women. ] 
(3) The term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions   by, and the 
manner of filling casual vacancies among, members of the Council sh all be such as may be, prescribed by 
rules made by the Central Government.  
4[(4) The State Government or, as the case may be, the Board, shall furnish information to the 
Council on the performance of Waqf Boards in the State, particularly on their financia l performance, 
survey, maintenance of waqf deeds, revenue records, encroachment of waqf properties, annual reports and 
audit reports in the manner and time as may be specified by the Council and it may suo motu  call for 
information on specific issues from the Board, if it is satisfied that there was prima facie  evidence of 
irregularity or violation of the provisions of this Act and if the Council is satisfied that such irregularity or 
violation of the Act is established, it may issue such directive, as cons idered appropriate, which shall be 
complied with by the concerned Board under intimation to the concerned State Government.  
(5) Any dispute arising out of a directive issued by the Council under sub -section ( 4) shall be referred 
to a Board of Adjudication to be constituted by the Central Government, to be presided over by a retired 
Judge of the Supreme Court or a retired Chief Justice of a High Court and the fees and travelling and 
other allowances payable to the Presiding Officer shall be such as may be sp ecified by that Government. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub-clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e. f. 1-11-2013).  11 
 10. Finance of Council .—(1) Every Board shall pay from its 1[Waqf] Fund annually to the Council 
such contribution a s is equivalent to one per cent.  of the aggregate of the net annual income of the 
2[auqaf]  in respect of which contribution is payable under  sub-section ( 1) of section 72 : 
Provided that where the Board, in the case of any particular 1[waqf]  has remitted under                   
sub-section ( 2) of section 72  the whole of the contribution payable to it under  sub-section  (1) of that 
section, then for calculating the contribution payable to the Council under this section the net annual 
income of the 1[waqf]  in respect of which such remission has been granted shal l not be taken into 
account.  
(2) All monies received by the Council under sub -section ( 1) and all other monies received by it as 
donations, benefactions and grants shall form a fund to be called the Central 1[Waqf] Fund.  
(3) Subject to any rules that may be made by the Central Government in this behalf, the Central 
1[Waqf] Fund shall be under the control of the Council and may be applied for such purposes as the 
Council may deem fit.  
11. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Council s hall cause to be maintained such books of account and 
other books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may be prescribed by rules 
made by the Central Government.  
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited and examined annually by such auditor as may be 
appointed by the Central Government.  
(3) The costs of the audit shall be paid from the Central 1[Waqf] Fund.  
12. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may , 
by notification  in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the purposes of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules  may 
provide for all or any of the f ollowing matters, namely: — 
(a) the term of office of, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions by,  and 
the manner of filling casual vacancies among, the members of the Council;  
(b) control over and application of the Central 1[Waqf] Fund;  
(c) the form and manner in which accounts of the Council may be maintained.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Chapter shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, befo re each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of third days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under the rule.  
CHAPTER IV  
ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARDS AND THEIR FUNC TIONS  
13. Incorporation .—(1) With effect from such date as the State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established a Board of 2[Auqaf]  under such 
name as may b e specified in the notification:  
3[Provided that in case where  a Board of Waqf has not been established, as required under this      
sub-section, a Board of Waqf shall, without prejudice to the provisions of this Act or any other law for the 
time being in force, be established within six months from the date of comme ncement of the Wakf 
(Amendment) Act, 2013  (27 of 2013) .] 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf s” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  12 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if the Shia 1[auqaf]  in any State constitute 
in number more than fifteen per cent . of all the 1[auqaf]  in the State or if the income of the properties of 
the Shia 1[auqaf]  in the State constitutes more than fifteen per cent . of the total income of properties of all 
the 1[auqaf]  in the State, the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , establish a 
Board of 1[Auqaf]  each for Sunni 1[auqaf]  and for Shia 1[auqaf]  under such names as may be specified in 
the notification.  
2[(2A) Where a Board of Waqf is established under sub -section ( 2) of section 13, in the case of Shia 
waqf, the Members shall belong to the Shia Muslim and in the case of Sunni waqf, the Members shall 
belong to the Sunni Muslim. ] 
(3) The Board shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal with power 
to acquire and hold property and to transfer any such property subject to such conditions and restrictions 
as may be prescribed and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
14. Composition of Board .—(1) The Board for a State and 3[the National Capital Territory of Delhi ] 
shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson;  
(b) one and not more than two members, as the State Government may think fit, to be elected 
from each of the electoral colleges consi sting of — 
(i) Muslim Members of Parliament from the State or, as the case may be, 3[the National 
Capital Terri tory of Delhi ]; 
(ii) Muslim Members of the State Legislature;  
4[(iii) Muslim members of the Bar Council of the concerned State or Union territory:  
Provided that in case there is no Muslim member of the Bar Council of a State or a               
Union territory, the State Government or the Union territory administration, as the case may be, 
may nominate any senior Muslim advocate from that State or the Union territory, and ] 
(iv) mutawallis of the 1[auqaf]  having an annual income of rupees one lakh and a bove . 
5[Explanation I .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the members from 
categories mentioned in sub -clauses ( i) to ( iv), shall be elected from the electoral college  
constituted for each category.  
Explanation II .—For the removal of doubts it is hereby declared that in case a Muslim 
member ceases to be a Member of Parliament from the State or National Capital Territory of 
Delhi as referred to in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( b) or ceases to be a Member of the State 
Legislative Assembly as  required under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( b), such member shall be 
deemed to have vacated the office of the member of the Board for the State or National Capital 
Territory of Delhi, as the case may be, from the date from which such member ceased to be a 
Member of Parliament from the  State National Capital Territory of Delhi, or a Member of the 
State Legislative Assembly, as the case may be; ] 
6[(c) one person from amongst Muslims, who has professional experience in town planning or 
business management, soci al work, finance or revenue, agriculture and development activities, to be 
nominated by the State Government;  
(d) one person each from amongst Muslims, to be nominated by the State Government from 
recognised scholars in Shia and Sunni Islamic Theology;  
(e) one person from amongst Muslims, to be nominated by the State Government from amongst 
the officers of the State Government not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the State Government; ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf s” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “ the Union territory of Delhi ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for sub-clause ( iii) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013) . 
6. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for clauses ( c), (d) and ( e) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  13 
 1[(1A) No Minister of the Central Government or, as the case may be,  a State Government, shall 
be elected or nominated as a member of the Board:  
Provided that in case of a Union territory, the Board shall consist of not less than five and not 
more than seven members to be appointed by the Central Government from categories  specified 
under sub -clauses ( i) to ( iv) of clause ( b) or clauses ( c) to ( e) in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided further that at least two Members appoint ed on the Board shall be women:  
Provided also that in every case where the system of mutawalli exists, there shall be one 
mutawal li as the member of the Board.]  
(2) Electi on of the members specified in c lause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be held in accordance with 
the system of proportional representation by means of a single transferable vote, in such manner as may 
be prescribed : 
Provided that where the number of Muslim Members of Parliament, the State Legislature or the State 
Bar Council, as the case may be, is only one, such Muslim Member shall be declared to have been elected 
on the Board:  
Provided further that where there are no Muslim Members in any of the categories mentioned in   
sub-clauses ( i) to ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) the ex -Muslim Members of Parliament, the State 
Legislature or ex -member of the State Bar Council, as the case may be, shall constitute the electoral 
college.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the State Government is satisfied , for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is not reasonably practicable to constitute an electoral college for 
any of the categories mentioned in sub -clauses ( i) to ( iii) of c lause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the State 
Government may nominate such persons as the members of the Board as it deems fit.  
(4) The number of elected members of the Board shall, at all times , be more than the nominated 
members of the Board except as provided under sub -section ( 3). 
2*   *   *   *   * 
(6) In determining the number of Shia members or Sunni members of the Board, the State 
Government shall have regard to the number and value of Shia 3[auqaf]  and Sunni 3[auqaf]  to be 
administered by the Board and appointment of the members shall be made, so f ar as may be, in 
accordance with such determination.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
(8) Whenever the Board is constituted or reconstituted, the members of the Board present at a meeting 
convened for the purpose shall elect one from amongst themselves as the Chairperso n of the Board.  
(9) The members of the Board shall be appointed by the State Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette.  
15. Term of office .—The members of the Board shall hold office for a term of five years  4[from the 
date of notification referred to in sub -section (9) of section 14] . 
16. Disqualification for being appointed, or for continuing as, a member of the Board .—A 
person shall be disqualified for being appointed, or for continui ng as, a member of the Board if — 
(a) he is not a Muslim  and is less than twenty -one years of age;  
(b) he is found to be a person of unsound mind;  
(c) he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(d) he has been convicted of an offence involving moral turpitude and such conviction has not 
been reversed or he has not been g ranted full pardon in respect of such offence;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s.  13 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2913).  
2. Sub-sections ( 5) and ( 7) omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  14 
 1[(da) he has been held guilty of encroachment on any waqf p roperty;]  
(e) he h as been on a previous occasion — 
(i) removed from his office as a member or as a mutawalli, or  
(ii) removed by an order of a competent court or tribunal from any position of trust either for 
mismanagement or for corruption. ] 
17. Meetings of the Board .—(1) The Board shall meet for the transaction of business at such time 
and places as may be provided by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson, or in his absence, any member chosen by the members from amongst 
themselves shall preside at a meeting of the Board.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of  this Act, all questions which come before any meeting of the Board 
shall be decided by a majo rity of votes of the members present, and in the case of equality of votes, the 
Chairperson or, in his absence, any other person presiding shall have a second or casting vote.  
18. Committees of the Board .—(1) The Board may, whenever it considers necessary,  establish 
either generally or for a particular purpose or for any specified area or areas committees for the 
supervision of 2[auqaf] . 
(2) The Constitution, functions and duties and the term of office of such committees shall be 
determined from time to  time by the Board:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary for the members of such committees to be members of the 
Board.  
19. Resignation of Chairperson and members .—The Chairperson or any other member may resign 
his office by writing under his hand addressed  to the State Government:  
Provided that the Chairperson or the member shall continue in office until the appointment of his 
successor is notified in the Official Gazette.  
20. Removal of Chairperson and member .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, remove the Chairperson of the Bo ard or any member thereof if he — 
(a) is or becomes subject to any disqualifications specified in  section 16 ; or 
(b) refuses to act or is incapable of acting or acts in a manner which the State Government, after 
hearing any explanation that he may offer, considers to be prejudicial to the interests of the                
2[auqaf] ; or 
(c) fails in the opinion of the Board, to attend three consecutive meetings of the Board, without 
sufficient excuse.  
(2) Where the Chairperson of the Board is removed under sub -section ( 1), he shall also cease to be a 
member of the Board.  
3[20A. Removal of Chairperson by vote of no confidence .—Without prejudice to the provisions of 
section 20, the Chairperson of a Board may be removed by vote of no confidence in the following 
manner, nam ely:— 
(a) no resolution expressing a vote of confidence or no confidence in any person elected as 
Chairperson of a Board shall be moved except in the manner prescribed and twelve months have not 
elapsed after the date of his election as a Chairperson and be removed except with the prior 
perm ission of the State Government;  
(b) notice for no confidence shall be addr essed to the State Government stating clearly the 
grounds on which such motion is proposed to be moved and shall be signed by at least half the total 
members of the Board;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 15 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 1 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  15 
 (c) at least three members of the Board signing the notice of no confidence shall pe rsonally 
present to the State Government, the notice together with an affidavit signed by them to the effect that 
the signatures on no confidence motion are genuine and have been made by the signatories after 
hearing or reading the contents of the notice;  
(d) on receipt of the notice of no confidence, as provided hereinabove, the State Government shall 
fix such time, date and place as may be considered suitable for holding a meeting for the purpose of 
the proposed no confidence motion:  
Provided that at leas t fifteen days notice sha ll be given for such a meeting;  
(e) notice for meeting under clause ( d) shall also provide that in the event of no confidence 
motion being duly carried on or, election of the new Chairperson, as the case may be, shall al so be 
held in the same meeting;  
(f) the State Government shall also nominate a Gazetted Officer (other than an officer of the 
department which is concerned with the supervision and administration of the Board) to act as 
presiding officer of the meeting in which the r esolution for no confidence shall be considered;  
(g) the quorum for such a meeting of the Board shall be one -half of the total number of members 
of the Board;  
(h) the resolution for no confidence shall be deemed to be carried out, if passed by a simple 
majority of the members present;  
 (i) if a resolution for no confidence is carried out, the Chairperson shall cease to hold office 
forthwith and shall be succeeded by his successor who shall be elected by another resolution in the 
same meeting;  
 (j) electio n of the new Chairperson shall be conducted under clause ( i), in the meeting under the 
chairmanship of the said presiding officer referred to in clause ( f), in the following manner, 
namely: —  
(A) Chairperson shall be elected from amongst the elected member s of the Board;  
(B) nomination of candidates shall be proposed and seconded in the meeting itself and 
election after withdrawal, if any, shall be held by method of secret ballot;  
(C) election shall be held by simple majority of the members present in the  meeting and in 
case of equality of votes, the matter shall be decided by drawing of lots; and  
(D) proceedings of the meeting shall be signed by the presiding officer;  
(k) new Chairperson elected under clause ( h) shall hold the office only up to the remainder of the 
term of the Chairperson removed by the resolution of no confidence; and  
 (l) if the motion for passing the resolution of no confidence fails for want of quorum or lack of 
requisite majority at the meeting, no subsequent meeting for conside ring the motion of no confidence 
shall be held within six months of the  date of the previous meeting.]  
21. Filling of a vacancy .—When the seat of a member becomes vacant by his removal, resignation, 
death or otherwise, a new member shall be appointed in hi s place and such member shall hold office so 
long as the member whose place he fills would have been entitled to hold office, if such vacancy had not 
occurred.  
22. Vacancies , etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Board .—No act or proceeding of the 
Board shall be invalid by reason only of the existence of any vacancy amongst its member or any defect 
in the constitution thereof.  
23. Appointment of Chief Executive Officer and his term of office and other conditions of 
service .—1[(1)There shall be a full -time Chief Executive Officer of the Board who shall be a Muslim and 
shall be appointed by the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, from a panel of two 
names suggested by the Board and who shall not be below the r ank of Deputy Secretary to the State 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 7 of 2013, s. 1 7, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  16 
 Government, and in case of non -availability of a Muslim officer of that rank, a Muslim officer of 
equivalent rank may be appointed on deputation. ] 
(2) The term of office and other conditions of service of the Chief Exec utive Officer shall be such as 
may be prescribed.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be  ex officio  Secretary of the Board and shall be under the 
administrative control of the Board.  
24. Officers and other employees of the Board .—(1) The Board shall have  the assistance of such 
number of officers and other employees as may be necessary for the efficient performance of its functions 
under this Act, details thereof shall be determined by the Board in consultation with the State 
Government.  
(2) The appointmen t of officers and other employees, their term of office and conditions of service 
shall be such as may be provided by regulations.  
25. Duties and powers of Chief Executive Officer .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of 
the rules made thereunder and the directions of the Board, functions of the Chief Executive Officer shall 
include — 
(a) investigating the nature and extent of 1[auqaf]  and 2[waqf]  properties and calling whenever 
necessary, an inventory of 2[waqf]  properties and calling, from time to time, for accounts, returns and 
information from mutawallis;  
(b) inspecting or causing inspection of 2[waqf]  properties and accounts, records, deeds or 
documents relating thereto;  
(c) doing generally of such acts as ma y be necessary for  the control, maintenance and 
superintendence of   1[auqaf] . 
(2) In exercising the powers of giving directions under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any 2[waqf] , the 
Board shall act in conformity with the directions by the 2[waqf]  in the dee d of the 2[waqf] , the purpose of 
2[waqf]  and such usage and customs of the 2[waqf]  as are sanctioned by the school of Muslim law to 
which the 2[waqf]  belongs.  
(3) Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, the Chief Executive Officer shall exercise such 
powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him or delegated to him under this Act.  
26. Powers of Chief Executive officer in respect of orders or resolutions of Board .—Where the 
Chief Executive Officer considers that an order or  resolution passed by the Board — 
(a) has not been passed in accordance with the law; or  
(b) is in excess of or is an abuse of the powers conferred on the Board by or under this Act or by 
any other law; or  
(c) if implemented, is likely to — 
(i) cause financi al loss to the Board or to the concerned 2[waqf]  or to the 1[auqaf]                    
generally; or  
(ii) lead to a riot or breach of   peace; or  
(iii) cause danger to human life, health or safety; or  
(d) is not beneficial to the Board or to  any 2[waqf]  or to 1[auqaf]  generally,  
he may, before implementing such order or resolution, place the matter before the Board for its 
reconsideration and, if such order or resolution is not confirmed by a majority of vote of the m embers 
present and voting after  such reconsideration, refer the matter to the State Government along with his 
objections to the order or resolution, and the decision of the State Government thereon shall be final.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  17 
 1[27. Delegation of powers by the Board .—The Board may, by a general or special  order in writing, 
delegate to the Chairperson, any other member, the Chief Executive Officer or any other officer or servant 
of the Board or any area committee, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the 
said order, such of its powers and duties under this Act, as it may deem necessary, except the powers and 
functions of the Board mentioned under clauses ( c), (d), (g) and ( j) of sub -section ( 2) of section 32 and 
section 110. ] 
2[28. Power of District Magistrate, Additional Distric t Magistrate or Sub -Divisional Magistrate 
to implement the directions of the Board. —Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, the District Magistrate or in his absence an Additional District Magistrate or Sub -Divisional 
Magistrat e of a District in the State shall be responsible for implementation of the decisions of the Board 
which may be conveyed through the Chief Executive Officer and the Board may, wherever considers 
necessary, seek directions from the Tribunal for the implemen tation of its decisions. ] 
29. Powers of Chief Executive Officer to inspect records, registers, etc .—3[(1)] The Chief 
Executive Officer or any officer of the Board duly authorised by him in this behalf shall, 4[subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed ], be entitled at all reasonable time to inspect, in any public office, any 
records, registers or other documents relating to a 5[waqf] , or movable or immovable properties which are 
5[waqf]  properties or are claimed to be 5[waqf]  properties.  
 6[(2) The mutawalli or any other person having the custody of any document related to waqf 
properties shall produce the same, within the prescribed period, before the Chief Executive Officer on 
being called upon to do so in writing.  
(3) Subject to such condi tions as may be prescribed, an agency of the Government or any other 
organisation shall supply, within ten working days, copies of the records, registers of properties or other 
documents relating to waqf properties or claimed to be waqf properties, to the Chief Executive Officer on 
a written request to this effect from him:  
Provided that before taking any course of action as mentioned in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), the Chief 
Executive Officer shall  obtain approval of the Board.]  
30. Inspection of records .—(1) The Board  may allow inspection of its proceedings or other records 
in its custody and issue copies of the same on payment of such fees and subject to such conditions as may 
be prescribed.  
 (2) All copies issued under this section shall be certified by the Chief Executive Officer of the Board 
in the manner provided in section 76 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872   (1 of 1872).  
(3) The powers conferred on the Chief Executive Officer by sub -section ( 2) may be exercised by such 
other officer or officers of the Board as may either generally or specially be authorised in this behalf by 
the Board.  
31. Prevention of disqualification for membership of Parliament .—It is hereby declared that the 
offices of  the Chairperson or member of a B oard shall not be disqualified and shall be deemed never to 
have been disqualified for being chosen as, or for being, a Member of Parliament  7[or a Member of Union 
territory Legislature or a Member of a State Legislature if so declared under a law made by the 
appropriate State Legislature ]. 
32. Powers and function s of the Board .—(1) Subject to any rules that may be made under this Act, 
the general superintendence of all 8[auqaf]  in a State shall  vest in the Board established or the State; and it 
shall be the duty of the Board so to exercise its powers under this Act as to ensure that the 8[auqaf]  under 
its superintendence are properly maintained, controlled and administered and the income thereof is duly 
applied to the objects  and for the purposes for which such 8[auqaf]  were created or intended:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27  of 2013, s. 18, for section 27 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 28 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. S. 29 numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 20 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f.1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
7. Ins. by s. 21 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
8. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  18 
 Provided that in exercising its powers under this Act in respect of any 1[waqf] , the Board shall act in 
conformity with the directions of the 2[waqif] , the purposes of the 1[waqf]  and any usage or custom of the 
1[waqf]  sanctioned by the school of Muslim law to which the 1[waqf]  belongs.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that in this sub -section, “1[waqf] ” 
includes a 1[waqf]  in relation to which a ny scheme has been made by any c ourt of law, whether before or 
after the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the functions of the Board shall be— 
(a) to maintain a record containing information relating to  the origin, income, object and 
beneficiaries of every 1[waqf] ; 
(b) to ensure that t he income and other property of 3[auqaf]  are applied to the objects and for the 
purposes for which such 3[auqaf]  were intended or created;  
(c) to give directions for the administration of 3[auqaf] ; 
(d) to settle schemes of management for a 1[waqf] : 
Provided that no such settlement shall be made without giving the parties affected an opportunity 
of being heard;  
(e) to direct — 
(i) the utilisation  of the surplus income of a 1[waqf]  consistent with the objects of 1[waqf] ; 
(ii) in what manner the income of   a 1[waqf] , the objects of which are not evident from any 
written instrument, shall be utili sed; 
(iii) in any case where any object of 1[waqf]  has ceased to exist or has become incapable of 
achievement, that so much of the income of the 1[waqf]  as was previously applied to that object 
shall be applied to any other object, which shall be similar, or nearly similar  or to the original 
object or for  the benefit of the poor or for the purpose of promotion of knowledge and learning in 
the Muslim community:  
Provided that no direction shall be given under this clause without giving the parties affected, an 
opportunity of being  heard.  
Explanation .—For the  purposes of this clause, the powers of the Board shall be exercised — 
(i) in the case of a Sunni 1[waqf] , by the Sunni members of the Board only; and  
(ii) in the case of a Shia 1[waqf] , by the  Shia members of the Board only:  
Provided that where having regard to the number of the Sunni or Shia members in the board and 
other circumstances, it appears to the Board that the power should not be exercised by such members 
only, it may co -opt such other Muslims being Sunnis or Shias, as the case may be, as it t hinks fit, to 
be temporary members of the Board for exercising its powers under this clause;  
(f) to scrutinise and approve the budgets submitted by mutawallis and to arrange for auditing of 
account of 3[auqaf] ; 
(g) to appoint and remove mutawallis in accor dance with the provisions of this Act;  
(h) to take measures for the recovery of lost properties of any 1[waqf] ; 
(i) to institute and defend suits and proceedings relating to 3[auqaf] ; 
4[(j) to sanction lease of any immovable property of a waqf in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder:  
Provided that no such sanction shall be given unless a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members of the Board pr esent cast their vote in favour of such transaction:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakif” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  19 
 Provided further that where no such sanction is given by the Board, the reasons for doing so shall 
be recorded in writing.]  
(k) to administer the 1[Waqf] Fund;  
(l) to call for such returns, statistics, accounts and other information from the mutawallis with 
respect to the 1[waqf]  property as the Board may, from time to time, require;  
(m) to inspect, or cause inspection of, 1[waqf]  properties, accounts, records or deeds and 
documents relating thereto;  
(n) to investigate and determine the nature and extent of 1[waqf]  and 1[waqf]  property, and to 
cause, whenever necessary, a survey of such 1[waqf]  property;  
 2[(na) to determine or cause to be determined, in such manner as may be specified by the Board, 
market rent of the waqf land or building; ] 
(o) generally do all such acts as may be necessary for the control, maintenance and administration 
of  3[auqaf] . 
(3) Where the Board has settled any scheme of management under clause ( d) or given any direction 
under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2), any person interested in the 1[waqf]  or affected by such settlement or 
direction may institute a suit in a Tribunal for setting aside such settlement or directions and the decision 
of the Tribunal thereon shall be final.  
(4) Where the Board is satisfied that any 1[waqf]  land, which is a 1[waqf]  property, 4[has the potential 
for development as an educational institution, shopping centre, market, housing or residential flats and the 
like], market, housing flats and the like, it may serve upon the mutawalli of the concerned 1[waqf]  a 
notice requiring him within such time, but not less than sixty days, as may be specified in the notice, to 
convey its decision whether he is willing to execute the development works specified in th e notice.  
(5) On consideration of the reply, if any, received to the notice issued under sub -section ( 4), the 
Board, if it is satisfied that the mutawalli is not willing or is not capable of executing the works required 
to be executed in terms of the notic e, it may, 5*** take over the property, clear it of any build ing or 
structure thereon, which , in the opinion of the Board is necessary for execution of the works and execute 
such works from 1[waqf] funds or from the finances which may be raised on the security of the properties 
of the 1[waqf]  concerned, and control and manage the properties till such time as all expenses incurred by 
the Board under this section, together with interest thereon, the e xpenditure on maintenance of such 
works and other legitimate charges incurred on the property are recovered from the income derived from 
the property:  
Provided that the Board shall compensate annually the mutawalli of the concerned 1[waqf]  to the 
extent of the average annual net income derived from the property during the three years immediately 
preceding the taking over of the property by the Board.  
(6) After all the expenses as enumerated in sub -section ( 5) have been recouped from the inc ome of 
the developed properties, the developed properties shall be handed over to mutawalli of the concerned 
1[waqf] . 
33. Powers of inspection by Chief Executive Officer or persons authorised by him .—(1) With a 
view to examining whether, by reason of any f ailure or negligence on the part of a mutawalli in the 
performance of his executive or administrative duties, any loss or damage has been caused to any 1[waqf]  
or 1[waqf]  property, the Chief Executive Officer 6[or any other person authoris ed by him in writing] with 
the prior approval of the Board, 7***, may inspect all movable and immovable properties, which are 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013). 
4. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for “ offers a feasible potential for development as a shopping centre”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. The words “ with the prior approval of the Government, ” omitted by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-11-2013).  
7. The words “either himself or any other person authorised by him in wri ting in this behalf” omitted by  s. 23 , ibid.              
(w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  20 
 1[waqf]  properties, and all records, correspondences, plans, accounts and other documents relating 
thereto.  
(2) Whenever any such inspection as referred to in sub -section ( 1) is made, the concerned mutawalli 
and all officers and other employees working under him and every person connected with the 
administration of the 1[waqf] , shall extend to the person making such inspection, all s uch assistance and 
facilities as may be necessary and reasonably required by him to carry out such inspection, and shall also 
produce for inspection any movable property or documents relating to the 1[waqf]  as may be called for by 
the person making the ins pection and furnish to him such information relating to the 1[waqf]  as may be 
required by him.  
(3) Where, after any such inspection, it appears that the concerned mutawalli or any officer or other 
employee who is or was working under him had mis -appropriat ed, misapplied or fraudulently retained, 
any money or other 1[waqf]  property, or had incurred irregular, unauthorised or improper expenditure 
from the funds of the 1[waqf] , the Chief Executive Officer may, after giving the mutawalli or the person 
concerned  a reasonable opportunity of showing cause why an order for the recovery of the amount or 
property, should not be passed against him and after considering such explanation, if any, as such person 
may furnish, determine the amount or the property which has been mis -appropriated, misapplied or 
fraudulently retained, or the amount of the irregular, unauthorised or improper expenditure incurred by 
such person, and make an order directing such person to make payment of the amount so determined and 
to restore the  said property to the 1[waqf] , within such time as may be specified in the order.  
(4) A mutawalli or other person aggrieved by such order may, within thirty days of the receipt by him 
of the order, appeal to the Tribunal:  
Provided that no such appeal shall  be entertained by the Tribunal unless the appellant first deposits 
with the Chief Executive Officer the amount which has been determined under sub -section ( 3) as being 
payable by the appellant and the Tribunal shall have no power to make any order staying  pending the 
disposal of the appeal, the operation of the ord er made by the Chief Executive O fficer under                  
sub-section ( 3). 
(5) The Tribunal may, after taking such evidence as it may think fit, confirm, reverse or modify the 
order made by th e Chief Executive Officer under sub -section ( 3) or may remit, either in whole or in part, 
the amount specified in such order and may make such orders as to costs as it may think appropriate i n the 
circumstances of the case . 
(6) The order made by the Tribun al under sub -section ( 5) shall be final.  
34. Recovery of the amount determined under section 33 .—Where any mutawalli or other person 
who has been ordered, whether under sub -section ( 3) or sub-section ( 5) of section 33, to make any 
payment or to restore the possession of any property, omits or fails to make such payment or restoration 
within the time specified in  such order, the Chief Executive Officer, with the prior approval of the Board 
shall, take such step s as he may think fit for the recovery of possession of the property aforesaid and shall 
also send a certificate to the Collector of the district in which the property of such mutawalli or other 
person is situate, stating therein the amount that has been d etermined by him or by the Tribunal, as the 
case may be, under section 33, as being payable by such mutawalli or other person, and , thereupon, the 
Collector shall recover the amount specified in such certificate as if it were an arrear of land revenue and 
on the recovery of such amount, pay the same to  the Chief Executive Officer, who shall, on receipt 
thereof, credit the amount to the funds of the concerned 1[waqf] . 
35. Conditional attachment by Tribunal .—(1) Where the Chief Executive Officer is satisfied that 
the mutawalli or any other person who has been ordered under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 5) of 
section 33 to make any payment, with intent to defeat or delay t he execution of the said order, — 
(a) is about to dispose of the whole or any part of  the  property; or  
(b) is about to remove the whole or any part of the property from the jurisdiction of the Chief 
Executive Officer,  
he may, with prior approval of the Board, apply to the Tribunal for the conditional attachment of the said 
property or such part thereof, as he may think necessary.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 27 of 2013,  s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  21 
 (2) The Chief Executive Officer shall, unless the Tribunal otherwise directs, specify in the application 
the property required to be attached and the estimated value thereof.  
(3) The Tribunal may direct the mut awalli or the person concerned, as the case may be, within a time 
to be fixed by it, either to furnish security, in such sum as may be specified in the order, to produce and 
place at the disposal of the Tribunal when required, the said property or the valu e of the same or such 
portion thereof as may be sufficient to satisfy the amount specified in the certificate referred to in    
section 34, or to appear and show cause why he should not furnish such security.  
(4) The Tribunal may also in the order direct t he conditional attachment of the whole or any portion 
of the property so specified.  
(5) Every attachment made under this section shall be made in accordance with the provisions of the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , as if it were an order for at tachment made under the provision 
of the said Code.  
CHAPTER V  
REGISTRATION OF 1[AUQAF]  
36. Registration .—(1) Every 2[waqf] , whether created before or after the commencement of this Act, 
shall be registered at the office of the Board.  
(2) Application for registration  shall be made by the mutawalli:  
Provided that such applications may be 3[made by the waqf] or his descendants or a beneficiary of the 
2[waqf]  or any Muslim belonging to the sect to which the 2[waqf]  belongs.  
(3) An application for registration  shall be made in such form and manner and at such place as the 
Board may by regulation provide and shall con tain the following particulars :— 
(a) a description of the 2[waqf]  properties sufficient for the identification thereof;  
(b) the gross annual income  from such properties;  
(c) the amount of land revenue, cesses, rates and taxes annually payable in respect of the 2[waqf]  
properties;  
(d) an estimate of the expenses annually incurred in the realisation of the income of the 2[waqf]  
properties;  
(e) the amou nt set apart under the 2[waqf]  for— 
(i) the salary of the mutawalli and allowances to the individuals;  
(ii) purely religious purposes;  
(iii) charitable purposes; and  
(iv) any other purposes;  
(f) any other particulars provided by the Board by regulations.  
(4) Every such application shall be accompanied by a copy of the 2[waqf]  deed or if no such deed has 
been executed or a copy thereof cannot be obtained, shall contain full particulars, as far as they are known 
to the applicant, of the origin, nature and obj ects of the 2[waqf] . 
(5) Every application made under sub -section ( 2) shall be signed and verified by the applicant in the 
manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure,   1908   (5 of 1908) for the signing and verification of 
pleadings.  
(6) The Board may require the applicant to supply any further particulars or information that it may 
consider necessary.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for “made by the wakf”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  22 
 (7) On receipt of an application for registration, the Board may, before the registration of the 1[waqf]  
make such inquiries as it thinks fit in respect of the genuineness and validity of the application and 
correctness of any particulars therein and when the application is made by any person other than the 
person administering the 1[waqf]  property, the Board shall, before registering the 1[waqf] , give not ice of 
the application to the person administering the 1[waqf]  property and shall hear him if he desires to be 
heard.  
(8) In the case of 2[auqaf]  created before the commencement of this Act, every application for 
registration shall be made, within three mo nths from such commencement and in the case of 2[auqaf]  
created after such commencement, within three months from the date of the creation of the 1[waqf] : 
Provided that where there is no Board at the time of creation of a 1[waqf] , such application will be 
made within three months from the date of establishment of the Board.  
37. Register of 2[auqaf] .— 3[(1)] The Board shall maintain a register of 2[auqaf]  which shall contain 
in respect of each 1[waqf]  copies of the 1[waqf]  deeds, when available and the  following particulars, 
namely: — 
(a) the class of the 1[waqf] ; 
(b) the name of the mutawallis;  
(c) the rule of succession to the office of mutawalli under the 1[waqf]  deed or by custom or by 
usage;  
(d) particulars of all 1[waqf]  properties and all title de eds and documents relating thereto;  
(e) particulars of the scheme of administration and the scheme of expenditure at the time of 
registration;  
(f) such other particulars as may be provided by regulations.  
4[(2) The Board shall forward the details of the properties entered in the register of auqaf to the 
concerned land record office having jurisdiction of the waqf property.  
(3) On receipt of the details as mentioned in sub -section ( 2), the land record office sh all, according to 
established procedure, either make necessary entries in the land record or communicate, within a period 
of six months from the date of registration of waqf property under section 36, its object ions to the Board.]  
38. Powers of Board to ap point Executive Officer .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the Board may, if it is of the opinion that it is necessary so to do in the interests of the 1[waqf] , 
appoint on whole -time or part -time or in an honorary capacity, subject to suc h conditions as may be 
provided by regulations, an Executive Officer with such supporting staff as it considers necessary for any 
1[waqf]  having a gross annual in come of not less than five lakh  rupees:  
Provided that the person chosen for appointment should  be a person professing Islam.  
(2) Every Executive Officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise such powers and discharge 
such duties as pertain only to the administration of the property of the 1[waqf]  for which he has been 
appointed and shall e xercise those powers and discharge those duties under the direction, control and 
supervision of the Board:  
Provided that the Executive Officer who is appointed for a 1[waqf]  having a gross annual in come of 
not less than five lakh  rupees shall ensure that t he budget of the 1[waqf]  is submitted, the accounts of the 
1[waqf]  are regularly maintained, and the yearly statement of accounts are submitted within such time as 
the Board may specify.  
(3) While exercising his powers and discharging his functions under s ub-section ( 2), the Executive 
Officer shall not interfere with any religious duties or any usage or custom of the 1[waqf]  sanctioned by 
the Muslim law.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. S. 37 numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  23 
 (4) The salaries and allowances of the Executive Officer and his staff shall be fixed by the Board and 
in fixing the quantum of such salary the Board shall have due regard to the income of the 1[waqf] , the 
extent and nature of the duties of the Executive Officer and shall also ensure that the amounts of such 
salaries and allowances are not disproportionate t o the income of the 1[waqf]  and do not operate as an 
unnecessary financial burden on it.  
(5) The salaries and allowances of the Executive Officer and his staff shall be paid by the Board from 
the 1[Waqf] Fund and, if the 1[waqf]  generates any additional income as a result of appointment of the 
Executive Officer, the Board may claim reimbursement of amounts spent on the salaries and allowances 
from the fund of the 1[waqf]  concerned.  
(6) The Board may, for sufficient reasons, and a fter giving to the Executive Officer or a member of 
his staff, a reasonable opportunity of being heard, suspend, remove or dismiss the Executive Officer or a 
member of his staff from his post.  
(7) Any Executive Officer or a member of his staff who is aggri eved by any order or removal or 
dismissal made under sub -section ( 6) may, within thirty days from the date of communication of the 
order, prefer an appeal against the order to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may, after considering such 
representation as the Board may make in the matter , and after giving a reasonable opportunity to the 
Executive Officer or a member of his staff of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the order.  
39. Powers of Board in relation to 2[auqaf]  which have ceased to exist .—(1) The Board shall, if it 
is satisfied that the objects or any part thereof, of a 1[waqf]  have ceased to exist, whether such cess er took 
place before or after the commencement of this Act, cause an inquiry to be held by the Chief Executive 
Officer, in the p rescribed manner, to ascertain the properties and funds pertaining to such 1[waqf] . 
(2) On the receipt of the report of inquiry of the Chief Executive Officer, the Board shall pass an 
order, — 
(a) specifying the property and funds of such 1[waqf] ; 
(b) directing that any property or funds pertaining to such 1[waqf]  which have been recovered 
shall be applied or utilised for the renovation of any 1[waqf]  property and where there is no need for 
making any such renovation or where utilisation of the funds for such renovation is not possible, be 
appropriated, to any of the purposes specific in  sub-clause ( iii) of clause  (e) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 32 . 
(3) The Board may, if it has reason to believe that any building or other place which was being used 
for religious purpose or instruction or for charity has, whether before or after the commencement of this 
Act, ceased to be used for that purpose, make an application to the Tribunal for an order directing the 
recovery of possession of such building or other place.  
(4) The Tribunal may, if it is satisfied, after making such inquiry as it may think fit, th at such building 
or other place — 
(a) is 1[waqf]  property;  
(b) has not been acquired under any law for the time being in force relating to acquisition of land 
or is not under any process of acquisition under any such law, or has not vested in the State 
Government under any law for the time being in force relating to land reforms; and  
(c) is not in the occupation of any person who has been authorised by or under any law for the 
time being in force to occupy such buildin g or other place, make an order — 
(i) directing the recove ry of such building or place from any person who may be in 
unauthorised possession thereof, and  
(ii) directing that such property, building or place be used for religious purpose or instruction 
as before, or if such use is not possible, be utilised for any  purpose specified in  sub-clause ( iii) of 
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 32 . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wak fs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  24 
 40. Decision if a property is 1[waqf]  property .—(1) The Board may itself collect information 
regard ing any property which it has reason to believe to be 1[waqf]  property and if any question arises 
whether a particular property is 1[waqf]  property or not or whether a 1[waqf]  is a Sunni 1[waqf]  or a     
Shia 1[waqf] , it may, after making such inquiry as it may deem fit, decide the question.  
(2) The decision of the Board on a question under sub -section ( 1) shall, unless revoked or modified 
by the Tribunal, be final.  
(3) Where the Board has any reason to believe that any property of any trust or society reg istered in 
pursuance of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) or under the Societies Registration Act, 1860        
(21 of 1860) or under any other Act, is 1[waqf]  property, the Board may notwithstanding anything 
contained in such Act, hold an inquiry in regard to such property and if after such inquiry the Board is 
satisfied that such property is 1[waqf]  property, call upon the trust or society, as the case may be, either to 
register such property under this Act as 1[waqf]  property or show cause why such prope rty should not be 
so registered:  
Provided that in all such cases, notice of the action proposed to be taken under this sub -section shall 
be given to the authority by whom the trust or society had been registered.  
(4) The Board shall, after duly consid ering such cause as may be shown in pursuance of notice issued 
under sub -section ( 3), pass such orders as it may think fit and the order so made by the Board, shall be 
final, unless it is revoked or modified by a Tribunal.  
41. Power to cause registration o f 1[waqf]  and to amend register .—The Board may direct a 
mutawalli to apply for the registration of a 1[waqf] , or to supply any information regarding a 1[waqf]  or 
may itself cause the 1[waqf]  to be registered or may at any  time amend the register of  2[auqaf] . 
42. Change in the management of 2[auqaf]  to be notified .—(1) In the case of any change in the 
management of a registered 1[waqf]  due to the death or retirement or removal of the mutawalli, the 
incoming mutawalli, shall forthwith, and any other person may notify the change to the Board.  
(2) In the case of any other change in any o f the particulars mentioned in s ection 36, the mutawa lli 
shall, within three months from the occurrence of the change, notify such change to the Board.  
43. 2[Auqaf]  registered before the commencement of  this Act deemed to be registered .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, where any 1[waqf]  has been registered before the 
commencement of this Act, under any law for the time being in force, it shall not be necessary to register 
the 1[waqf]  under the provisions of this Act and any such registration made before such commencement 
shall be deemed to be a registration made under this Act.  
CHAPTER VI  
MAINTENANCE OF ACCOUN TS OF 2[AUQAF]  
44. Budget .—(1) Every mutawalli of   a 1[waqf]  shall, in every   year prepare, in such form and at such 
time as may be prescribed, a budget in respect of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure during that financial year.  
(2) Every such budget shall be submitted b y the mutawalli at  least 3[thirty  days] before the beginning 
of the financial year to the Board and shall make adequa te provision for the following :— 
(i) for carrying out the objects of the 1[waqf] ; 
(ii) for the maintenance and preservation of   the 1[waqf]  property;  
(iii) for the discharge of all liabilities and subsisting commitments binding on the 1[waqf]  under 
this Act or any other law for the time being in force.  
4[(3) In case the Board considers any item in the budget being contrary to the objects of the waqf and 
the provisions of this Act, it may give such direction for addition or deletion of  such item as it may deem 
fit.] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for “ninety days” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  25 
  (4) If in the course of the financial year the mutawalli finds it necessary to modify the provisions 
made in the budget in regar d to the receipt or to the distribution of the amounts to be expended under the 
different heads, he may submit to the Board a supplementary or a revised budget and the provisions of 
sub-section ( 3) shall, as far as may be, apply to such supplementary or re vised budget.  
45. Preparation of budget of 1[auqaf]  under direct management of the Board .—(1) The Chief 
Executive Officer shall prepare, in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, a budget in respect 
of the financial year next ensuing showing the estimated receipts and expenditure for each of the 1[auqaf]  
under the direct management of the Board, showing therein the estimated receipts and expenditure and 
submit it to the Board for its approval.  
(2) While submitting the budget under sub -section ( 1), the Chief Executive Officer shall also prepare 
statement giving details of  the increase, if any, in the income of each 2[waqf]  under the direct 
management of the Board and the steps which  have been taken for its better management and the results 
accruin g therefrom during the year.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall keep regular accounts and be responsible for the proper 
management of every 2[waqf]  under the direct management of the Board.  
(4) Every budget submitted by the Chief Executive Officer under  sub-section ( 1) shall comply with 
the requirements of section 46 and, for this purpose, references therein to the mutawalli of the 3[waqf]  
shall be construed as references to the Chief Executive Officer.  
(5) The audit of accounts of every 2[waqf]  under th e direct management of the Board shall be 
undertaken by the State Examiner of Local funds or any other officer appointed by the State Government 
for this purpose, irrespective of the income of the 2[waqf] . 
(6) The provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 47 and the provisions of sections 48 and 49 
shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, apply to the audit of 
accounts referred to in this section.  
(7) Where any 2[waqf]  is under the direct management of the B oard, such administrative charges as 
may be specified by the Chief Executive Officer shall be payable by the 2[waqf]  to the Board:  
Provided that the Chief Executive Officer shall not collect more than ten per cent . of the gross annual 
income of the 2[waqf]  under the direct management of the Board as administrative charges.  
46. Submission of Accounts of 1[auqaf] .—(1) Every mutawalli shall keep regular accounts.  
(2) Before the 3[1st day of July]  next, following the date on which the application referred to 
in section 36  has been made and thereafter before the 3[1st day of July]  in every year, every mutawalli of 
a 2[waqf] shall prepare and furnish to the Board a full and true statement of accounts, in such form and 
containing such particulars as may be provided by regulations by the Board, of   all moneys received or 
expended by the mutawalli on behalf of the 2[waqf]  during the period of twelve months ending on the  
31st day of March, or, as the case may be, during that portion of the said period during which the 
provisions of this Act, have been applicable to the 2[waqf] : 
Provided that the date on which the annual accoun ts are to be closed may be varied at the discretion 
of the Board.  
47. Audit of accounts of 1[auqaf] .—(1) The accounts of 1[auqaf]  submitted to the Board under 
section 46 shall be audited and examined in the following manner, namely :— 
(a) in  the  case  of  a  2[waqf]   having   no  income   or  a  net  annual  income  not exceeding 
4[fifty thousand rupees ], the submission of a statement of accounts shall be a sufficient com pliance 
with the provisions of s ection 46 and the accounts of two per cent . of such 1[auqaf]  shall be audited 
annually by an auditor appointed by the Board;  
(b) the accounts of the 2[waqf]  having net annual income exceeding 4[fifty  thousand rupees ] shall 
be audited annually, or at such other intervals as may be prescribed, by an auditor appointed by the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 27, ibid., for “1st day of May” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  26 
 Board from out of the panel of auditors prepared by the State Government and while drawing up such 
panel of auditors, the State Government shall spe cify the scale of remuneration of auditors;  
(c) the State Government may, 1[under intimation to the Board,] at an y time cause the account of 
any 2[waqf]  audited by the State Examiner of Local Funds or by any other officer designated for that 
purpose by tha t State Government.  
(2) The auditor shall submit his report to the Board and the report of the auditor shall among other 
things, specify all cases of irregular, illegal or improper expenditure or of failure to recover money or 
other property caused by negl ect or misconduct and any other matter which the auditor considers it 
necessary to report; and the report shall also contain the name of any person who, in the opinion of the 
auditor, is responsible for such expenditure or failure and the auditor shall in every such case certify the 
amount of such expenditure or loss as due from such person.  
(3) The cost of the audit of the accounts of a 2[waqf]  shall be met from the funds of that 2[waqf] : 
Provided that the remuneration of the auditors appointed from out of the panel drawn by the State 
Government in relation to 3[auqaf]  having a net annual income of 4[more than fifty thousand rupees ] shall 
be paid in accordance with the scale of remuneration specified by the State Government under clause ( c) 
of sub -section ( 1): 
Provided further that where the audit of the accounts of any 2[waqf]  is made by the State Examiner of 
Local Funds or any othe r officer designated by the State Government in this behalf, the cost of such audit 
shall not exceed one and a half per cent . of the net annual income of such 2[waqf]  and such costs shall be 
met from the funds of the 3[auqaf]  concerned.  
48. Board to pass o rders on auditor’s report .—(1) The Board shall examine the auditor’s report, 
and may call for the explanation of any person in regard to any matter mentioned therein, and shall pass 
such orders as it thinks fit including orders for the recovery of   the amount certified by the auditor under 
sub-section ( 2) of s ection 47.  
(2) The mutawalli or any other person aggrieved by any order made by the Board may, within thirty 
days of the receipt by him of the order, apply to the Tribunal to modify or set aside the  order and the 
Tribunal may, after taking such evidence as it may think necessary, confirm or modify the order or remit 
the amount so certified, either in whole or in part, and may also make such order as to costs as it may 
think appropriate in the circums tances of the case.  
(3) No application made under sub -section ( 2) shall be entertained by the Tribunal unless the amount 
certified by the auditor under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 47 has first been deposited in the Tribunal and the 
Tribunal shall not have a ny power to stay the operation of the order made by the Board under              
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) The order made by the Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) shall be final.  
(5) Every amount for the recovery of which any order has been made under sub -section (1) or       
sub-section ( 2) shall, where such amount remains unpaid, be recoverable in the manner specified 
in section 34  or section  35 as if the said order were an order for the recovery of any amount determined 
under  sub-section ( 3) of s ection 3 5. 
49. Sums certified to be due recoverable as arrears of land revenue .—(1) Every sum certified to 
be due from any person by an auditor in his report under  section  47 unless such certificate is modified or 
cancelled by an order of the Board or of the Tribunal made under section 48, and every sum due on a 
modified certificate shall be paid by such person within sixty days after the s ervice of a demand notice for 
the same issued by the Board.  
(2) If such payment is not made in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the sum payable 
may, on a certificate issued by the Board after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being heard, 
be recovered in the same as an arrear of land revenue.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 28 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “more than te n thousand rupees but less than fifteen thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  27 
 50. Duties of mutawalli .—It shall  be the duty of every mutawalli — 
(a) to carry out the directions of the Board in accordance with the provisions of this Act or of any 
rule or order made th ereunder;  
(b) to furnish such returns and supply such information or particulars as may from time to time be 
required by the Board in accordance with the provisions of this Act or of an y rule or order made 
thereunder;  
(c) to allow inspection of  1[waqf]   properties, accounts or records or deeds and documents relating 
thereto;  
(d) to discharge all public dues; and  
(e) to do any other act which he is lawfully required to do by or under this Act.  
51. Alienation of 1[waqf ] property without sanction of Board to be void .—2[(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the waqf deed, any lease of any immovable property which is waqf property, shall 
be void unless such lease is effected with the prior sanction of the Board:  
Provided that no mosque, dargah, khanqah, graveyard, or imambara shall be leased except any unused 
graveyards in the States of Punjab, Haryana and Himachal Pradesh where such graveyard has been leased 
out before the date of commencement of the Wakf (Amendment) Act, 2013  (27 of 2013) .  
(1A) Any sal e, gift, exchange, mortgage or transfer of waqf property shall be void ab initio : 
 Provided that in case the Board is satisfied that any waqf property may be developed for the purposes 
of the Act, it may, after recording reasons in writing, take up the dev elopment of such property through 
such agency and in such manner as the Board may determine and move a resolution containing 
recommendation of development of such waqf property, which shall be passed by a majority of two -thirds 
of the total membership of t he Board:  
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect any acquisition of waqf 
properties for a public purpose under the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (1 of 1894) or any other law relating 
to acquisition of land if such acquisitio n is made in consultation with the Board:  
Provided also that —  
(a) the acquisition shall not be in contravention of the Places of Public Worship (Special 
Provisions) Act, 1991  (42 of 1991) ;  
(b) the purpose for which the land is being acquired shall be undisputedly for a public purpose;  
 (c) no alternative land is available which shall be considered as more or less suitable for that 
purpose; and  
(d) to safeguard adequately the interest and objective of the waqf, the compensation shall be at 
the prevaili ng market value or a suitable land with reasonable solatium in lieu of the acquired 
property.]  
 3*   *   *   *   * 
52. Recovery of 1[waqf]  property transferred in contravention of  section 51 .—(1) If the Board is 
satisfied, after making any inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, that any immovable property of 
a 1[waqf]  entered as such in the register of 1[waqf]  maintained under  section 36 , has been transferred 
without the previous sanction of the Board in contravention of the provisions of  section 51  4[or section 
56], it may send a req uisition to the Collector within whose jurisdiction the property is situate to obtain 
and deliver possession of the property to it.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Sub -sections ( 2), (3), (4) and ( 5) omitted by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 30 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  28 
 (2) On receipt of a requisition under sub -section ( 1), the Collector shall pass an order directing the 
person in possession of the property to deliver the property to the Board within a period of thirty days 
from the date of the service of the order.  
(3) Every order passed under sub -section ( 2) shall be served — 
(a) by giving or tendering the order, or by sending it by post to the person for whom it is 
intended; or  
(b) if such person cannot be found, by affixing the order on some conspicuous part of his last 
known place of abode or business, or by giving or tendering the order to some adult male member or 
servant of his family o r by causing it to be affixed on some conspicuous part of the property to which 
it relates:  
Provided that where the person on whom the order is to be served, is a minor, service upon his 
guardian or upon any adult male member or servant of his family shall  be deemed to be the service upon 
the minor.  
(4) Any person aggrieved by the order of the Collector under sub -section ( 2) may, within a period of 
thirty days from the date of the service of the order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal within whose 
jurisdict ion the property is situate and the decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final.  
(5) Where an order passed under sub -section ( 2) has not been complied with and the time for 
appealing against such order has expired without an appeal having been p referred or the appeal, if any, 
preferred within that time has been dismissed, the Collector shall obtain possession of the property in 
respect of which the order has been made, using such force, if any, as may be necessary for the purpose 
and deliver it t o the Board.  
(6) In exercising his functions under this section the Collector shall be guided by such rules as may be 
provided by regulations.  
1[52A. Penalty for alienation  of waqf property without sanction of Board .—(1) Whoever 
alienates or purchases or takes possession of, in any manner whatsoever, either permanently or 
temporarily, any movable or immovable property being a waqf property, without prior sanction of the 
Board, shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term  which may extend to tw o years:  
Provided that the waqf property so alienated shall without prejudice to the provisions of any law for 
the time being in force, be vested in the Board without any compensation therefor.  
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crimina l Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  any 
offence punishable under this section shall be cognizable and non -bailable.  
(3) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section except on a complaint made by 
the Board or any officer duly authorised by th e State Government in this behalf.  
(4) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence p unishable under this section.]  
53. Restriction on purchase of property on behalf of  2[waqf] .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in a 2[waqf]  deed, no immovable property shall be purchased for or on behalf of any 2[waqf]  
from the funds of any 2[waqf]  except with prior sanction of the Board, and the Board shall not accord 
such sanction unless it con siders that the acquisition of  such property is necessary or beneficial to the 
2[waqf]  and that the price proposed to be paid therefor is adequate and reasonable:  
Provided that before such sanction is accorded, the particulars relating to the proposed tran saction 
shall be published in the Official Gazette inviting objections and suggestions with respect thereto and, the 
Board shall, after considering the objections and suggestions that may be received by it from mutawallis 
or other persons interested in the  2[waqf] , make such orders as it may think fit.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 31 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  29 
 54. Removal of encroachment from 1[waqf]  property .—(1) Whenever the Chief Executive Officer 
considers whether on receiving any complaint or on his own motion that there has been an encroachment 
on any land, b uilding, space or other property which is 1[waqf]  property and, which has been registered as 
such under this Act, he shall cause to be served upon the encroacher a notice specifying the particulars of 
the encroachment and calling upon him to show cause before a date to be specified in such notice , as to 
why an order requiring him to remove the encroachment before the date so specified should not be made 
and shall also send a copy of such notice to the concerned mutawalli.  
(2) The notice referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be served in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(3) If, after considering the objections, received during the period specified in the notice, and after 
conducting an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed, the Chief Executive Officer is satisfied that 
the property in question is 1[waqf] property and that there has been an encroachment on any such 1[waqf]  
property, 2[he may, make an application to the Tribunal for grant of order of eviction for removing]  such 
encroachment and deliver possession of the land, building, space or other pro perty encroached upon to the 
mutawalli of the 1[waqf] . 
3[(4) The Tribunal, upon receipt of such application from the Chief Executive Officer, for reasons to 
be recorded therein, make an order of eviction directing that the waqf property shall be vacated by  all 
persons who may be in occupation thereof or any part thereof, and cause a copy of the order to be affixed 
on the outer door or some other conspicuous part of the waqf property:  
Provided that the Tribunal may before making an order of eviction, give an  opportunity of being 
heard to the person against whom the application for eviction has been made by the Chief Executive 
Officer.  
(5) If any person refuses or fails to comply with the order of eviction within forty -five days from the 
date of affixture of t he order under sub -section ( 2), the Chief Executive Officer or any other person duly 
authorised by him in this behalf may evict that person from, and take p ossession of, the waqf property.]  
55. Enforcement of orders made under section 54 .—Where the person,  ordered under               
4[sub-section ( 4)] of section 54 to remove any encroachment, omits or fails to remove such encroachment, 
within the time specified in the order or, as the case may be, fails to vacate the land, building, space or 
other property to which the order relates, within the time af oresaid, the Chief Executive Officer may 
5[refer the order of the Tribunal to the Executive Magistrate]  within the local limits of whose jurisdiction 
the land, building, space or other property , is situate for evicting the encroacher, and , thereupon, such 
Magistrate shall make an order directing the encroacher to remove the encroachment, or, as the case may 
be, vacate the land, building, space or other property and to deliver possession thereof to the concerned 
mutawalli and in default of compliance with th e order, remove the encroachment or, as the case may be, 
evict the encroacher from the land, building, space or other property and may, for this purpose, take such 
police assistance as may be necessary.  
6[55A.  Disposal of property left on waqf property by unauthori sed occupants. —(1) Where any 
person has been evicted from any waqf property under sub -section ( 4) of section 54, the Chief Executive 
Officer may, after giving fourteen days’ notice to the person from whom possession of the waqf property 
has been taken and after publishing the notice in at least one newspaper having circulation in the locality 
and after proclaiming the contents of the notice by placing it on conspicuous part of the waqf property, 
remove or cause to be removed or dispose of by publi c auction any prope rty remaining on such premises.  
(2) Where any property is sold under sub -section ( 1), the sale proceeds shall, after deducting the 
expenses   relating  to  removal,   sale  and   such   other   expenses,   the  amount,  if  any,  due  to  the  State   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for “he may, by an order, require the encroacher to remove”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 32, ibid., for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for “sub -section ( 3)” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 33, ibid., for “apply to the Sub -Divisional Magistrate”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 34, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  30 
 Government or a local authority or a corporate authority on account of arrears of rent, damages or costs, 
be paid to such person, as may appear to the Chief Executive Officer to be entitled to the same:  
Provided that where the Chief Executive Of ficer is unable to decide as to the person to whom the 
balance of the amount is payable or as to the appointment of the same, he may refer such dispute to the 
Tribunal and the decision of the Tribunal thereon shall be final. ] 
56. Restriction on power to gr ant lease of 1[waqf]  property .—(1) 2[A lease for any period 
exceeding th irty years ] of any immovable property which is 1[waqf]  property, shall , 
notwithstanding  anything contained in the deed or instrument of 1[waqf]  or in any other law for the time 
being in force, be void and of no effect:  
3[Provided that a lease for any period up to thirty years may be made for commercial activities, 
education or health purposes, with the approval of the State Government, for such p eriod and purposes as 
may be specified in the rules made by the Central Government:  
Provided further that lease of any immovable waqf property, which is an agricultural land, for a 
period exceeding three years shall, notwithstanding anything contained in t he deed or instrument of waqf 
or in any other law for the time being in force, be void and of no effect:  
Provided also that before making lease of any waqf property, the Board shall publish the details of 
lease and invite bids in at least one leading natio nal and regional news papers. ] 
(2) 4[A lease for a period of one year but not exceeding th irty years ] of immovable property which is 
1[waqf]  property shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the deed or instrument of 1[waqf]  or in any 
other law for the time being in force, be void and of no effect unless it is made with the previous 
sanction  of the Board.  
(3) The Board shall, in granting sanction for lease 5*** or renewal th ereof under this section review 
the terms and condit ions on which the lease 5*** is proposed to be granted or renewed and make its 
approval subject to the revision of such terms and conditions in such manner as it may direct : 
3[Provided that the Board shall immediately intimate the State Government regardin g a lease for any 
period exceeding three years of any waqf property and thereafter it may become effective after the expiry 
of forty -five days from the date on which the Board intimates the State Government. ] 
3[(4) Every rule made by the Central Government  under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be 
after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days, 
which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before th e expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in su ch modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule. ] 
57. Mutawalli entitled to pay certain costs from income o f 1[waqf]   property .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the 1[waqf]  deed, every mutawalli may pay from the income of the 1[waqf]  property 
any expenses properly incurred by him for the purpose of enabling him to furnish any particulars, 
documents or copies under  section  36 or any accounts under  section 46  or any information or documents 
required by the Board or for the purpose of enabling him to carry out the directions of the Board.  
58. Power of Board to pay dues in case of d efault by mutawalli .—(1) Where a mutawalli refuses 
to pay or fails to pay any revenue, cess, rates or taxes due to the Government or any local authority, the 
Board may discharge dues from the 1[Waqf] Fund and may recover the amount so paid from the 1[waqf]  
property and may also recover damages not exceeding twelve and a half per cent . of the amount so paid.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by , s. 35 , ibid., for “A lease or sub -lease for any period exceeding three years ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 35 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 35, ibid., for “ A lease or sub -lease for any period exceeding one year and not exceeding three years ”               
(w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. The words “or sub -lease” omitted by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  31 
 (2) Any sum of money due under sub -section ( 1) may, on a certificate issued by the Board after 
giving the mutawalli concerned an opportunity of   being h eard, be recovered in the same manner as an 
arrear of land revenue.  
59. Creation of reserve fund .—For the purpose of making provisions for the payment of rent and of 
revenue, cess, rates and taxes due to the Government or any local authority, for the discharge of the 
expenses of the repair of the 1[waqf]  property and for the preservation of the 1[waqf]  property , the Board 
may direct the creation and maintenance, in such manner as it may think fit, of a reserve fund from the 
income of a 1[waqf] . 
60. Extension of time .—The Board may, if its is satisfied that it is necessary so to do, extend the 
time withi n which any act is required to be done by the mutawalli under this Act.  
61. Penalties .—(1) If a mutawalli fails to — 
(a) apply for the registration of a 2[auqaf]; 
(b) furnish statements of particulars or accounts or returns as required under this Act;  
(c) supply information or particulars as required by the Board;  
(d) allow inspection of 1[waqf]  properties, accounts, records or deeds  and documents relating 
thereto;  
(e) deliver possession of any 1[waqf]  property, if ordered by the Board or Tribunal;  
(f) carr y out the directions of the Board;  
(g) discharge any public dues; or  
(h) do any other a ct which he is lawfully required to do by or under this Act;  
he shall, unless he satisfies the court or the Tribunal that there was reasonable cause for his failure, be 
punishable with fine which may extend to 3[ten thousand rupees  for non -compliance of clauses ( a) to ( d) 
and in case of non -compliance of clauses ( e) to ( h), he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to six months and also with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees] . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if— 
(a) a mutawalli omits or fails, with a view to concealing the existing of a 1[waqf] , to apply for its 
registration under this Act ,— 
(i) in the cas e of a 1[waqf]  created before the commencement of this Act, within the period 
specified therefor in  sub-section ( 8) of section 36 ; 
(ii) in the case of any 1[waqf]  created after such commencement, within three months from 
the date of the creation of the 1[waqf] ; or 
(b) a mutawalli furnishes any statement, return, or information to the Board, which he knows or 
has reason to believe to be false, misleading, untrue or incor rect in any material particular,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months and also with fine 
which may extend to fifteen thousand rupees.  
(3) No c ourt, shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this  Act save upon complaint 
made by the Board or an officer duly authorised by the board in this behalf.  
(4) No c ourt inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974),  the fine 
imposed under sub -section ( 1), when realised, shall be credited to the 1[Waqf] Fund.  
(6) In every case where offender is convicted after the commencement of this Act, of an offence 
punishable under sub -section ( 1) and sentenced to a fine, the court shall also impose such term of 
imprisonment in default of payment of fine as is authorised by law for such default.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 36, ibid., for “eight thousand rupees ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  32 
 62. Mutawalli not to spend any money belonging t o 1[waqf]  for self defence .—No mutawalli shall 
spend any money out of the funds of the 1[waqf] , of which he is the mutawalli, for meeting any  costs, 
charges, or expenses which are or may be, incurred by him, in relation to any suit, appeal or any other 
proceeding for, or incidental to, his removal from office or for taking any disciplinary action against 
himself.  
63. Power to appoint mutawallis in certain cases .—When there is a vacancy in the office of the 
mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  and there is no one to be appointed under the terms of the deed of the 1[waqf] , or 
where the right of any person to act as mutawalli is disputed, the board may appoint any person to act as 
mutawalli for such period and on such conditions as it may think f it. 
64. Removal of mutawalli .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law or the deed of 
1[waqf] , the Board may remove a mutawalli fr om his office if such mutawalli — 
(a) has been convicted more than once of an offence punishable under  section  61; or 
(b) has been convicted of any offence of criminal breach of trust or any other offence involving 
moral turpitude, and such conviction has not been reversed and he has not  been granted full pardon 
with respect to such offence; or  
(c) is of unsound mind or is suffering from other mental or physical defect or infirmity which 
would render him unfit to perform the functions and discharge the duties of a mutawalli; or  
(d) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(e) is proved to be addicted to drinking liquor or other spirituous preparations, or is addicted to 
the taking of any narcotic drugs; or  
(f) is employed as paid legal practitioner on behalf of, or against, the 1[waqf] ; or 
(g) has  failed, without reasonable excuse, to maintain regular accounts for two consecutive years 
or has failed to submit, in two consecutive years, the yearly statement of accounts, as required by   
sub-section  (2) of section 46 ; or 
(h) is interested, directly or indirectly, in a subsisting lease in respect of any 1[waqf]  property, or 
in any contract made with, or any work being done for, the 1[waqf]  or is in arrears in respect of any 
sum due by him  to such 1[waqf] ; or 
(i) continuously neglects his duties or commits any misfeasance , malfeasance, misapplication of 
funds or breach of trust in relation to the 1[waqf]  or in respect of any money or other 1[waqf]  property; 
or 
(j) wilfully  and persistently disobeys the lawful orders made by the Central Government, State 
Government, Board under any provision of this Act or rule or order made thereunder;  
(k) misappropriates or fraudulently deals with the property of the 1[waqf] . 
(2) The remov al of a person from the office of the mutawalli shall not affect his personal rights, if 
any, in respect  of the 1[waqf]  property either as a beneficiary or in any other capacity or his right, if any, 
as a sajjadanashin.  
(3) No action shall be taken by the Board under sub -section ( 1), unless it has held an inquiry into the 
matter in a prescribed manner and the decision has been taken by a majority of not less than two -thirds of 
the members of the Board.  
(4) A mutawalli who is aggrieved by an order passed und er any of the clauses ( c) to ( i) of              
sub-section ( 1), may , within one month from the date of the receipt by him of the order, appeal against the 
order to the Tribunal and the decision of the Tribunal on such appeal shall be final.  
(5) Where any  inquiry under sub -section ( 3) is proposed, or commenced, against any mutawalli, the 
Board may, if it is of opinion that it is necessary so to do in the interest of the 1[waqf] , by an order 
suspend such mutawalli until the conclusion of the inquiry:  
Provid ed that no suspension for a period exceeding ten days shall be made except after giving the 
mutawalli a reasonable opportunity of being heard against the proposed action.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  33 
 (6) Where any appeal is filed by the mutawalli to the Tribunal under sub -section ( 4), the Board may 
make an application to the Tribunal for the appointment of a receiver to manage the 1[waqf]  pending the 
decision of the appeal, and where such an application is made, the Tribunal shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Civi l Procedure, 1908   (5 of 1908), appoint a suitable person as 
receiver to manage the 1[waqf]  and direct the receiver so appointed to ensure that the customary or 
religious rights of the mutawalli and of the 1[waqf]  are safeguarded.  
(7) Where a mutawalli has  been removed from his office under sub -section ( 1), the Board may, by 
order, direct the mutawalli to deliver possession of the 1[waqf]  property to the Board or any officer duly 
authorised in this behalf or to any person or committee appointed to act as th e mutawalli of the 1[waqf]  
property.  
(8) A mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  removed from his office under this section shall not be eligible for        
re-appointment as a mutawalli of that 1[waqf]  for a period of five years from the date of such removal.  
65. Assumption of direct management of certain 2[auqaf]  by the Board .—(1) Where no suitable 
person is available for appointment as a mutawalli of a 1[waqf] , or where the Board is satisfied, for 
reasons to be recorded by it in writing, that the filling up o f the vacancy in the office of a mutawalli is 
prejudicial to the interests of the 1[waqf] , the Board may, by notification in the Official Gazette, assume 
direct management of the 1[waqf]  for such period or periods, not exceeding five years in   the aggregat e, as 
may be specified in the notification.  
(2) The State Government may, on its own motion or on the application of any person interested in 
the 1[waqf] , call for the records of any case for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, 
legality  or propriety of the notification issued by the Board under sub -section ( 1) and pass such orders as 
it may think fit and the orders so made by the State Government shall be final and shall be published in 
the manner specified in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) As soo n as possible after the close of every financial year, the Board shall send to the State 
Government a detailed report in regard to every 1[waqf]  under its di rect management, giving therein — 
(a) the details of the income of the 1[waqf]  for the year immediat ely preceding the year under 
report;  
(b) the steps taken to improve the management and income of the 1[waqf] ; 
(c) the period during which the 1[waqf]  has been under the direct management of the Board and 
explaining the reasons as to why it has not been possible to entrust the management of the 1[waqf]  to 
the mutawalli or any committee of management during the year; and  
(d) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(4) The State Government shall examine the report submitted to it under sub -section ( 3), and after 
such examination, issue such directions or instructions to the Board as it may think fit and the Board shall 
comply with such directions or instructions on receipt thereof.  
3[(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Board shall take over the 
administration of a waqf, if the waqf Board has evidence before it to prove that management of the waqf 
has contravened the provisio ns of this Act. ] 
66. Powers of appointment and removal of mutawalli when to be exercised by the State 
Government .—Whenever a deed of 1[waqf]  or any decree or order of a court of any scheme of 
management of any 1[waqf]  provides that a court or any authority other than a Board may appoint or 
remove a mutawalli or settle or modify such scheme of management or otherwise exercise 
superintendence over the 1[waqf] , then , notwithstanding anything contained in such deed of 1[waqf] , 
decree, order  or scheme, such powers aforesaid shall be exercisable by the State Government:  
Provided that where a Board has been established, the State Government shall consult the Board 
before exercising such powers.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid.,  for “wakf s” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 37 , ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  34 
 67. Supervision and supersession of committee of M anagement .—(1) Whenever the supervision 
or management of a 1[waqf]  is vested in any committee appointed by the 1[waqf] , then, notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, such committee shall continue to function until it is superseded by the 
Board or until the expiry of its term as may be specified by the 1[waqf] , whichever is earlier:  
Provided that such committee sha ll function under the direction, control and supervision of the Board 
and abide by such directions as the Board may issue from time to time:  
Provided further that if the Board is satisfied that any scheme for the management of a 1[waqf]  by a 
committee is i nconsistent with any provision of this Act or of any rule made thereunder or with the 
directions of the 1[waqf] , it may, at any time, modify the scheme in such manner as may be necessary to 
bring it in conformity with the directions of the 1[waqf]  or of th e provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, and in the deed of the 1[waqf] , the Board may, if 
it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that a committee, referred to in sub -section (1) is not 
functioning properly and satisfactorily, or that the 1[waqf]  is being mismanaged and that in the interest of 
its proper management, it is necessary so to do, by an order, supersede such committee, and, on such 
superse ssion, any direction of t he 1[waqf] , in so far as it relates to the constitution of the committee, shall 
cease to have any force:  
Provided that the Board shall, before making any order superseding any committee, issue a notice 
setting forth therein the reasons for the proposed act ion and calling upon the Committee to show cause 
within such time, not being less than one month, as may be specified in the notice, as to why such action 
shall not be taken.  
(3) Every order made by the Board under sub -section ( 2) shall be published in the  prescribed manner 
and on such publication shall be binding on the mutawalli and all persons having any interest in the  
1[waqf] . 
(4) Any order made by the Board under sub -section ( 2) shall be final:  
Provided that any person aggrieved by the order made under sub -section ( 2) may, within sixty days 
from the date of the order, appeal to the Tribunal:  
Provided further that the Tribunal shall have no power to suspend the operation of the order made by 
the Board pending such appeal.  
(5) The Board shall, whenev er it supersedes any committee under sub -section ( 2), constitute a new 
committee of   management simultaneously with the order made by it under sub -section ( 2). 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Board may, instead of 
superseding any committee under sub -section ( 2), remove any member thereof if it is satisfied that such 
member has abused his position as such member or had knowingly acted in a manner prejudicial to the 
interests of the 1[waqf] , and every such order for t he removal of any member shall be served upon him by 
registered post:  
Provided that no order for the removal of the member shall be made unless he has been given a  
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed action:  
Provided further that a ny member aggrieved by any order for his removal from the membership of  the 
committee may, within a period of thirty days from the date of  service of the order on him, prefer an 
appeal against such order to the Tribunal and Tribunal may, after giving a rea sonable opportunity to the 
appellant and the Board of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the order made by the Board and the 
order made by the Tribunal in such appeal shall be final.  
68. Duty of mutawalli or committee to deliver possession of records , etc.—(1) Where any 
mutawalli or committee of management has been removed by the Board in accordance with provisions of 
this Act, or of any scheme made by the Board, the mutawalli or the committee so removed from the office 
(hereinafter in this section referred to as the removed mutawalli or committee) shall hand  over charge and 
deliver possession of the records, accounts and all properties of the 1[waqf]  (including cash) to the 
successor mutawalli or the successor committee, within one month from the da te specified in the order.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  35 
 (2) Where any removed mutawalli or committee fails to deliver charge or deliver possession of the 
records, accounts and properties (including cash) to the successor mutawalli or committee within the time 
specified in sub -section (1), or prevents or obstructs such mutawalli or committee, from obtaining 
possession thereof   after expiry of the period aforesaid, the successor mutawalli or any member of the 
successor committee may make an application, accompanied by a certified copy of  the order appointing 
such successor mutawalli or committee, to any 1[District Magistrate, Additional District Magistrate,   
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or their equivalent ] within the local limits of whose jurisdiction any part of the 
2[waqf]  property is si tuate d and, thereupon such 1[District Magistrate, Additional District Magistrate,    
Sub-Divisional Magistrate or their equivalent ] may, after giving notice to the removed mutawalli or 
members of the removed committee, make an order directing the delivery of charge and possession of 
such records, accounts and properties (including cash ) of the  2[waqf]  to the successor mutawalli or th e 
committee, as the case may be, within such time as may be specified in the order.  
(3) Where the removed mutawalli or any member of the removed committee, omits or fails to deliver 
charge and possession of the records, accounts and properties (including c ash) within the time specified 
by 3[any Magistrate ] under sub -section ( 2) the remove d mutawalli or every member of  the removed 
committee, as the case may be, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six 
months or with fine which  may extend to eight thousand rupees, or with both.  
(4) Whenever any removed mutawalli or any member of the removed committee omits or fails to 
comply with the  orders made by  3[any Magistrate ] under sub -section ( 2), 3[any Magistrate ] may authorise 
the succ essor mutawalli or committee to take charge and possession of such records, accounts, properties 
(including cash) and may authorise such person to take such police assistance as may be necessary for the 
purpose.  
(5) No order of the appointment of the succe ssor mutawalli or committee, shall be called in question 
in the proceedings before 3[any Magistrate ] under this section.  
(6) Nothing contained in this s ection shall bar the institution of any suit in a competent civil court by 
any person aggrieved by any o rder made under this section, to establish that he has right, title and interest 
in the properties specified in the order made by 3[any Magistrate ] under sub -section ( 2). 
69. Power of Board to frame scheme for administration of 2[waqf] .—4[(1) Where the Board is 
satisfied after an enquiry, whether on its own motion or on the application of not less than five persons 
interested in any waqf, to frame a scheme for the proper administration of the waqf, it may, by an order, 
frame such scheme for the administr ation of the waqf, after giving reasonable opportunity and after 
consultation with the mutawalli or others in the prescribed manner. ] 
(2) A scheme framed under sub -section ( 1) may provide for the r emoval of the mutawalli of the 
2[waqf]  holding office as such immediately before the date on which the scheme comes into force:  
Provided that where any such scheme provides for the removal of any hereditary mutawalli, the 
scheme shall also provide for the appointment of the person next in here ditary succession to the mutawalli 
so removed, as one of the members of the committee appointed for the proper administration of the 
2[waqf] . 
(3) Every order made under sub -section ( 2) shall be published in the prescribed manner, and, on such 
publication s hall be final and binding on the mutawalli, and  all persons interested in the 2[waqf] : 
Provided that any person aggrieved by an order made under this section may, within sixty days from 
the date of the order, prefer an appeal to the Tribunal and  after hear ing such appeal, the Tribunal may 
confirm, reverse or modify the order:  
Provided further that the Tribunal shall have no power to stay the operation of the order made under 
this section.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 38, for “Magistrate of the first class ” and “Magistrate” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for “the Magistrate ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  36 
 (4) The Board may, at any time by an order, whether made before or af ter the scheme has come into 
force, cancel or modify the scheme.  
(5) Pending the framing of the scheme for th e proper administration of the 1[waqf] , the Board may 
appoint a suitable person to perform all or any of the functions of the mutawalli thereof and  to exercise 
the powers, and perform the duties, of such mutawalli.  
70. Inquiry relating to administration of 1[waqf] .—Any person interested in a 1[waqf]  may make 
an application to the Board supported by an affidavit to institute an inquiry relating to the administration 
of the 1[waqf]  and if the Board is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for bel ieving that the affairs 
of the 1[waqf]  are being mi smanaged, it shall take such action thereon as it thinks fit.  
71. Manner of holding inquiry .—(1) The Board may, either on an application received 
under  section  2[70] or on its own motion, — 
(a) hold an inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed; or  
(b) authorise any person in this behalf to hold an inquiry  into any matter relating to a 1[waqf]  and 
take such action as it thinks fit.  
(2) For the purposes of an inquiry under this s ection, the Board or any person authorised by it in this 
behalf, shall have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908) for enforcing the attendance of witnesses and production of documents.  
CHAPTER VI I 
FINANCE OF THE BOARD  
72. Annual contribution payable to Board .—(1) The mutawalli of every 1[waqf] , the net annual 
income of which is not less than five thousand rupees, shall pay annually, out of the net annual income 
derived by the 1[waqf] , such contributions, not exceeding seven per cent . of such annual income, as may 
be prescribed, to the Board for the services  rendered by such Board to the 1[waqf] . 
Explanation I  .—For the purposes of this Act, “net annual income” shall mean the gross income of 
the 1[waqf]  from all sources, including nazars and offerings which do not amount to contributions to the 
corpus of the 3[auqaf], in a year after deducting therefrom the follow ing, name ly:— 
(i) the land revenue paid by it to the Government;  
(ii) the rates, cesses, taxes and licence fees, paid by it to the Government or any local authority;  
(iii) expenditure incurred for all or any of the 4[in respect of lands directly under cultivation by 
the mutawalli for the benefit of the waqf] , namely: — 
(a) maintenance of, or repairs to, irrigation works, which shall not include the capital cost of 
irrigation;  
(b) seeds or seedlings;  
(c) manure;  
(d) purchase and maintenance of agricultura l implements;  
(e) purchase and maintenance of cattle for cultivation;  
(f) wages for ploughing, watering, sowing, transplanting, harvesting, threshing and other 
agricultural operations:  
Provided that the total deduction in respect of an expenditure incurred  under this clause shall not 
exceed 5[twenty  per cent .] of the income derived f rom lands belonging to the 1[waqf] : 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 40, ibid., for “73” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 41, ibid., for “following purposes” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 4 1, ibid., for “ten per cent. ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  37 
 1[Provided further that no such deduction shall be permitted in respect of waqf land given on 
lease, by whatever name called, whether batai  or share cropping or any other name. ] 
(iv) expenditure on sundry repa irs to rented buildings, not exceeding five per cent . of the annual 
rent derived therefrom, or the actual expenditure, whichever is less;  
(v) sale proceeds of immovable properties or rig hts relating to, or arising out of immovable 
properties, if such proceeds are reinvested to earn income for the 2[waqf] : 
Provided that the following items of receipts shall not be deemed to be income for the purposes of 
this section, namely: — 
(a) advances  and deposits recovered and loans taken or recovered;  
(b) deposits made as security by employees, lessees or contractors and other deposits, if any;  
(c) withdrawals from banks or of investments;  
(d) amounts recovered towards costs awarded by courts;  
(e) sale proceeds of religious books and publications where such sales are undertaken as an 
un-remunerative enterprise with a view to propagating religion;  
(f) donations in cash or kind or offerings made by the donors as contribution to the corpus of 
the 2[waqf] : 
Provided that interest on income, if any, accruing from such donations or offerings shall be 
taken into account in calculating the gross annual income;  
(g) voluntary contributions received in cash or kind for a specific service to be performed  by 
the 2[waqf] and expended on such service;  
(h) audit recoveries;  
Explanation II .—In determining the net annual income for the purposes of this section, only the net 
profit derived by any 2[waqf]  from its remunerative undertakings, if any, shall be taken as income, and in 
respect of its non -remunerative undertakings, such as, schools, colleges, hospitals, poor homes, 
orphanages or any other similar institutions, the grants given by the Government or any local authority or 
donations received from the public or fees collected from the pupils of educational institutions shall not 
be taken as income.  
(2) The Board may in the case of any mosque or orphanage or any particular 2[waqf]  reduce or remit 
such contribution for such time as it thinks fit.  
(3) The mutawalli of a 2[waqf]  may realise the contributions payable by him under sub -section ( 1) 
from the various persons entitled to received any pecuniary or other material benefit from the 2[waqf] , but 
the sum realisable from any one of such persons shall not exceed such amount as shall bear to the total 
contribution payable, the same proportion, as the value of the benefits receivable by such person bears to 
the entire net annual income of the 2[waqf] : 
Prov ided that if there is any income of the 2[waqf]  available in excess of the amount payable as dues 
under this Act, other than as the contribution under sub -section ( 1), and in excess of the amount payable 
under the 2[waqf]  deed, the contribution shall be pa id out of such income.  
(4) The contribution payable under sub -section ( 1) in respect of a 2[waqf]  shall, subject to the prior 
payment of any dues to the Government or any local authority or of any other  statutory first charge on the 
2[waqf]  property or the income thereof, be a first charge on the income of the 2[waqf]  and shall be 
recoverable, on a certificate issued by the Board after giving the mutawalli concerned an opportunity of 
being heard, as an arrear of land revenue.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 41 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1-11-2013).  38 
 (5) If a mutawa lli realises the income of the 1[waqf]  and refuses to pay or does not pay such 
contribution, he shall also be personally liable for such contribution which may be realised from his 
person or property in the manner aforesaid.  
(6) Where, after the commenceme nt of this Act, the mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  fails to submit a return of 
the net annual income of the 1[waqf]  within the time specified therefor or submits a return which, in the 
opinion of the Chief Executive Officer is incorrect or false in any material pa rticular, or which does not 
comply with the provisions of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder, the Chief Executive Officer 
may assess the net annual income of the 1[waqf]  to the best of his judgment or revise the net annual 
income as shown in the  return submitted by the mutawalli and the net annual income as so assessed or 
revised shall be deemed to be the net annual income of the 1[waqf]  for the purposes of this section:  
Provided that no assessment of net annual income or revision of return submi tted by mutawalli shall 
be made except after giving a notice to the mutawalli calling upon him to show cause, within the time 
specified in the notice, as to why such assessment or revision of the return shall not be made and every  
such assessment or revisi on shall be made after considering the reply if any, given by the mutawalli.  
(7) Any mutawalli who is aggrieved by the assessment or revision made by the Chief Executive 
Officer, under sub -section ( 6), may prefer an appeal to the Board within thirty days f rom the date of the 
receipt of the assessment or revision of return and the Board may, after giving the appellant a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, confirm, reverse or modify the assessment or revision or the return and the 
decision of the Board the reon shall be final.  
(8) If, for any reason, the contribution or any portion thereof leviable under this section has escaped 
assessment in any year, whether before or after the commencement of this Act, the Chief Executive 
Officer may, within five years fr om the last date of the year to which s uch escaped assessment relates 
serve upon the mutawalli a notice assessing him with the contribution or portion thereof which had 
escaped assessment, and demanding payment thereof within thirty days from the date of s ervice of such 
notice, and the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, shall, as far as may be, apply as if the 
assessments were made under this Act, in the first instance.  
73. Power of Chief Executive Officer to direct banks or other person to make              
payments .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the 
Chief Executive Officer, if he is satisfied   that it is necessary a nd expedient so to do, make an order 
directing any bank in which, or any person with whom any money belonging to a 1[waqf]  is deposited, to 
pay the contribution, leviable under  section 72 , out of such money, as may be standing to the credit of the 
1[waqf]  in such bank or may be deposited with such person, or out of the moneys which may, from time 
to time, be received by bank or other person for or on behalf of the 1[waqf]   by wa y of deposit, and on 
receipt of such orders, the bank or the other person, as the case may be, shall, when no appeal has been 
preferred under                sub-section ( 3), comply with such orders, or where an appeal has been preferred 
under sub -section ( 3), shall comply, with the orders made by the Tribunal on such appeal.  
(2) Every payment made by a bank or other person in pursuance of any order made under              
sub-section ( 1), shall operate as a full discharge of the liability of such bank or ot her person in relation to 
the sum so paid.  
(3) Any bank or other person who is ordered under sub -section ( 1) to make any payment may, within 
thirty days from the date of the order, prefer an appeal against such order to the Tribunal and the decision 
of the  Tribunal on such appeal shall be final.  
(4) Every officer of the bank or other person who fails, without any reasonable excuse, to comply 
with the order made under sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 3), shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or with fine which may extend 
to eight thousand rupees, or with both.  
74. Deduction of contribution from perpetual annuity payable to the 1[waqf] .—(1) Every 
authority empowered to disburse any perpetua l annuity payable to a 1[waqf]  under any law relating to the 
abolition of zamindars or jagirs, or laying down land ceilings, shall, on receipt of a certificate from the 
Chief Executive Officer, specifying the amount of contribution payable by the 1[waqf]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  39 
 under  section  72 which remains unpaid, deduct before making payment of the perpetual annuity to the 
1[waqf] , the amount specified in such certificate and remit the amount so de ducted to the Chief Executive 
Officer.  
(2) Every amount remitted under sub -section ( 1) to the Chief Executive Officer shall be deemed to be 
a payment made by the 1[waqf]  and shall, to the extent of the amount so remitted, operate as a full 
discharge of the  liability of such authority with regard to the payment of the perpetual annuity.  
75. Power of board to borrow .—(1) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Board may, with the previous sanction of the State Government, borrow  such sum of money and on 
such terms and conditions as the State Government may determine.  
(2) The Board shall repay the money borrowed, together with any interest or costs due in respect 
thereof, according to the terms and conditions of the loan.  
76. Mutawalli not to lend or borrow moneys without sanction .—(1) No mutawalli, Executive 
Officer  or other person  in charge of the administration of  a 1[waqf]  shall lend any money belonging to the 
1[waqf]  or any 1[waqf]  property  or borrow any money for the purposes of the 1[waqf]  except with the 
previous san ction of the Board:  
Provided that no such sanction is necessary if there is an ex press provision in the deed of  1[waqf]  for 
such borrowing or lending, as the case may be.  
(2) The Board may, while according sanction, specify any terms and conditions subject to which the 
person referred to in sub -section ( 1) is authorised by him to lend or borr ow any money or lend any other 
1[waqf]  property.  
(3) Where any money is lent or borrowe d, or other 1[waqf]  property is lent in contravention of the 
provisions of this section, it shall be lawful f or the Chief Executive Officer, — 
(a) to recover an amount equal to the amount which has been so lent or borrowed,  together with 
interest due thereo n, from the personal funds of the person by whom such amount was lent or 
borrowe d; 
(b) to recover the possession of the 1[waqf]  property lent in contravention of the provisions of this 
Act, from the person to whom it was lent, or from persons who claim title to such property through 
the person to whom such property was lent.  
77. 1[Waqf] Fund .—(1) All moneys received or realised by  the Board under this Act and all other 
moneys received as donations, benefactions or grants by the Board shall form a fund to be called the 
1[Waqf] Fund. 
(2) All moneys received by the Board, as donations, benefactions and grants shall be deposited and 
accounted for under a separate sub -head.  
(3) Subject to any rules that may be made by the State Government in this behalf, the 1[Waqf] Fund 
shall be under the control of the Board, so, however, that    the 1[Waqf] Fund under the control of common 
1[Waqf] Board shall be subject to rules, if any, made in this behalf by the Central Government.  
(4) The 1[Waqf] Fund shall be applied to — 
(a) repayment of any loan incurred under  section  75 and payment of interest thereon;  
(b) payment of the cost of audit of the 1[Waqf] Fund and the accounts of 2[auqaf] ; 
(c) payment of the salary and allowances to the officers and staff of the Board;  
(d) payment of traveling allowances to the Chair person, members, of the Board;  
(e) payment of all expenses incurred by the Board in the performance of the duties imposed, and 
the exercise of the powers conferred, by or under this Act;  
(f) payment of all expenses incurred by the Board for the discharge o f any obligation imposed on 
it by or under any law for the time being in force.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for “wakf s” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  40 
 1[(g) payment  of maintenance to Muslim women as ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction 
under the provisions of the Muslim Women (Protection of Rights on Divorce) Act, 1986                  
(25 of 1986) .] 
(5) If any balance remains after meeting the expenditure ref erred to in sub -section ( 4), the Board may 
use any portion of such balance for the preservation and protection of 2[waqf]  properties or for such other 
purposes as it may deem fit.  
78. Budget of Board .—(1) The Board shall  in every year prepare, in such form and at such time as 
may be prescribed, a budget for the next financial year showing the estimated receipts and expenditure 
during that financial year and forward a copy of the same to the State Government.  
(2) On receipt of the budget forwarded to it under sub -section ( 1), the State Government shall 
examine the same and suggest such alterations, corrections or modifications to be made therein as it may 
think fit and forward such suggestions to the Board for its considerati on. 
(3) On receipt of the suggestions from the State Government the Board may make written 
representations to that Government with regard to the altera tions, corrections or modifications suggested 
by that Government and the State Government shall, after co nsidering such representations, 
communicate, within a period of three weeks from the date of receipt thereof, to the Board its final 
decision in relation to the matter and the decision of the State Government shall be final.  
(4) On receipt of the decision of the State Government under sub -section ( 3), the Board shall 
incorporate in its budget all the alterations, corrections, modifications finally suggested by the State 
Government and the budget as so altered, corrected or modified, shall be the budget whic h shall be passed 
by the Board.  
79. Accounts of Board .—The Board shall cause to be maintained such books of account and other 
books in relation to its accounts in such form and in such manner as may be provided by regulations.  
80. Audit of accounts of Boar d.—(1) The accounts of the Board shall be audited and examined 
annually by such auditor as may be ap pointed by the State Government.  
(2) The auditor shall submit his report to the State Government and the report of the auditor shall, 
among other things, specify whether the accounts of every 2[waqf]  under the direct management of the 
Board have been kept separately and whether such account s have been audited annually by the State 
Examiner of Local Funds and shall also specify all cases of irregular, illegal or improper expenditure or of 
failure to recover money or other property caused by neglect or misconduct and any other matter which 
the auditor considers it necessary to report; and the report shall also contain the name of any person who, 
in the opinion of the auditor is responsible for such expenditure or failure and the auditor shall in every 
such case certify the amount of such expend iture or loss as due from such person.  
(3) The cost of the audit shall be paid from the 2[Waqf] Fund.  
81. State Government to pass orders on auditor’s report .—The State Government shall examine 
the auditor’s report and may call for the explanation of any p erson in regard to any matter mentioned 
therein, and shall pass such orders on the report  as it thinks fit  3[and a copy of the said auditor’s report, 
along with orders shall be forwarded by the State Government to the Council within a period of thirty 
days of laying of such report before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses 
or where such Legislatures consist of one House, before that House ]. 
82. Dues of  Board to be recovered as arrears of land revenue .—(1) Every sum certified to be due 
from any person by an auditor in his report under  section  80, be paid by such person within sixty days 
after service of a demand notice by the Board.  
(2) If such payment is not made in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the sum payable 
may, on a certificate issued by the Board, after giving the person concerned an opportunity of being 
heard, be recovered as an arrear of land revenue.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 42 (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4 3, ibid., for “as it thinks fit ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  41 
 CHAPTER VIII  
JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS  
83. Constitution of Tribunals, etc .—1[(1) The State Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, constitute as many Tribunals as it may think fit, for the determination of any dispute, question or 
other matter relating to  a waqf or waqf property, eviction of a tenant or determination of rights and 
obligations of the lessor and the lessee of such property, under this Act and define the local limits and  
jurisdiction of such Tribunals.]  
(2) Any mutawalli person interested in a 2[waqf]  or any other person aggrieved by an order made 
under this Act, or rules made thereunder, may  make an application within the time specified in this Act or 
where no such time has been specified, within such time as may be prescribed, to the Tribuna l for the 
determination of any dispute, question or other matter relating to the 2[waqf] . 
(3) Where any application made under sub -section ( 1) relates to any 2[waqf]  property which falls 
within the territorial limits of the jurisdiction of two or more Trib unals, such application may be made to 
the Tribunal within the local limits of whose jurisdiction the mutawalli or any one of the mutawallis of 
the 2[waqf]  actually and voluntarily resides, carries on business or personally works for gain, and, where 
any such application is made to the Tribunal aforesaid, the other Tribunal or Tribunals having jurisdiction 
shall not entertain any application for the determin ation of such dispute, question or other matter:  
Provided that the State Government may, if it is of opinion that it is expedient in the interest of the 
2[waqf]   or any other person interested in the 2[waqf]  or the 2[waqf]  property to transfer such applica tion 
to any other Tribunal having jurisdiction for the determination of the dispute, question or other matter 
relating to such 2[waqf]  or 2[waqf]  property, transfer such application to any other Tribunal having 
jurisdiction, and, on such transfer, the Trib unal to which the application is so transferred shall deal with  
the application from the stage  which was reached before the Tribunal from which the application has been 
so transferred, except where the Tribunal is of opinion that it is necessary in the int erest of justice to deal 
with the application afresh.  
3[(4) Every Tribunal shall consist of — 
(a) one person, who shall be a member of the State Judicial Service holding a rank, not below that 
of a District, Sessions or Civil Judge, Class I, who shall be th e Chairman;  
(b) one person, who shall be an officer from the State Civil Services equivalent in rank to that of 
the Additional District Magistrate, Member;  
(c) one person having knowledge of Muslim  law and jurisprudence, Member;  
and the appointment of every such person shall be made either by name or by designation.  
(4A) The terms and conditions of appointment including the salaries and allowances payable to the 
Chairman and other members other than persons appointed as ex officio  members shall be such as may be 
prescribed. ] 
(5) The Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court and shall have the same powers as may be 
exercised by a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, or 
executing a dec ree or order.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 (5 of 1908), the 
Tribunal shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed.  
(7) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and binding upon the parties t o the applic ation and it 
shall  have the force of a decree made by a civil court. 
(8) The execution of any decision of the Tribunal shall be made by the civil court to which such 
decision is sent for execution in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908      
(5 of 1908).  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 44, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4,  ibid., for “wakf” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4 4, ibid., for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  42 
 (9) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order whether interim or otherwise, given or made by 
the Tribunal:  
Provided that a High Court may, on its own motion or on the application of the Board or any person 
aggrieved, call for and examine the records relating to any dispute, question or other matter which has 
been determined by the Tribunal for the purpose of sati sfying itself as to the correctness, legality or 
propriety of such determination and may confirm, reverse or modify such determination or pass such 
other order as it may think fit.  
84. Tribunal to hold proceedings expeditiously and to furnish to the partie s copies of its 
decision .—Whenever an application is made to a Tribunal for the determination of any dispute, question 
or other matter relating to a 1[waqf]  or 1[waqf]  property it shall hold its proceedings as expeditiously as 
possible and shall as soon as  practicable, on the conclusion of the hearing of such matter give its decision 
in writing and furnish a copy of such decision to each of the parties to the dispute.  
85. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie in any                    
2[civil court, revenue court and any other authority]  in respect of any dispute, question or other matter 
relating to any 1[waqf] , 1[waqf]  property or other matter which is required by o r under this Act to be 
determined by a Tribunal.  
86. Appointment of a receiver in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or in any other law for the time being in force, where any suit or 
other l egal procee ding is instituted or commenced — 
(a) by or on behalf of a Board — 
(i) to set aside the sale of any immovable property, which is 1[waqf]  property, in execution of 
a decree or order of a civil court;  
(ii) to set aside the transfer of any immovable property, which is 1[waqf]  property, made by 
the mutawalli thereof, whether for valuable consideration or not, without or otherwise than in 
accordance with, the sanction of the Board;  
(iii) to recover possession of the property referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or to restore 
possession of such property to the mutawalli of the concerned 1[waqf] ; or 
(b) by a mutawalli to recover possession of immovable property, which is 1[waqf]  property, 
which has been transferr ed by a previous mutawalli  3[or by any other person] , whether for valuable 
consideration or not, without otherwise than in accordance with the sanction of the Board, and which 
is in the possession of the defendant,  
the court may, on the application of the plaintiff, appoint a receiver of such property and direct such 
receiver to pay from time to time to the plaintiff, out of the income of the property, such amount as the 
court may consider to be necessary for further pros ecution of the suit.  
87. [Bar to the enforcement of right on behalf of unregistered wakfs. ] Omitted by the Wakf 
(Amendment) Act , 2013 (27 of 2013),  s. 47 (w.e.f . 1-11-2013).  
88. Bar to challenge the validity of any notification, etc .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in 
this Act, no notification or order or decision made, proceeding or action taken, by the Central 
Government or the State Government under this Act or any rule made thereunder shall be questioned in 
any Civil Court.  
89. Notice of suits by parties against Board .—No suit shall be instituted against the Board in 
respect of any act purporting to be done by it in pursuance of this Act or of any rules made thereunder, 
until the expiration of two months next after notice in writing has been del ivered to, or left at, the office of 
the Board, stating the cause of action, the name, description and place of residence of the plaintiff and the 
relief which he claims; and the plaint shall contain a statement that such notice has been so delivered or 
left. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4 5, ibid., for “civil court” ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  43 
 90. Notice of suits, etc., by courts .—(1) In every suit or proceeding relating to a title to or possession 
of a 1[waqf]  property or the right of a mutawalli or beneficiary, the court or Tribunal shall issue notice to 
the Board at the cost of the party instituting   such suit or proceeding.  
(2) Whenever any 1[waqf]  property is notified for sale in execution of a decree of a civil court or for 
the recovery of any revenue, cess, rates of taxes due to the Government or any local authority, notice shall 
be gi ven to the Board by the court, Collector or other person under whose order the sale is notified.  
(3) In the absence of a notice under sub -section ( 1), any decree or order passed in the suit or 
proceeding shall be declared void, if the Board , within 2[six month ] of its coming to know of such suit or 
proceeding, applies to the court in this behalf.  
(4) In the absence of a notice under sub -section ( 2), the sale shall be declared void, if the Board, 
within one month of its coming to know of  the sale, applies in this behalf to the court or other authority 
under whose order the sale was held.  
91. Proceedings under Act 1 of 1894 .—(1) If, in the course of proceedings under the Land 
Acquisition Act, 1894 or under any law for the time being in force relating to the acquisition of land or 
other property, 3[and before an award is made, in case the property ] under acquisition is 1[waqf]  property, 
a notice of such acquisition shall be served by Collector on the Board and further proceedings shall be 
stayed to enable the Board to appear and plead as a party to the proceeding at any time within three 
months from the date of the receipt of s uch notice.  
Explanation .—The reference to the Collector in the foregoing provisions of this sub -section shall, in 
relation to any other law referred to therein, be construed, if the Collector is not the competent authority 
under such other law to make an a ward of the compensation or other amount payable for acquisition of 
land or other property thereunder, as a reference to the authority under such other law competent to make 
such award.  
(2) Where the Board has reason to believe that any property under acqu isition is 1[waqf]  property, it 
may at any time before the award is made appear and plead as a party to the proceeding.  
(3) When the Board has appeared under the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), no order 
shall be passed under section 31 or  section 32 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or under the 
corresponding provisions of the other law referred to in sub -section ( 1) without giving an opportunity to 
the Board to be heard.  
(4) Any order passed under section 31 or section 32 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 or under the 
corresponding provisions of the other law referred to in sub -section ( 1) without giving an opportunity to 
the Board to be heard, shall be declared void if the Board, within one month of its coming to know of the 
order, ap plies in this behalf to the authority which made the order.  
92. Board to be party to suit or proceeding .—In any suit or proceeding in respect of a 1[waqf]  or 
any 1[waqf]  property the Board may appear and plead as a party to the suit or proceeding.  
93. Bar to compromise of suits by or against mutawallis .—No suit or proceeding in any court by 
or against the mutawalli of a 1[waqf]  relating to title to 1[waqf]  property or the rights of the mutawalli 
shall be compromised without the sanction of the Board.  
94. Po wer to make application to the Tribunal in case of failure of mutawalli to discharge his 
duties .—(1) Where a mutawalli is under an obligation to perform any act which is recognised by Muslim 
law as pious, religious or charitable and the mutawalli fails to perform such act, the Board may apply to 
the Tribunal for an order directing the mutawalli to pay to the Board or to any person authori sed by the 
Board in this behalf  the amount necessary for the performance of such act.  
(2) Where a mutawalli is under an o bligation to discharge any other duties imposed on him under the 
1[waqf]  and the mutawalli wil fully fails to discharge such duties, the Board or any person interested in the 
1[waqf]  may make  an application to the Tribunal and the Tribunal may pass such ord er thereon as it thinks 
fit. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for “one month”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 49, ibid., for “it appears to the Collector before an award is made that any property”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  44 
 95. Power of  appellate authority to entertain appeal after expiry of specified period .—Where , 
under this Act any period has been specified for the filing of any appeal, the appellate authority may, if it 
is satisfied that the a ppellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the 
period so specified, entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
96. Power of Central Government to regulate secular activities of 1[auqaf] .—(1) For the purpose 
of regulating the secular activities of 1[auqaf] , the Central Government shall have the followin g powers 
and functions, namely: — 
(a) to lay down general principles and policies of 2[waqf]  administration in so far as they relate to 
the secular activities of the 1[auqaf] ; 
(b) to co -ordinate the functions of the Central 2[Waqf] Council and the Board, in so far as they 
relate to their secular functions;  
(c) to review administration of the secu lar activities of 1[auqaf]  generally and to suggest 
improvements, if any.  
(2) In exercising its powers and functions under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may call for 
any periodic or other reports from any Board and may issue to the Board such dir ections as it may think 
fit and the Board shall comply with such directions.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section “secular activities” shall include social, economic, 
educational and other welfare activities.  
97. Directions by State Government .—Subject to any directions issued by the Central Government 
under section 96, the State Government may, from time to time, give to the Board such general or special 
directions as the State Government thinks fit and in the performance of its functions, the B oard shall 
comply with such directions : 
3[Provided that the State Government shall not issue any direction being contrary to any waqf deed or 
any usage; practice or custom of the waqf. ] 
98. Annual report by State Government .—As soon as may be after the clo se of a financial year, the 
State Government shall cause a general annual report on the working and administration of the State 
2[Waqf] Board and the Administration of   1[auqaf]  in the State during that year to be prepared and laid 
before each House of the  State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such legislature 
consists of one House, before that House, and every such report shall be in such form and shall contain 
such matters as may be provided by regulations.  
99. Power to supersede Boa rd.—(1) If the State Government is of opinion that the Board is unable 
to perform or has persistently made default in the performance of, the duty imposed on it by or under this 
Act or has exceeded o r abused its powers, or has wil fully and without sufficient cause failed to comply 
with any direction issued by the Central Government under  section 96  or the State Government 
under  section 97 , or if the State Government is satisfied on consideration of any report submitted after 
annual inspection, that the Board’s continuance is likely to be injurious to the interests of the 1[auqaf]  in 
the State,  the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, supersede the Board for a 
period not exceeding six months:  
Provided that before issuing a notification under this sub -section, the State Government shall give a 
reasonable time to the Boar d to show cause why it should not be superseded and shall consider the 
explanations and objections, if any, of the Board : 
4[Provided further that the power of the State Government under this section shall not be exercised 
unless there is a prima facie  evidence of financial irregularity, misconduct or violation of the provisions 
of this Act. ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakfs”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 50, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 51, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  45 
 (2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Board, — 
(a) all the members of the Board shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as 
such members;  
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or 
performed by or on behalf of the Board shall, during t he period of supersession, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the State Government may direct; and  
(c) all properties  vested in the Board shall, during the period of supersession vest in the State 
Government.  
(3) On the expiration of t he period of supersession specified in the notification issued under           
sub-section ( 1), the State Government may — 
1[(a) extend the period of supersession by another six months with reasons to be recorded in 
writing and, the period of continuous sup ersession shall not exceed more than a year; or ] 
(b) reconstitute the Board in the manner provided in  section  14. 
100. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against 
the board or Chief Executive Officer or Survey Commissioner or any other person duly appointed under 
this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
101. Survey Commissioner, members and officers of the Board , deemed to be public servants .—
(1) The Survey Commissioner, members of the Board, every officer, every auditor of the Board and every 
other person duly appointed to discharge any duties imposed on him  by this Act or any rule or order made 
thereunder, shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
(2) Every mutawalli of a 2[waqf] , every member of managing committee, whether constituted by th e 
Board or under any deed of 2[waqf] , every Executive Officer and every person holding any office in a 
3[waqf]  shall also be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860).  
102. Special provision for re organisation of certain Boards .—(1) Where on account of the 
reorganisation of States under any law providing reorganisation of States, the whole or any part of a State 
in respect of which a Board was, immediately before the day of such reorganisation, func tioning has been 
transferred on that day to another State and by reason of such transfer, it appears to the Government of a 
State in any part of which the Board is functioning that the Board should be dissolved or that it should be 
reconstituted as an Intr a-State Board for the whole or any part of   that State, the State Government may 
frame a scheme or such dissolution or such reconstitution, including proposals regarding the transfer of 
the assets, rights and liabilities of the Board to any other Board or State Government and the transfer or 
re-employment of employees of the Board and forward the scheme to the Central Government.  
(2) On receipt of a scheme forwarded to it under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may, 3[after 
consulting the Council and the State Governments ] concerned, approve the scheme with or without 
modifications and give effect to the scheme so approved by making such order as it thinks fit.  
(3) An order under sub -section ( 2) may provide for all or any of the following m atters, namely: — 
(a) the dissolution of the Board;  
(b) the reconstitution in any manner whatsoever of the Board including the establishment, where 
necessary, of a new Board;  
(c) the area in respect of which the reconstituted Board or new Board shall functi on and operate;  
(d) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets, rights and liabilities of   the Board (including the 
rights and liabilities under any contract made by it) to any other Board or State Government and the 
terms and conditions of such tran sfer; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 51, for  clause ( a) (w.e.f. 1-11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakf”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 52, ibid., for “after consulting the State Governments”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  46 
 (e) the substitution of any such transferee, for the Board, or the addition of any such transferee, as 
a party to any legal proceeding to which the Board is a party; and the transfer of any proceeding 
pending before the Board to any such transferee;  
(f) the transfer o r re-employment of any employee  of the Board to or by, any such transferee and 
subject to the provisions of law providing for the reorganisation of the concerned State , the terms and 
conditions of service applicable to such employees after such transfer or re -employment; and  
(g) such incidental,  consequential and supplemental matters as may be necessary to give effect to 
the approved scheme.  
(4) Where an order is made un der this section transferring the assets, rights and liabilities of the 
Board, then, by virtue of that order, such assets, rights and liabilities of the Board shall vest in, and be the 
assets, rights and liabilities of, the transferee.  
(5) Every order made  under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette.  
(6) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament, as soon as may 
be, after it is made.  
103. Special provision for establishment of Board for part of a Stat e.—(1) Where on account of 
the territorial changes brought about by any law providing for the reorganisation of any State, this Act is 
as from the date on which that law comes into force applicable only to any part or parts of a State but has 
not been brought into force in the remaining part thereof, then notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, it shall be lawful for the Government of the State to establish one or more Boards for such part or 
parts in which this Act is in force and in such  a case any reference in this Act to the word “State” in 
relation of a Board shall be construed as a reference to that part of the State for which the Board is 
established.  
(2) Where any such Board has been established and it appears to the Government of the Sta te, that a 
Board should be established for the whole of the State, the State Government may, by order notified in the 
Official Gazette dissolve the Board established for the part of the State or reconstitute and reorganise, 
such Board or establish a new Bo ard for the whole of the State and thereupon, the assets, rights and 
liabilities of the Board for the part of the State shall vest in and be the assets, rights and liabilities of   the 
reconstituted Board or the new  Board, as the case may be.  
104. Applicati on of Act to properties given or donated by persons not professing Islam for 
support of certain 1[waqf] .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act where any movable or 
immovable property has been given or donated by any person not professing Islam f or the support of a 
1[waqf]  being — 
(a) a mosque, idgah, imambara, dargah, khangah or a maqbara;  
(b) a Muslim graveyard;  
(c) a choultry or a musafirkhana,  
then such property shall be deemed to be comprised in that 1[waqf]  and be dealt in the same manner as the 
1[waqf]  in which it is so comprised.  
2[104A.  Prohibition of sale, gift, exchange, mortgage or transfer of waqf                       
property. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force or any waqf deed, no person shall sell, gift, exchange, mortgage or transfer any movable or 
immovable property which is a waqf property to any other person.  
(2) Any sale, gift, exchange, mortgage or transfer of property referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
void ab initio .] 
3[104B.  Restoration of waqf properties in occupation of Government agencies to waqf Board. —
(1) If any waqf property has been occupied by the Government agencies it shall be returned to the Board 
or the mutawalli  within a period of six months from the date of the order of the Tribunal.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 53, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Ins. by s. 54, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  47 
 (2) The Government agency may, if the property is required for a public purpose, make an application 
for determination of the rent, or as the case may be, the compensation, by the T ribunal at the prevailing 
market value. ] 
105. Power of Board and Chief Executive Officer to require copies of documents, etc., to be 
furnished. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in force, it shall be lawful 
for the Board or the Chief Executive Officer to require any person having the custody of any record, 
register, report or other document relating to a 1[waqf]  or any immovable property, which is 1[waqf]  
property, to furnish, subject to the payment of necessary costs, copies of, or extracts from, any such 
record, register, report or document and every person to whom such a requisition is made, shall furnish, as 
soon as may be practicable, to the Board or Chief Executive Officer, copies or extracts from the required 
record, register, report or other document.  
106. Powers of Central Government to constitute common Boards .—(1) Where the Central 
Government i s satisfied th at by reasons of — 
(i) the smallness of the Muslim population in two or more States,  
(ii) the slender resources of the 2[Auqaf]  in such States, and  
(iii) the disproportion between the number and income of the 2[auqaf]  and the Muslim population 
in such States,  
it is expedient in the interests of the 2[auqaf]  in the States and the Muslim population of such States, to 
have, instead of separate Boards for each of such States, a common Board, it may, 3[after consultation 
with the Council and the Government ] of each of the concerned States, establish, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, a common Board for such States as it may deem fit, and may, by the same or any 
subsequent notification specify the place at which the pr incipal office of such common Board shall be 
located.  
(2) Every common Board established under sub -section ( 1) shall, as far as practicable, consist of the 
persons specified in sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be,  sub-section ( 7) of section 14 . 
(3) Whenever any common Board is est ablished under sub -section ( 1)— 
(a) all powers vested in the State Government under any deed of 1[waqf]  or any provision of law 
for the time being in force relating to 2[auqaf] , shall stand transferred to, and vested in, the Central 
Government and, thereupon, references in such deed of 1[waqf]  or law to the State Governments shall 
be construed as references  to the Central Government:  
Provided that while establishing a common Board for two or more States, the Central 
Government shall ensure, that at least one representative of each of the concerned States is in cluded 
as a member of the Board;  
(b) references i n this Act to a State shall be construed as references to each of the States for which 
the common Board has been established;  
(c) the Central Government may, without prejudice to any rule applicable to a Board in a State, 
may, by notification in the Offici al Gazette, rules regulating the conduct of business by, and affairs 
of, the common Board.  
(4) The common Board shall be a body corporate, with objects not confined to one State, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal with power to acquire and hold property and to transfer any such 
property, subject to such conditions and restrictions as may be specified by the Central Government, and 
shall by the said name sue or be sued.  
107. Act 36 of 19 63 not to apply for recovery of 1[waqf]  properties .—Nothing c ontained in the 
Limitation Act, 1963 shall apply to any suit for possession of immovable property comprised in any 
1[waqf]  or for possession of any interest   in such property.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 55, ibid., for “after consultation with the Government ” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  48 
 108. Special provision as to evacuee 1[waqf]  properties .—The provisions of this Act shall apply, 
and shall be deemed always to have applied, in relation to any evacuee property within the meaning of    
clause ( f) of section 2 of the Administration of Evacuee Property Act, 1950 (31 of 1950) which 
immediately befo re it became such evacuee property within the said meaning was property comprised in 
any 1[waqf]  and, in particular any entrustment (whether by transfer of any documents or in any other 
manner and whether generally or for specified purpose) of any such pro perty to a Board made before the 
commencement of this Act in pursuance of the instructions of the Custodian under the Administration of 
Evacuee Property Act, 1950 shall have, and shall be deemed always to have had, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any  other provision of this Act, effect as if s uch entrustment had operated to — 
(a) vest such property in such Board in the same manner and with the same effect as in a trustee 
of such property for the purposes of sub -section ( 1) of  section 11 of the Adminis tration of Evacuee of 
Property Act, 1950 (31 of 1950), with effect from the date of such entrustment, and  
(b) authorise such Board to assume direct management of the 1[waqf]  concerned for so long as it 
might deem necessary.  
2[108A.  Act to have overriding effect. —The provisions of this Act shall have overriding effect 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other tha n this Act. ] 
109. Power to make rules.—(1) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act, other than those of  Chapter  III. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
3[(i) the qualifications required to be fulfilled by a person to be appointed as a mutawalli under 
clause ( i) of section 3;  
(ia) other particulars which the report of the Survey Commissioner may contain under clause ( f) 
of sub -section ( 3) of section 4; ] 
(ii) any other matter under  clause ( f) of sub -section ( 4) of section 4 ; 
(iii) the particulars which a list of 4[Auqaf]  published under  sub-section ( 2) of section 5 , may 
contain;  
(iv) the manner of election of members of the Board by means of a single transferable vote, 
5[under  sub-section ( 1) of ] sub-section ( 2) of section 14 ; 
(v) the terms and conditions of service of the Chief Executive Officer  under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23 ; 
(vi) the conditions and restrictions subject to which the Chief Executi ve Officer or any other 
officer may inspect any public office , records or registers under  section  29; 
6[(via) the period within which the mutawalli or any other person may produce documents related 
to waqf properties under sub -section ( 2) of section 31;  
(vib) the conditions under which an agency of the Government or any other organisation may 
supply copies of records, registers and other documents under sub -section ( 3) of section 31; ] 
(vii) the conditions subject to which an Executive Officer and supporting staff may be appointed 
under  sub-section ( 1) of section 38 ; 
(viii) the manner in which an inquiry may be held by th e Chief Ex ecutive Officer under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 39 ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakf”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 56, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 57, ibid., for clause ( i) (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wakfs”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
5. Subs. by s. 57, ibid., for “under”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
6. Ins. by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  49 
 (ix) the form in which, and the time within which, a separate budget for 1[Auqaf]  under the direct 
management of the Board shall be prepared under  sub-section ( 1) of section 45 ; 
(x) the interval at which account s of 1[Auqaf]  may be audited in pursuance of the provisions of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 47;  
2*   *   *   *  *  
(xii) the guidance subject to which the Collector shall recover the property transferred in 
contravention of the provisions of this Act, under  section 52 ; 
(xiii) the manner of service of notice issued under  sub-section ( 1) of section  54 and the manner in 
which any inquiry is to be made under  sub-section ( 3) of that section ; 
(xiv) the manner in which any inquiry may be held under  section 64  or section  71; 
(xv) the other matters which may be specified in the report submitted under  sub-section  (3) of 
section 65 ; 
(xvi) the manner of publication of order made under  sub-section ( 2) of section  67; 
(xvii) the manner in which consultation may be made with mutawalli under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 69;  
(xviii) the manner of publication of order made under  sub-section ( 3) of section 69 ; 
(xix) the rate at which contribution is to be made by a mutawalli under  section 72 ; 
(xx) the payment of moneys into the 3[Waqf] Fund, the investment, the custody and disbursement 
of such moneys under  section 77 ; 
(xxi) the form in which, and the time within which, the budget of the Board may be prepared and 
submitted under  section 78 ; 
(xxii) the time within which application is to be made to the Tribunal  under  sub-section ( 2) of 
section 83 ; 
4[(xxiia ) the terms and conditions of appointment including the salaries and allowances payable to 
the Chairman and other members other than persons appointed as ex officio  members unde r           
sub-section ( 4A) of section 83; ] 
(xxiii) the procedure which the Tr ibunal shall follow under  sub-section ( 6) of section 83 ; 
(xxiv) the form in which the annual report is to be submitted and the matters which such report 
shall contain under  section  98; and 
(xxv) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
110. Powers to make regulations by the Board .—(1) The Board may, with previous sanction of the 
State Government, make regulations not inconsistent with this Act or the rules made thereunder, for 
carrying out its functions under this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such regulations 
may provide for all or any o f the f ollowing matters, namely — 
(a) the time and places of the meetings of the Board under  sub-section ( 1) of section 17 ; 
(b) the procedure and conduct of business at the meetings of the Board;  
(c) the constitution and functions of the committees and the Board and the procedure for 
transaction of business at the meetings of such committees;  
(d) the allowances or fees to be paid to the Chairperson or members of the Board or members of 
committees;  
(e) the terms and conditions of service of   the officers and other employees of the Board 
under  sub-section  (2) of section 24 ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakfs”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
2. Cl. (xi) omitted by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “wak f” (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
4. Ins. by s. 57, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  50 
 (f) the forms of application for registration of 1[Auqaf]  further p articulars to be contained therein 
and the manner and place of registration of 1[Auqaf]  under  sub-section ( 3) of section 36 ; 
(g) further part iculars to be contained in the r egister of 1[Auqaf]  under  Section  37; 
(h) the form in which, and the time within which, the budgets of 1[Auqaf]  may be prepared and 
submitted by the Mutawalli and approved by the Board under  sub-section  (1) of section 44 ; 
(i) the books of accounts and other books to be maintained by the Board under  section 79 ; 
(j) fees  payable for inspection of proceedings and records of the Board or for issue of copies of 
the same;  
(k) persons by whom any order or decision of the Board may be authenticated; and  
(l) any other matter which has to be, or may be, provided by regulations.  
(3) All regulations made under this section shall be published in the Official Gazette and shall have 
effect from the date of such publication.  
111. Laying of rules and regulations before State Legislature .—Every rule made under  section 
109 and every regulation made under section 110 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
the State Legislature.  
112. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Wak f Act, 1954 (29 of 1954)  and the Wak f (Amendment)               
Act, 1984 (69 of 1984) are hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Acts shall be 
deemed  to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(3) If, immediately before the commencement of this Act, in any State, there is in force in that State, 
any law which correspond s to this Act  that corresponding law shall stand rep ealed:  
Provided that such repeal shall not affect the previous operation of that corresponding law, and 
subject thereto, anything done or any action taken in the exercise of any power conferred by or under the 
corresponding law shall be deemed to have been  done or taken in the exercise of the powers conferred by 
or under this Act as if  this Act was in force on the day on which such things were done or action was 
taken.  
113. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the period o f two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) However, order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 27 of 2013, s. 4, for “wakfs”  (w.e.f. 1 -11-2013).  
