--------------------------The Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996--------------------------
1 
 THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996  
_______  
ARRA NGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
PREAMBLE  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
PART I  
ARBITRA TION  
CHAPTER I  
General provisions  
2. Definitions.   
3. Receipt of written communications.  
4. Waiver of right to  object.  
5. Extent of judicial intervention.  
6. Administrative assistance.  
CHAPTER II  
Arbitration agreement  
7. Arbitration agreement.  
8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement.  
9. Interim mea sures, etc., by Court.  
CHAPTER  III 
Composition of arbitral tribunal  
10. Number of arbitrators.  
11. Appointment of arbitrators.  
11A. Power of Central Government to amend Fourth Schedule . 
12. Grounds for challenge.  
13. Challenge procedure.  
14. Failure or impossibility to act.  
15. Termination of mandate and substitution of arbitrator.  
CHAPTER IV  
Jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals  
16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction.  
17. Interim measures ordered by arbitral tribunal.  
CHAPTER V  
Conduct of arbitral  proceeding s 
18. Equal treatment of parties.  
19. Determination of rules of procedure.  
20. Place of arbitration.  2 
 SECTIONS  
21. Commencement of arbitral proceedings.  
22. Language.  
23. Statements of claim and defence.  
24. Hearings and written proceedings.  
25. Default of a party.  
26. Expert appoint ed by arbitral tribunal.  
27. Court assistance in taking evidence.  
CHAPTER VI  
Making of arbitral award and termination of proceedings  
28. Rules applicable to substance of dispute.  
29. Decision making by panel of arbitrators.  
29A.  Time limit for arbitral award.  
29B. Fast track procedure.  
30. Settlement.  
31. Form and contents of arbitral award.  
31A. Regime for costs . 
32. Termination of proceedings.  
33. Correction and interpretation of award;  additional award.  
CHAPTER VII  
Recourse against arbitral award  
34. Application for setting aside arbitral award s. 
CHAPTER VIII  
Finality and enforcement of arbitral awards  
35. Finality of arbitral awards.  
36. Enforcement.  
CHAPTER IX  
Appeals  
37. Appealable orders.  
CHAPTER X  
Miscellaneous  
38. Deposits.  
39. Lien on arbitral award and deposits as to costs.  
40. Arbitration agreement not to be discharged by death of party thereto.  
41. Provisions in case of insolvency.  
42. Jurisdiction.  
43. Limitations.  
PART II  
ENFORCEMENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN AWARDS  
CHAPTER I  
New York Convention Awards  
44. Definition.  3 
 SECTIONS  
45. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration.  
46. When foreign award binding.  
47. Evidence.  
48. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards.  
49. Enforcement of foreign awards.  
50. Appealable orders.  
51. Saving.  
52. Chapter II n ot to apply.  
CHAPTER II  
Geneva Convention Awards  
53. Interpretation.  
54. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration.  
55. Foreign awards when binding.  
56. Evidence.  
57. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards.  
58. Enforcement of foreign awards.  
59. Appealable orders.  
60. Savings.  
PART III  
CONCILIATION  
61. Application and scope.  
62. Commencement of conciliation proceedings.  
63. Number of conciliators.  
64. Appointment of conciliators.  
65. Submission of statements to conciliator.  
66. Conciliator not bound by certain enactments.  
67. Role of conciliator.  
68. Administrative assistance.  
69. Communication between conciliator and parties.  
70. Disclosure of informat ion. 
71. Co-operation of parties with conciliator.  
72. Suggestions by parties for settlement of dispute.  
73. Settlement agreement.  
74. Status and effect of settlement agreement.  
75. Confidentialit y. 
76. Termination of conciliation proceedings.  
77. Resort to arbitral or judicial proceedings.  
78. Costs.  
79. Depos its. 
80. Role of conciliator in other proceedings.  
81. Admissib ility of evidence in other proceedings.  
PART IV  
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS  
82. Power of High Court to make rules.  
83. Removal of difficulties.  4 
 SECTIONS  
84. Power to make rules.  
85. Repeal and saving s. 
86. Repeal and saving.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
THE FIFTH  SCHEDULE.  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.  
APPENDIX . 
 
 
 
 
 
  5 
 THE ARBITRATION AND CONCILIATION ACT, 1996  
ACT No. 26 OF 1996  
[16th Augus t, 1996 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to domestic arbitration, international 
commercial arbitration and enforcement of  foreign arbitral awards as also to define the law 
relating to conciliation and for matters connected therewith  or incidental thereto.  
Preamble .—WHEREAS  the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) 
has adopted the UNCITRAL Model Law on  International  Commercial Arbitration in 1985;  
AND WHEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations has recommended that all countries give 
due consideration to the  said Model Law, in view of the desirability of uniformity of the law of arbitral 
procedures and the specific needs of international  commercial arbi tration practice;  
AND WHEREAS  the UNCITRAL has adopted the UNCITRAL Conciliation Rules in 1980;  
AND WHEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations has recommended the use of the said 
Rules in cases where a  dispute arises in the context of international  commercial relations and the parties 
seek an amicable settlement of that dispute by  recourse to conciliation;  
AND WHEREAS  the said Model Law and Rules make significant contribution to the establishment of a 
unified legal framework for  the fair and efficie nt settlement of disputes arising in international 
commercial relations;  
AND WHEREAS  it is expedient to make law respecting arbitration and conciliation, taking into account 
the aforesaid Model Law and  Rules;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and 
Conciliation Act, 1996.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India:  
Provided that Parts  I, III and IV shall extend to the State of Jammu and Kashmir only in so far as they 
relate to international  commercial arbitration or, as the case may be, international commercial 
conciliation.  
Explanation .—In th is sub -section, the expr ession “ international commercial conciliation”  shall have 
the same meaning as the  expression “ international commercial arbitration”  in clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 2, subject to the modification that for the  word “ arbitratio n” occurring therein , the word 
“conciliati on” shall be substituted.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
PART I  
ARBITRATION  
CHAPTER I  
General provisions  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “arbitration”  means any arbitration whether or not administered by permanent arbitral 
institution;  
(b) “arbitration agreement”  means an agreement referred to in section 7;  
                                                           
1. 22nd  August, 1996, vide notificat ion No. G.S.R 375(E), dated 22nd  August, 1996, see Gazette of Indi a, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3 (i). 6 
 (c) “arbitral award”  includes an interim award;  
(d) “arbitral tribunal”  means a sole arbitrator or a panel of arbitrators;  
1[(e) “Court”  means — 
(i) in the case of an arbitration other than international  commercial arbitration, the principal 
Civil Court of original  jurisdictio n in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of  its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide  the questions forming the 
subject -matter of the arbitration if the  same had been the subject -matter of a suit, but does not 
include  any Civil Court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or  any Court of Small 
Causes;  
(ii) in the case of international commercial arbitration, the  High Court in exercise of its 
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having  jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the 
subject -matter of  the arbitration if the same had been the subject -matter of a suit, and  in other 
cases, a High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals  from decrees of courts subordinate to that 
High Court; ] 
(f) “international commercial arbitration”  means an arbitration relating to disputes arising out of 
legal relationships, whether  contractual or not, considered as commercial under the law in force in 
India and where at least one of the par ties is — 
(i) an individual who is a national of, or habitually resident in, any country other than India; 
or 
(ii) a body corporate which is incorpo rated in any country other than India; or  
(iii) 2*** an association or a body of individuals whose central management and control is 
exercised in any country other  than India; or  
(iv) the Government of a foreign country;  
(g) “legal repres entative”  means a person who in law represents the estate of a decease d person, 
and includes any person who  intermeddles with the estate of the deceased, and, where a party acts in a 
representative character, the person on whom the estate  devolves on the death of the party so acting;  
(h) “party”  means a party to an arbitrati on agreement.  
(2) This Part shall apply where the p lace of arbitration is in India:  
3[Provided that subject to an agreement to the contrary, the provisions of  sections 9, 27 and clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 3) of section  37 shall also apply to international commercial 
arbitration, even if the place of  arbitration is outside India, and an arbitral award made or to be made in 
such place is enforceable and recognised under the provisions of Part II of this Act. ] 
(3) This Part shall not aff ect any other law for the time being in force by virtue of which certain 
disputes may not be submitted to  arbitration.  
(4) This Part except sub -section ( 1) of section 40, sections 41 and 43 shall apply to every arbitration 
under any other enactment for  the time being in force, as if the arbitration were pursuant to an arbitration 
agreement and as if that other enactment were an  arbitration agreement, except in so far as the provision s 
of this Part are inconsistent with that other enactment or with any rules  made thereunder.  
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), and save in so far as is otherwise provided by any law 
for the time being in force or  in any agreement in force between India and any other country or countries, 
this Part shall apply to a ll arbitrations and to all  proceedings relating thereto.  
(6) Where this Part, except section 28, leaves the parties free to determine a certain issue, that 
freedom shall include the right of  the parties to authorise  any person including an institution, to determine 
that issue.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 2 , for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. The words “a company or” o mitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e. f. 23 -10-2015).  7 
 (7) An arbitral award made under this Part shall be considered as a domestic award.  
(8) Where this Part — 
(a) refers to the fact that the parties have agreed or that they may agree, or  
(b) in an y other way refers to an agreement of the parties,   
that agreement shall include any arbitration rules referred to in that agreement.  
(9) Where this Part, other than clause ( a) of section 25 or clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) of section 32, 
refers to a claim, it shall also  apply to a counterclaim, and where it refers to a defence, it shall also apply 
to a defence to that counterclaim.   
3. Receipt of written communications .—(1) Unless otherwise agreed by th e parties ,— 
(a) any  written communication is deemed to have been received if it is delivered to the addressee 
personally or at his place of  business, habitual residence or mailing address, and  
(b) if none of the places referred to in clause ( a) can be found after making a re asonable inquiry, a 
written communication is  deemed to have been received if it is sent to the addressee's last known 
place of business, habitual residence or mailing address  by registered letter or by any other means 
which provides a record of the attempt  to deliver it.  
(2) The communication is deemed to have been received on the day it is so delivered.  
(3) This section does not apply to written communications in respect of proceedings of any judicial 
authority.  
4. Waiver of right to object. —A party who kn ows that — 
(a) any provision of this Part from which the parties may derogate, or  
(b) any requirement under the arbitration agreement,   
has not been complied with and yet proceeds with the arbitration without stating his objection to such 
non-compliance without  undue delay or, if a time limit is provided for stating that objection, within that 
period of time, shall be deemed to have waived his right to so object.  
5. Extent of judicial intervention .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, in matters  governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so 
provided in this Part.  
6. Administrative assistance .—In order to facilitate the conduct of the arbitral proceedings, the 
parties, or the arbitral tribunal with the  consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative assistance 
by a suitable institution or person.  
CHAPTER II  
Arbit ration agreement  
7. Arbitration agreement .—(1) In this Part, “arbitration agreement”  means an agreement by the 
parties to submit to arbitration all or  certain disputes which have arisen or which may arise between them 
in respect of a defined legal relationship, whether contractual  or not.  
(2) An arbitration agreement may be in the form of an arbitration clause in a contract or in the form of 
a separate agreement.  
(3) An arbitration agreement shall be in writing.  
(4) An arbitration agreement is i n writing if it is contained in — 
(a) a document signed by the parties;  
(b) an exchange of letters, telex, telegrams  or other means of telecommunication 1[including 
communication through electronic me ans] which  provide a record of the agreement ; or 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 3 (w. e. f. 23 -10-2015).  8 
 (c) an exchange of statements of claim and defence in which the existence of the agreement is 
alleged by one party and not denied  by the other.  
(5) The reference in a contract to a document containing an arbitration clause constitutes an 
arbitration agreement if  the contract is  in writing and the reference is such as to make that arbitration 
clause part of the contract.  
8. Power to refer parties to arbitration where there is an arbitration agreement .—1[(1) A 
judicial authority, before which an action is brought i n a matter  which is the subject of an arbitration 
agreement shall, if a party to the arbitration  agreement or any person claiming through or under him, so 
applies not later  than the date of submitting his first statement on the substance of the dispute,  then, 
notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of the Supreme Court or  any Court, refer the parties to 
arbitration unless it finds that prima facie no valid arbitration agreement exists. ] 
(2) The application referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall not be  entertained unless it is accompanied by 
the original arbitration  agreement o r a duly certified copy thereof:  
2[Provided that where the original arbitration agreement or a certified copy thereof is not available 
with the party applying for reference to arb itration under sub -section ( 1), and the said agreement or 
certified copy is retained by the other party to that agreement, then, the party so applying shall file such 
application along with a copy of the arbitration agreement and a petition praying the Court to call upon 
the other party to produce the original arbitration agreement or its duly certified copy before that Court .] 
(3) Notwithstanding that an application has been made under sub -section ( 1) and that the issue is 
pending before the judicial  authority, an  arbitration may be commenced or continued and an arbitral 
award made.  
9. Interim measures , etc., by Court. —3[(1)] A party may, before  or during arbitral proceedings or at 
any time after the making of the arbitral  award but before it is enforced  in accordance with section 36, 
apply to a court —  
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound mind for the purposes of 
arbitral proceedings; or  
(ii) for an interim measure of  protection in respect of any of the following matters , namely: — 
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which are the subject -matter of the 
arbitration agreement;  
(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;  
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or thing which is the           
subject -matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to  which any question may arise therein and 
authorising for any of the aforesaid purposes any person to enter up on any land or  building in the 
possession of any party , or authorising any samples to be taken or any observation to be made, or 
experiment to be  tried, which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full 
information or evidence;  
(d) inte rim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;  
(e) such other interim measure of protection as may appear to the Court to be just and 
convenient,   
and the Court shall have the same power for making orders as it has for the purpose of, and in relation 
to, any proceedings before  it. 
4[(2) Where, before the commencement of the arbitral proceedings, a Court  passes an order for any 
interim measure of protection under sub -section ( 1), the  arbitral proceedings shall be commenced within a 
period of ninety days from the date  of such order or within such further time as the Court may determine.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 4 , for sub -section ( 1) (w. e. f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 4 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Section 9 shall be r enumbered as  sub-section  (1) thereof by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
4. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  9 
 (3) Once the arbitral tribunal has been constituted, the Court shall not entertain  an application under 
sub-section ( 1), unless the Court finds that circumstances exist  which may not render the remedy provided 
under section 17 efficacious. ] 
CHAPTER III  
Composition of arbitral tribunal  
10. Number of arbitrators. —(1) The parties are free to determine the number of arbitrators, 
provided that such number shall not be an  even number.  
(2) Failing the determination referred to in sub -section ( 1), the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a sole 
arbitrator.  
11. Appointment of arbitrators. —(1) A person of any nationality may be an arbitrator, unless 
otherwise agreed by the parties.  
(2) Subject to sub -section ( 6), the parties are free to agree on a procedure for appointing the arbitrator 
or arbitrators.  
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 2), in an arbitration with three arbitrators, each 
party shall appoint one  arbitr ator, and the two appointed arbitrators shall appoint the third arbitrator who 
shall act as the presiding arbitrator.  
(4) If the appointment procedure in sub -section ( 3) applies and — 
(a) a party fails to appoint an arbitrator within thirty days from the re ceipt of a request to do so 
from the other party; or  
(b) the two appointed arbitrators fail to agree on the third arbitrator within thirty days from the 
date of their appointment,  
the appointment shall be made, upon request of a party, by 1[the Supreme Cou rt or, as the case may be, 
the High Court or any person or institution designated by such Court];  
(5) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 2), in an arbitration with a sole arbitrator, if the 
parties fail to agree on the  arbitrator within thirty days from receipt of a request by one party from the 
other party to so agree the appointment shall be made,  upon request of a party, by 1[the Supreme Court or, 
as the case may be, the High Court or any person or instit ution designated by such Court] . 
(6) Where, under an appointment procedure agreed upon by the parties, — 
(a) a party fails to act as required under that procedure; or  
(b) the parties, or the two appointed arbitrators, fail to reach an agreement expected of them under 
that procedure; or  
(c) a person, including an institution, fails to perform any function entrusted to him or it under 
that procedure,   
a party may request 1[the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or any person or 
institution designated by such Court]  to take  the necessary measure, unless the  agreement on the 
appointment procedure provides other means for securing the appointment.  
2[(6A) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, while  considering any application 
under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or sub-section ( 6), shall, notwithstanding any judgment, decree or 
order of any  Court, confine to the examination of the existence of an arbitration agreement.  
(6B) The designation of any person or institution by the Supreme Court  or, as the case may be, the 
High Court, for the purposes of this section shall not  be regarded as a delegation of judicial power by the 
Supreme Court or the High  Court. ] 
 (7) A decision on a matter entrusted by sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or sub -section ( 6) to 3[the 
Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court or the person or institution designated by such 
Court is final and no appeal including Letters Patent Appeal s hall lie against such decision ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6, for “the Chief Justice or any person or institution designated by him” (w. e. f. 23 -10-2015).   
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the Chief Justice or the person  or institution designated by him is final” (w.e .f. 23-10-2015).  10 
 1[(8) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High  Court or the person or institution designated 
by such Court, before appointing an arbitrator, shall seek a disclosure in writing from the prospective 
arbitrator in terms of  sub -section ( 1) of section 12, and have due regard to — 
(a) any  qualifications required for the arbitrator by the agreement  of the parties; and  
(b) the contents of the disclosure and other considerations as are  likely to secure the appointment 
of an independent and  impartial  arbitrator .] 
(9) In the case of appointment of sole or third arbitrator in an international commercial arbitration, 
2[the Supreme Court or the person or institution designated by that Court]  may appoint an arbitrator of a 
nationality other than the nationalities of the p arties where the  parties belong to different nationalities.  
3[(10) The Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court, may  make such scheme as the said 
Court may deem appropriate for dealing with  matters entrusted by sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or 
sub-section ( 6), to it.] 
 (11) Where more than one request has been made under sub -section ( 4) or sub -section ( 5) or                  
sub-section ( 6) to the Chief Justices  of different High Courts or their designates, 4[different High Courts 
or their designates, the High Court or its designate to whom the request has been first made]  under the  
relevant sub -section shall alone be competent to decide on the request.  
 5[(12) (a) Where the matters referred to in sub -sections ( 4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and sub -section ( 10) arise 
in an international commercial arbitration, the reference to the “Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the 
High Court” in those sub -sections shall be construed as a reference to the “Supreme Court”; and  
(b) Where the matters referred to in sub -sections ( 4), (5), (6), (7), (8) and sub -section ( 10) arise in any 
other arbitration, the reference to “the Supreme Court or, as the case may be, the High Court” in those 
sub-sections shall be construed as a reference to the “High Court” within w hose local limits the principal 
Civil Court referred to in clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 is situate, and where the High Court 
itself is the Court referred to in that clause, to that High Court.]  
6[(13) An application made under this section fo r appointment of an arbitrator or arbitrators shall be 
disposed of by the Supreme Court or the High Court or the person or institution designated by such Court, 
as the case may  be, as expeditiously as possible and an endeavour shall be made to dispose of t he matter 
within a period of sixty days from the date of service of notice on the opposite party.  
(14) For the purpose of determination of the fees of the arbitral tribunal and the manner of its 
payment to the arbitral tribunal, the High Court may frame s uch rules as may be necessary, after taking 
into consideration the rates specified in the Fourth Schedule.  
Explanation. —For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that this sub -section shall not apply to 
international commercial arbitration and in a rbitrations (other than international commercial arbitration) 
in case where parties have agreed for determinatio n of fees as per the rules of an  arbitral institution.]  
7[11A. Power of Central Government to amend Fourth Schedule. —(1) If the Central Government 
Government is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do, it may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, amend the Fourth Schedule and thereupon the Fourth Schedule shall be deemed to have been 
amended accordingly.  
(2) A copy of every notificat ion proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before t he expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
disapproving the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 6 , for sub -section ( 8) (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid.,  for “the Chief Justice of India of India or the perso n or institution designated by him” (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 10) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
4. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “the Ch ief Justices of different High C ourts or their designates, the Chief Justice or his designate to  
whom the request has been first made” (w.e.f 23 -10-2015).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub -section ( 12) (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
6. Ins. by s. 6,  ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
7. Ins. by s. 7 , ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  11 
 notification, the notification shall not  be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by the both Houses of Parliament.]  
12. Grounds for challenge .—1[(1) When a person is approached in connection with his possible  
appointment as an arbitrator, he shall disclose in writing any circumstances, — 
(a) such as the existence either direct or indirect, of any past or  present relationship with or 
interest in any of the parties or in relation to  the subject -matter in dispute, whether financial,  business, 
professional  or other kind, which is likely to give rise to justifiable doubts as to his  independence or 
impartiality; and  
(b) which are likely to affect his ability to devote sufficient time to  the arbitration and in 
particular his ability to c omplete the entire arbitration  within a period of twelve months . 
 Explanation  1.—The grounds stated in the Fifth Schedule shall guide in determining whether 
circumstances exist which give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or impartiality of an 
arbitrator.  
Explanation 2.—The disclosure shall be made by such person in the fo rm specified in the Sixth 
Schedule.]  
(3) An arbitrator may be ch allenged only if — 
(a) circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality, 
or 
(b) he does not possess the qualifications agreed to by the parties.  
(4) A party may challenge an arbitrator appointed by him, or in whose appointment he has 
participated, only for reasons of which he  becomes aware after the appointment has been made.  
2[(5) Notwithstanding any prior agreement to the contrary, any person  whose relationship, with the 
parties or counsel or the subject -matter of the  dispute, falls under any of the categories specified in the 
Seventh Schedule  shall be ineligible to be appointed as an arbitrator:  
Provided that parties may, subsequent to disputes having arisen between them, waive the applicability  
of this sub -section by an express agreement in writing. ]  
13. Challenge procedure. —(1) Subject to sub -section ( 4), the parties are free to agree on a procedure 
for challenging an arbitrator.  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1), a party who intends to challenge an arbitrator 
shall, within fifteen days  after becoming aware of the constitution of the arbitral tribunal or after 
becoming aware of any circumstances referred to in su b-section  (3) of section 12, send a written 
statement of the reasons for the challenge to the arbitral tribunal.  
(3) Unless the arbitrator challenged under sub -section ( 2) withdraws from his office or the other party 
agrees to the challenge, the  arbitral t ribunal shall decide on the challenge.  
(4) If a challenge under any procedure agreed upon by the parties or under the procedure under       
sub-section ( 2) is not successful,  the arbitral tribunal shall continue the arbitral proceedings and make an 
arbitra l award.  
(5) Where an arbitral award is made under sub -section ( 4), the party challenging the arbitrator may 
make an application for setting  aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34.  
(6) Where an arbitral award is set aside on an applicat ion made under sub -section ( 5), the Court may 
decide as to whether the  arbitrator who is challenged is entitled to any fees.  
14. Failure or impossibility to act .—(1) 3[The mandate of an  arbitrator shall terminate and he shall 
be substituted by another arbitrator , if]— 
(a) he becomes de jure or de facto  unable to perform his functions  or for other reasons fails to act 
without undue delay; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 8 , for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015). 
3. Sub s. by s. 9, ibid., for  “The mandate of an arbitrator shall terminate if” (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  12 
 (b) he withdraws from his office or the parties agree to the termination of his mandate.  
(2) If a controversy remains concerning any of the grounds referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), 
a party may, unless  otherwise agreed by the parties, apply to the Court to decide on the termination of the 
mandate.  
(3) If, under this section or sub -section ( 3) of sectio n 13, an arbitrator withdraws from his office or a 
party agrees to the termination  of the mandate of an arbitrator, it shall not imply acceptance of the validity 
of any ground referred to in this section or sub -section  (3) of section 12.  
15. Termination of  mandate and substitution of arbitrator .—(1) In addition to the circumstances 
referred to in section 13 or section 14,  the mandate of a n arbitrator shall terminate — 
(a) where he withdraws from office for any reason; or  
(b) by or pursuant to agreement of the parties.  
(2) Where the mandate of an arbit rator terminates, a substitute arbitrator shall be appointed according 
to the rules that were  applicable to the appointment of the arbitrator being replaced.  
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where an arbitrator is replaced under sub -section ( 2), any 
hearings previously held may  be repeated at the discretion of the arbitral tribunal.  
(4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, an order or ruling of the arbitral tribunal m ade prior to the 
replacement of an arbitrator  under this section shall not b e invalid solely because there has been a change 
in the composition of the arbitral tribunal.  
CHAPTER IV  
Jurisdiction of arbitral tribunals  
16. Competence of arbitral tribunal to rule on its jurisdiction. —(1) The arbitral tribunal may rule 
on its own jurisdiction, including ruling  on any objections with respect to the existence or validity of the 
arbitration agreem ent, and for that purpose, — 
(a) an arbitration clause which forms pa rt of a contract shall be treated as an agreement 
independent of the other terms of the  contract; and  
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail ipso jure  the 
invalidity of the arbitration clause.  
(2) A plea  that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later than the 
submission of the statement of  defence; however, a party shall not be precluded from raising such a plea 
merely because that he has  appointed , or participated in  the appointment of, an arbitrator.  
(3) A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding th e scope of its authority shall b e raised as soon as the 
matter alleged to be beyond  the scope of its authority is raised during the arbitral proceedings.  
(4) The arbitral t ribunal may, in either of the cases referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), 
admit a later plea if it considers  the delay justified.  
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) and, 
where the  arbitral tribunal takes a  decision rejecting the plea, continue with the arbitral proceedings and 
make an arbitral award.  
(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make an application for setting aside such an 
arbitral award in accordance with  section 34.  
1[17. Interim measures ordered by arbitral tribunal .—(1) A party may, during the arbitral 
proceedings or at any time after the  making of the arbitral award but before it is enforced in accordance 
with section 36,  apply to the arbitral tribunal — 
(i) for the appointment of a guardian for a minor or person of unsound  mind for the purposes of 
arbitral proceedings; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 10 , for section 17 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015) . 13 
 (ii) for an interim measure of protection in respect of any of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the preservation, interim custody or sale of any goods which  are the subject -matter of the 
arbitration agreement;  
(b) securing the amount in dispute in the arbitration;  
(c) the detention, preservation or inspection of any property or  thing which is the                 
subject -matter of the dispute in arbitration, or as to  which any question may arise therein and 
authorising for any of the  aforesaid purposes any person to enter upon any land or building in the  
possession of any party, or authorising any samples  to be taken, or any  observation to be made, or 
experiment to be tried, which may be necessary  or expedient for the purpose of obtaining full 
information or evidence;  
(d) interim injunction or the appointment of a receiver;  
(e) such other interim measure o f protection as may appear to the  arbitral tribunal to be just 
and convenient,  
and the arbitral tribunal shall have the same power for making orders, as the  court has for the purpose of, 
and in relation to, any proceedings before it.  
(2) Subject to any orders passed in an appeal under section 37, any order  issued by the arbitral 
tribunal under this section shall be deemed to be an order of the  Court for all purposes and shall be 
enforceable under the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908) , in the same  manner as if it were an 
order of the Court. ] 
CHAPTER V  
Conduct of arbitral proceedings  
18. Equal treatment of parties .—The parties shall be treated with equality and each party shall be 
given a full opportunity to present  his case.  
19. Determination of rules of procedure. —(1) The arbitral tribunal shall not be bound by the Code 
of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  or the  Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) . 
(2) Subject to this Part, the parties are free to agree on the procedure to be followed by the a rbitral 
tribunal in conducting its  proceedings.  
(3) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 2), the arbitral tribunal may, subject to this Part, 
conduct the proceedings in the  manner it considers appropriate.  
(4) The power of the arbitral tribuna l under sub -section ( 3) includes the power to determine the 
admissibility, relevance, materiality  and weight of any evidence.  
20. Place of arbitration .—(1) The parties are free to agree on the place of arbitration.  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub-section ( 1), the place of arbitration shall be determined 
by the arbitral tribunal having  regard to the circumstances of the case, including the convenience of the 
parties.  
(3) Notwithstanding sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the arbitral tribunal m ay, unless otherwise 
agreed by the parties, meet at any  place it considers appropriate for consultation among its members, for 
hearing witnesses , experts or the parties, or for inspection of  documents, goods or other property.  
21. Commencement of arbitral proceedings. —Unless otherwise agreed by the pa rties, the arbitral 
proceedings  in respect of a  particular dispute commence on the date on which a request for that disp ute to 
be referred to arbitration  is received by the  respondent.  
22. Language. —(1) The par ties are free to agree upon  the language or languages to be  used in the 
arbitral proceedings.  
(2) Failing any agreement referred to in sub -section ( 1), the arbitral tribunal shall determine the 
language or languages to be used in  the arbitral proceedings.  14 
 (3) The agreement or determination, unless otherwise specified, shall apply to any written statement 
by a party, any hearing and  any arbitral award, decision or other communication by the arbitral tribunal.  
(4) The arbitral tribunal may order that any docu mentary evidence shall be accompanied by a 
translation into the language  or languages agreed  upon by the parties or determined by the arbitral 
tribunal.  
23. Statements of claim and defence. —(1) Within the period of time agreed upon by the parties or 
determ ined by the arbitral tribunal,  the claimant shall state the facts supporting his claim, the points at 
issue and the relief or remedy sought, and the respondent shall  state his defence in respect of these 
particulars, unless the parties have otherwise agree d as to the required elements of those  statements.  
(2) The parties may submit with their statements all documents they consider to be relevant or may 
add a reference to the  documents or other evidence they will submit.  
1[(2A) The respondent, in support of his case, may also submit a counterclaim or plead a set -off, 
which shall be adjudicated upon by the arbitral tribunal, if such counterclaim or set -off falls within the 
scope of the arbitration agreement. ] 
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, either party may amend or supplement his claim or 
defence during the course of the  arbitral proceedings, unless the arbitral tribunal considers it inappropriate 
to allow the amendment or supplement having regard to  the delay in making it.  
24. Hearings and written  proceedings. —(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the arbitral 
tribunal shall decide whether to hold  oral hearings for the presentation of evidence or for oral argument, 
or whether the proceedings shall be conducted on the basis of  documents an d other materials:  
Provided that the arbitral tribunal shall hold  oral hearings, at an appropriate stage of the proceedings, 
on a request by a party, unless  the parties have agreed that no oral hearing shall be held : 
2[Provided further that the arbitral tribunal shall, as far as possible, hold oral hearings for the 
presentation of evidence or for oral argument on day -to-day basis, and not grant any adjournments unless 
sufficient cause is made out, and may impose costs including exemplary costs on the part y seeking 
adjournment without any sufficient cause. ] 
(2) The parties shall be given sufficient advance notice of any hearing and of any meeting of the 
arbitral tribunal for the purposes of  inspection of documents, goods or other property.  
(3) All statement s, documents or other information suppl ied to, or applications made to  the arbitral 
tribunal by one party shall be  communicated to the other party, and any expert report or evidentiary 
document on which the arbitral tribunal may rely in making its  decision  shall be communicated to the 
parties.  
25. Default of a party. —Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where, witho ut showing sufficient 
cause, — 
(a) the claimant fails to communicate his statement of claim in accordance with sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23, the arbitral tribunal  shall terminate the proceedings;  
(b) the respondent fails to communicate his statement of defence in accordance with                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 23, the arbitral  tribunal shall continue the proceedings without treating  that 
failure in itself as an admission of the allegations by the claimant 3[and shall have the discretion to 
treat the right of the respondent to file such statement of defence as having been forfeited] . 
(c) a party fails to appear at an oral hearing or t o produce documentary evidence, the arbitral 
tribunal may continue the proceedings  and make the arbitral award on the evidence before it.  
26. Expert appointed by arbitral tribunal .—(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parti es, the arbitral 
tribunal may — 
(a) appoint one or more experts to report to it on specific issues to be determined by the arbitral 
tribunal, and  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 11 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  15 
 (b) require a party to give the expert any relevant information or to produce, or to provide access 
to, any relevant documents, goods  or other pro perty for his inspection.  
(2) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, if a party so requests or if the arbitral tribunal considers it 
necessary, the expert shall,  after delivery of his writte n or oral report, participate in  an oral hearing where 
the partie s have the opportunity to put questions to  him and to present expert witnesses in order to testify 
on the points at issue.  
(3) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the expert shall, on the request of a party, make available 
to that party for examination  all documents, goods or other property in the possession of the expert with 
which he was provided in order to prepare his report.  
27. Court assistance in taking evidence. —(1) The  arbitral tribunal, or a party with the approval of 
the arbitral tribunal, may apply to  the Court for assistance in taking evidence.  
(2) The application shall specify — 
(a) the names and addresses of the  parties and the arbitrators;  
(b) the general nature of the claim and the relief sought;  
(c) the evidence to be obtained, in particular, — 
(i) the name and address of any person to be heard as witness or expert witness and a 
statement of the subject -matter of the  testimony required;  
(ii) the d escription of an y document to be produced or property to be inspected.  
(3) The Court may, within its competence and according to its rules on taking evidence, execute the 
request by  ordering that the  evidence be provided directly to the arbitral tribunal.  
(4) The Court may, while making an order under sub -section ( 3), issue the same processes to 
witnesses as it may issue in suits  tried before it.  
(5) Persons failing to attend in accordance with such process, or making any other default, or refusing 
to give their evidence, or guilty  of any contempt to the arbitral tribunal during the conduct of arbitral 
proceedings, shall be subject to the like disadvantages,  penalties and punishments by order of the Court 
on the representation of the arbitral tribunal as the y would incur for the like  offences in  suits tried before 
the Court.  
(6) In this section the expression “Processes”  includes summonses and commissions for the 
examination of witnesses and  summonses to produce documents.  
CHAPTER VI  
Making of arbitral award and termination of proceedings  
28. Rules applicable to substance of dispute .—(1) Where the place of arbit ration is situate in 
India, — 
(a) in an arbitration other than an international commercial arbitration, the arbitral tribunal shall 
decide the dispute submitted to  arbitration in accordance with the substantive law for the time being 
in force in India;  
(b) in internati onal commercial arbitra tion,— 
(i) the arbitral tribunal shall decide  the dispute in accordance with the rules of law designated 
by the parties as applicable to the  substance of the dispute;  
(ii) any designation by the parties of the law or legal system of a given country shall be 
construed, unless otherwise expressed, as  directly referring to the substantive law of that country 
and not to its conflict of laws rules;  
(iii) failing any designation of the law under clause ( a) by the parties, the arbitral tribunal 
shall apply the ru les of law it considers to  be appropriate given all the circumstances surrounding 
the dispute.  
  16 
 (2) The arbitral tribunal shall decide ex aequo  et bono or as amiable compositeur  only if the parties 
have expressly authorised it to  do so.  
1[(3) While deciding and making an award, the arbitral tribunal shall, in all cases, take into account 
the terms of the contract and trade usages applicable to the transaction. ] 
29. Decision making by panel of arbitrators .—(1) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, i n 
arbitral proceedings with more than one  arbitrator, any decision of the arbitral tribunal shall be made by a 
majority of all its members.  
(2) Notwithstanding sub -section ( 1), if authorised by the parties or all the members of the arbitral 
tribunal, questions of procedure  may be decided by the presiding arbitrator.  
2[29A. Time limit for arbitral award .—(1) The award shall be made within a period of twelve 
months from  the date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference.  
Explanation. —For the purpose  of this sub -section, an arbitral tribunal shall be  deemed to have entered 
upon the reference on the date on which the arbitrator or all  the arbitrators, as the case may be, have 
received notice, in writing, of their  appointment.  
(2) If the award is made within a period of six months from the date the arbitral  tribunal enters upon 
the reference, the arbitral tribunal shall be entitled to receive such  amount of additional fees as the parties 
may agree.  
(3) The parties may, by consent, extend the period spec ified in sub -section ( 1) for making award for a 
further period not exceeding six months.  
(4) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub -section ( 1) or the  extended period 
specified under sub -section ( 3), the mandate of the arbitrator(s) sh all terminate unless the Court has, 
either prior to or after the expiry of the period so  specified, extended the period:  
Provided that while extending the period under this sub -section, if the Court  finds that the 
proceedings have been delayed for the reas ons attributable to the  arbitral tribunal, then, it may order 
reduction of fees of arbitrator(s) by not exceeding  five per cent. for each month of such delay.  
(5) The extension of period referred to in sub -section ( 4) may be on the  application of any of th e 
parties and may be granted only for sufficient cause and on  such terms and conditions as may be imposed 
by the Court.  
(6) While extending the period referred to in sub -section ( 4), it shall be open to  the Court to substitute 
one or all of the arbitrators  and if one or all of the arbitrators  are substituted, the arbitral proceedings shall 
continue from the stage already reached  and on the basis of the evidence and material already on record, 
and the arbitrator(s)  appointed under this section shall be deeme d to have received the said evidence and  
material.  
(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under this section, the arbitral  tribunal thus 
reconstituted shall be deemed to be in continuation of the previously  appointed arbitral tribunal.  
(8) It shall be open to the Court to impose actual or exemplary costs upon any  of the parties under this 
section.  
(9) An application filed under sub -section ( 5) shall be disposed of by the Court  as expeditiously as 
possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the matter  within a period of sixty days from the date 
of service of notice on the opposite party.  
29B. Fast track procedure. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the parties to an  
arbitration agreement, may, at any stage either before or  at the time of appointment of  the arbitral tribunal, 
agree in writing to have their dispute resolved by fast track  procedure specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(2) The parties to the arbitration agreement, while agreeing for resolution of  dispute by fast track  
procedure, may agree that the arbitral tribunal shall consist of a  sole arbitrator who shall be chosen by the 
parties.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 14 , for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f. 23-10-2015).  17 
 (3) The arbitral tribunal shall follow the following procedure while conducting  arbitration 
proceedings under sub -section ( 1):— 
(a) The  arbitral tribunal shall decide the dispute on the basis of written  pleadings, documents and 
submissions filed by the parties without any oral  hearing;  
(b) The arbitral tribunal shall have power to call for any further information  or clarification from 
the parties in addition to the pleadings and documents filed  by them;  
(c) An oral hearing may be held only, if, all the parties make a request or if  the arbitral tribunal 
considers it necessary to have oral hearing for clarifying  certain issues;  
(d) The arbit ral tribunal may dispense with any technical formalities, if an  oral hearing is held, 
and adopt such procedure as deemed appropriate for  expeditious disposal of the case.  
(4) The award under this section shall be made within a period of six months  from the  date the arbitral 
tribunal enters upon the reference.  
(5) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub -section ( 4), the  provisions of                     
sub-sections ( 3) to ( 9) of section 29A shall apply to the proceedings.  
(6) The fees payable to the arbitrator and the manner of payment of the fees shall  be such as may be 
agreed between the arbitrator and the parties. ] 
30. Settlement. —(1) It is not incompatible with an arbitration agreement for an arbitral tribunal to 
encourage settlemen t of the dispute  and, with the agreement of the parties, the arbitral tribunal may use 
mediation, conciliation or other procedures at any time during  the arbitral proceedings to encourage 
settlement.  
(2) If, during arbitral proceedings, the parties settle the dispute, the arbitral tribunal shall terminate the 
proceedings and, if requested  by the parties and not objected to by the arbitral tribunal, record the 
settlement in the form of an arbitral award on agreed terms.  
(3) An arbitral award on agreed terms shall be made in accordance with section 31 and shall state that 
it is an arbitral award.  
(4) An arbitral award on agreed terms shall have the same status and effect as any other arbitral award 
on the substance of the  dispute.  
31. Form and contents of arbi tral award. —(1) An arbitral award shall be made in writing and shall 
be signed by the members of the  arbitral tribunal.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), in arbitral proceedings with more than one arbitrator, the 
signatures of the majority of all th e members of the arbitral tribunal shall be sufficient so long as the 
reason for any omitted signature is stated.  
(3) The arbitral award shall state the reasons upon  which it is based, unless — 
(a) the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given, or  
(b) the award is an arbitral award on agreed terms under section 30.  
(4) The arbitral award shall state its date and the place of arbitration as determined in accordance with 
section 20 and the award  shall be deemed to have been made at that place.  
(5) After the arbitral award is made, a signed copy shall be delivered to each party.  
(6) The arbitral tribunal may, at any time during the arbitral proceedings, make an interim arbitral 
award on any matter with respect  to which it may make a final arbitral award.  
(7) (a) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, where and in so far as an arbitral award is for the 
payment o f money, the arbitral  tribunal may include in the sum for which the award is made interest, at 
such rate as it deems reasonable, on the whole or any part  of the money, for the whole or any part of the 
period between the date on which the cause of action arose and the date on which  the award is made.  18 
 1[(b) A sum directed to be paid by an arbitral award shall, unless the award otherwise dire cts, carry 
interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the current rate of interest prevalent on the date of award, 
from the date of award to the date of payment . 
Explanation. —The expression “current rate of interest” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it 
under clause ( b) of section 2 of the Interest Act, 1978  (14 of 1978) .] 
2[(8) The costs of an arbitration shall be fixed by the arbitral tribunal in accordance with section  31A.]  
Explanation. —For the purpose of clause ( a), “costs”  means reasonable costs relating to — 
(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators and witnesses,  
(ii) legal fees and expenses,  
(iii) any  administration fees of the institution supervising the arbitration, and  
(iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral proceedings and the arbitral 
award.  
3[31A. Regime  for costs. —(1) In relation to any arbitration proceeding or a proceeding under any of  
the provisions of this Act pertaining to the arbitration, the Court or arbitral tribunal,  notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908) , shall have  the discretion to 
determine — 
(a) whether costs  are payable by one party to another;  
(b) the amount of such costs; and   
(c) when such costs are to be paid.  
Explanation. —For the purpose of this sub -section, “costs” means reasonable  costs relating to — 
(i) the fees and expenses of the arbitrators, Courts and witnesses;  
(ii) legal fees and expenses;  
(iii) any administration fees of the institution supervising the  arbitration; and   
(iv) any other expenses incurred in connection with the arbitral or Court  proceedings and the 
arbitral award.  
(2) If the Court or arbitral tribunal decides to make an order as to payment of  costs, — 
(a) the general rule is that the unsuccessful party shall be ordered to pay  the costs of the 
successful party; or  
(b) the Court or a rbitral tribunal may make a different order for reasons to  be recorded in writing.  
(3) In determining the costs, the Court or arbitral tribunal shall have regard to all  the circumstances, 
including — 
(a) the conduct of all the parties;  
(b) whether  a party has succeeded partly in the case;  
(c) whether the par ty had made a frivolous counter claim leading to delay  in the disposal of the 
arbitral proceedings; and  
(d) whether any reasonable offer to settle the dispute is made by a party  and refused by th e other 
party.  
(4) The Court or arbitral tribunal may make any order under this section including  the order that a 
party shall pay — 
(a) a proportion of another party’s costs;  
(b) a stated amount in respect of another party’s costs;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 16 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 16 , ibid., for sub -section ( 8) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Ins. by s.17, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  19 
 (c) costs  from or until a certain date only;  
(d) costs incurred before proceedings have begun;  
(e) costs relating to particular steps taken in the proceedings;  
(f ) costs relating only to a distinct part of the proceedings; and  
(g) interest on costs from or until a  certain date . 
(5) An agreement which has the effect that a party is to pay the whole or part of  the costs of the 
arbitration in any event shall be only valid if such agreement is made  after the dispute in question has 
arisen .] 
32. Termination of proceedin gs.—(1) The arbitral proceedings shall be terminated by the final 
arbitral award or by an order of the  arbitral tribunal under sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The arbitral tribunal shall issue an order for the termination of th e arbitral proceedings 
where — 
(a) the  claimant withdraws his claim, unless the respondent objects to the order and the 
arbitral tribunal recognises a legitimate  interest on his part in obtaining a final settlement of the 
dispute,  
(b) the parties agree on the termination of the proceedings, or  
(c) the arbitral tribunal finds that the continuation of the proceedings has for any other reason 
become unnecessary or impossible.  
(3) Subject to section 33 and sub -section ( 4) of section 34, the mandate of the arbitral tribunal shall 
terminate with the termination of  the arbitral proceedings.  
33. Correction and interpretation of award; additional award .—(1) Within thirty days from the 
receipt of the arbitral award, unless  another period of time has been  agreed upon by the parties — 
(a) a party, with notice to the other party, may request the arbitral tribunal to correct any 
computation errors, any clerical  or typographical errors or any other errors of a similar nature 
occurring in the award;  
(b) if so agreed by the parties, a party, with  notice to the other party, may request the arbitral 
tribunal to give an interpretation of a  specific point or part of the award.  
(2) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub -section ( 1) to be justified, it shall 
make the correction or  give the  interpretation within thirty days from the receipt of the request and the 
interpretation shall form part of the arbitral award.  
(3) The a rbitral tribunal may correct any  error of the type referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), 
on its own i nitiative, within thirty  days from the date of the arbitral award.  
(4) Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, a party with notice to the other party, may request, within 
thirty days from the receipt of  the arbitral award, the arbitral tribunal to make an  additional arbitral award 
as to claims presented in the arbitral proceedings but  omitted from the arbitral award.  
(5) If the arbitral tribunal considers the request made under sub -section ( 4) to be justified, it shall 
make the additional arbitral award  within sixty days from the receipt of such request.  
(6) The arbitral tribunal may extend, if necessary, the period of time within which it shall make a 
correction, give an interpretation or  make an additional arbitral award under sub -section ( 2) or             
sub-section ( 5). 
(7) Section 31 shall apply to a correction or interpretation of the arbitral award or to an additional 
arbitral award made under this  section.  
CHAPTER VII  
Recourse against arbitral award  
34. Application for setting  aside arbitral award .—(1) Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award 
may be made only by an  application for setting aside such award in accordance with sub -section ( 2) and 
sub-section ( 3). 
  20 
 (2) An arbitral award may be s et aside by the Court only if — 
(a) the party making the appli cation furnishes proof that — 
(i) a party was under some incapacity, or  
(ii) the arbitration agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have subjected it 
or, failing any indication thereon, under  the law for the time being in force; or  
(iii) the party making the application was not given proper notice of the appointment of an 
arbitrator or of the arbitral proceedings or  was otherwise unable to present his case; or  
(iv) the arbitral award deals with a dispute not c ontemplated by or not falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration, or it  contains decisions on matter s beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration:  
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated fro m those 
not so submitted, only that part of the  arbitral award which contains decisions on matters not 
submitted to arbitration may be set aside; or  
(v) the composition of the arbitral tribunal or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance 
with the agree ment of the parties, unless  such agreement was in conflict with a provision of this 
Part from which the parties cannot derogate, or, failing such agreement, was  not in accordance 
with this Par t; or 
(b) the Court finds that — 
(i) the subject -matter of the dispute is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law 
for the time being in force, or  
(ii) the arbitral award is in conflict with the public policy of India.  
1[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarifie d that an award is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if, — 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption or was in violation 
of section 75 or section 81; or  
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy  of Indian law; or  
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.  
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on  the merits of the dispute. ] 
 2[(2A) An arbitral award arising out of arbitrations other than international commercial arbitrations, 
may also be set aside by the Court, if the Court finds that the award is vitiated by patent illegality 
appearing on the face of the  award:  
Provided that an a ward shall not be set aside merely on the ground of an erroneous application of the 
law or by re appreciation of evidence.]  
(3) An application for setting aside may not be made after three months have elapsed from the date on 
which the party making that  application had received the arbitral award  or, if a request had been made 
under section 33, from the date on which that request  had been disposed of by the arbitral tribunal:  
Provided that if the Court is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by suff icient cause from 
making the application within the  said period of three months it  may entertain the application within a 
further period of thirty days, but not thereafter.  
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Court may, where it is appropriate and it is 
so requested by a party,  adjourn the proceedings for a period of time determined by it in order to give the 
arbitral tribunal an opportunity to resume the  arbitral proceedings or to take such other action as in the 
opinion of arbitral  tribunal will eliminate the grounds for setting aside the  arbitral award.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 18,  for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23-10-2015).  
2. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015 ). 21 
 1[(5) An application under this section shall be filed by a party only after  issuing a prior notice to the 
other party and such application shall be  accompanied by an affidavit by t he applicant endorsing 
compliance with the  said requirement.  
(6) An application under this section shall be disposed of expeditiously,  and in any event, within a 
period of one year from the date on which the notice  referred to in sub -section ( 5) is served upon the other 
party. ] 
CHAPTER VIII  
Finality and enforcement of arbitral awards  
35. Finality of arbitral awards. —Subject to this Part an arbitral award shall be final and binding on 
the parties and persons claiming  under them respectively.  
2[36. Enforcement. —(1) Where the time for making an application to set aside the arbitral award  
under section 34 has expired, then, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), such  award shall be 
enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , in the same 
manner as if it were a decree of the court.  
(2) Where an application to set aside the arbitral award has been filed in the  Court under section 34, 
the filing of such an application shall not by itself render that  award unenforceable, unless the Court 
grants an order of stay of the operation of the  said arbitral award in accordance with the provisions of     
sub-section ( 3), on a separate  application made for that purpose.  
(3) Upon filing of an application under sub -section ( 2) for stay of the operation  of the arbitral award, 
the Court may, subject to such conditions as it may deem fit,  grant stay of the operation of such award for 
reasons to be recorded in writing:  
Provided that the Court shall, while considering the application for grant of  stay in the case of an 
arbitral award for payment of money, have due regard to the  provisions for grant of stay of a money 
decree under the provisions of the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) .] 
CHAPTER IX  
Appeals  
37. Appealable orders .—(1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders (and from no others) to 
the Court authorised by law to hear  appeals from original decrees of the Cou rt passing the order, 
namely: — 
3[(a) refusing to refer the parties to arbitration under  section 8;  
 (b) granting or refusing to grant any measure under section 9;  
(c) setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under section 34. ] 
(2) Appeal shall also lie to a court from an or der of the arbitral tribunal — 
(a) accepting the plea referred to in sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3) of section 16; or  
(b) granting or refusing to grant an interim measure under section 17.  
(3) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in th is 
section shall a ffect or take  away any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.  
CHAPTER X  
Miscellaneous  
38. Deposits .—(1) The arbitral tribunal may fix the amount of the depo sit or supplementary deposit, 
as the case may be, as an  advance for the costs referred to in sub-section ( 8) of section 31, which it 
expects will be incurred in respect of the claim submitted  to it: 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 18  (w.e.f .  23-10-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 19,  ibid., for section 36 (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
3. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for clause s (a) and ( b) (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  22 
 Provided that where, apart from the claim, a counter -claim has been submitted to the arbitral tribunal, 
it may fix separate amount of  deposit for the claim and counter -claim.  
(2) The deposit referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be payable in equal shares by the parties:  
Provided that where one party fails to pay his share of the deposit, the other party may pay that share:  
Provided further that where th e other party also does not pay the aforesaid share in respect of the 
claim or the counter -claim, the  arbitral tribunal may suspend or terminate the arbitral proceedings in 
respect of such claim or counter -claim, as the case may be.  
(3) Upon termination of  the arbitral proceedings, the arbitral tribunal shall render an accounting to the 
parties of the deposits  received and shall return any unexpended balance to the party or parties, as the case 
may be.  
39. Lien on arbitral award and deposits as to costs .—(1) Subject to the provisions of                           
sub-section ( 2) and to any provision to the  contrary in the arbitration agreement, the arbitral tribunal shall 
have a lien on the arbitral award for any unpaid costs of the  arbitration.  
(2) If in any  case an arbitral tribunal refuses to deliver its award except on payment of the costs 
demanded by it, the Court may, on  an application in this behalf, order that the arbitral tribunal shall 
deliver the arbitral award to the applicant on payment into Court  by the applicant of the costs demanded, 
and shall, after suc h inquiry, if any, as it thinks  fit, further order that out of the money so paid  into Court 
there shall be paid to the arbitral tribunal by way of costs such sum as the Court may consider reasona ble 
and that the  balance of the money, if any, shall be refunded to the applicant.  
(3) An application under sub -section ( 2) may be made by any party unless the fees demanded have 
been fixed by written  agreement between him and the arbitral tribunal, and th e arbitral tribunal shall be 
entitled to appear and be heard on any such  application.  
(4) The Court may make such orders as it thinks fit respecting the costs of the arbitration where any 
question arises respecting such  costs and the arbitral award contain s no sufficient provision concerning 
them.  
40. Arbitration agreement not to be discharged by death of party thereto .—(1) An arbitration 
agreement shall not be discharged by  the death of any party thereto either as respects the deceased or as 
respects any o ther p arty, but shall in such event be  enforceable by or against the legal representative of 
the deceased.  
(2) The mandate of an arbitrator shall not be terminated by the death of any party by whom he was 
appointed.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall affect  the operation of any law by virtue of which any right of action 
is extinguished by the death of a  person.  
41. Provisions in case of insolvency. —(1) Where it is provided by a term in a contract to which an 
insolvent is a party that any dispute  arising ther eout or in connection therewith shall be submitted to 
arbitration, the said term shall, if the receiver adopts the contract,  be enforceable by or against him so far 
as it relates to any such dispute.  
(2) Where a person who has been adjudged an insolvent ha d, before the commencement of the 
insolvency proceedings, become a  party to a n arbitration agreement, and any matter to which the 
agreement applies is required to be determined in connection with, or  for the purposes of, the insolvency 
proceedings , then, i f the case is one to which sub -section ( 1) does not apply, any other party or  the 
receiver may apply to the judicial authority having jurisdiction in the insolvency proceedings for an order 
directing that the matter  in question shall be submitted to arbitr ation in accordance  with the arbitration 
agreement , and the judicial authority may, if it is of  opinion that, having regard to all the circumstances of 
the case, the matter ought to be determined by arbitration, make an order  accordingly.  
(3) In this secti on the expression “receiver”  includes an Official Assignee.  
42. Jurisdiction. —Notwithstanding anything contained elsewhere in this Part or in any other law for 
the time being in force, where with  respect to an arbitration agreement any application under this Part has 
been made in a Court, that Court alone shall have  jurisdiction over the arbitral proceedings and all 23 
 subsequent applications arising out of that agreement and the arbitral proceedings  shall be made in that 
Court and in no other Court.  
43. Limitations. —(1) The Li mitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , shall  apply to arbitrations as it applies 
to proceedings in court.  
(2) For the purposes of this section and the Lim itation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , an arbitration shall be 
deemed to have commenced  on the date referred  to in section 21.  
(3) Where an arbit ration agreement to submit fu ture disputes to arbitration provides that any claim to 
which the agreement applies  shall be barred unless some step to commence arbitral proceedings is taken 
within a time fixe d by the agreement, and a dispute  arises to which the agreement applies , the Court, if it 
is of opinion that in the circumstances of the case undue hardship would  otherwise be caused, and 
notwithstanding that the time so fixed has expired, may on such terms, if any, as the justice of the case  
may require, extend the time for such period as it thinks proper.  
(4) Where the Court orders that an arbitral award be set aside, the period between the commencement 
of the arbitration and the  date of the order of the Court shall be excluded in computing the time prescribed 
by the Lim itation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) , for the  commencement of the proceedings (including 
arbitration) with respect to the dispute so submitted.  
PART II  
ENFORCE MENT OF CERTAIN FOREIGN AWARDS  
CHAPTER I  
New York Convention Awards  
44. Definition. —In this Chapter, unless t he context otherwise requires, “ foreign award”  means an 
arbitral award on differences  between persons arising out of legal relationships, whether contractual or 
not, considered as  commercial under the law in force in  India, made on or after the 11th day of              
October, 1960 — 
(a) in pursuance of an agreement in writing for arbitration to which the Convention set forth in 
the First Schedule applies, and  
(b) in one of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions 
have been made may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, declare to be territories to which the said 
Convention applies.  
45. Power of judicial authority to r efer parties to arbitration .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Part I or in the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , a judicial authority, when seized 
of an action in a matter in respect of which the parties have made an  agreement referred to in section 44, 
shall, at the request of one of the parties or any person claiming through or under him, refer the  parties to 
arbitration, unless it finds that the said agreement is null and void, inoperative or incapable of being 
performed.  
46. When foreign a ward binding. —Any foreign award which would be enforceable under this 
Chapter shall be treated as binding for  all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and 
may accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of  defence, set off or ot herwise in any legal 
proceedings in India and any references in this Chapter to enforcing a foreign award shall  be construed as 
including references to relying on an award.  
47. Evidence. —(1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at the time of the 
application, produce before the  court — 
(a) the original award or a copy thereof, duly authenticated in the manner required by the law of 
the country in which it was made;  
(b) the original agreement for arbitration or a duly certified cop y thereof; and  
(c) such evidence as may be n ecessary to prove that the award  is a foreign award.  
(2) If the award or agreement to be produced under sub -section ( 1) is in a foreign language, the party 
seeking to enforce the award  shall produce a translation into English certified as correct by a diplomatic 24 
 or consular agent of the country to which that party  belongs or certified as correct in such other manner as 
may be sufficient according to the law in force in India.  
1[Explanati on.—In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter, “Court” means the High 
Court having original jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject -matter of the arbitral award 
if the same had been the subject -matter of a suit on its o riginal civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the 
High Court  having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such  High Court.]  
48. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards. —(1) Enforcement of a foreign award may be 
refused, at the request of the party  against whom it is invoked, only if that party furnishes to the court 
proof th at— 
(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in section 44 were, under the law applicable to them, 
under some incapacity, or the said  agreement is not valid under the law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication thereon, under the law of the  country where the award was 
made; or   
(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appoi ntment 
of the arbitrator or of the arbitral  proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his case; or   
(c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission to arbitration, or it  contains decisions on  matters beyond the scope o f the submission to 
arbitration:  
Provided that, if the decisions on matters submitted to arbitration can be separated from those not 
so submitted, that part of the  award which contains decisions on matters submitted to arbitration may 
be enforced; or  
(d) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral procedure was not in accordance with 
the agreement of the parties, or,  failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the 
country where the arbitra tion took place ; or  
(e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a 
competent authority of the  country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made.  
(2) Enforcement of an arbitral award may also  be refused if the C ourt finds that — 
(a) the subject -matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the 
law of India; or  
(b) the enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of India.  
2[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award  is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if, — 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption  or was in violation of 
section 75 or section 81; or  
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law; or  
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.  
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a  contravention with the 
fundamental p olicy of Indian law shall not entail a review on  the merits of the dispute. ] 
(3) If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the award has been made to a competent 
authority referred to in clause  (e) of sub -section ( 1) the Court may, if it considers it proper, adjourn the 
decision on the enforc ement of the award and may also , on the application of the party claiming 
enforcement of the award, order the other party to give suitable security.  
49. Enforcement of foreign awards. —Where the Court i s satisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Chapter, the award  shall be deemed to be a decree of that Court.  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 3 of 2016, s. 21, for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 22,  ibid., for the Explanation  (w.e.f. 23 -10-2015).   25 
 50. Appealable orders .—(1) An appeal shall l ie from the order refusing to — 
(a) refer the parties to arbitration under section 45;  
(b) enforce a foreign award under section 48,   
to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order.  
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this 
section shall affect or take away  any right  to appeal to the Supreme Court.  
51. Saving .—Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of 
enforcing in India of any award  or of availing himself in India of any award if this Chapter had not been 
enacted.  
52. Chapter II not to apply. —Chapter II of this Part shall not apply in relation to foreign awards to 
which this Chapter applies.  
CHAPTER II  
Geneva Convention Awards  
53. Interpretation. —In this Chapter “foreign award”  means an arbitral award on differences relating 
to matters considered as  commercial under the law in force in India made afte r the 28th day of July,   
1924, — 
(a) in pursuance of an agreement for arbitration to which the Protocol set forth in the Second 
Schedule applies, and  
(b) between persons of whom one is subject to the jurisdiction of some one of such Powers as the 
Central Government, being  satisfied that recipro cal provisions have been made, may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, declare to be parties to the  Convention set forth in the Third Schedule, and of 
whom the other is subject to the jurisdiction of some other of the Powers  aforesaid, and  
(c) in one  of such territories as the Central Government, being satisfied that reciprocal provisions 
have been made, may, by like  notification, declare to be territories to which the said Convention 
applies,   
and for the purposes of this Chapter an award shall not b e deemed to be final if any proceedings for the 
purpose of contesting the  validity of the award are pending in the country in which it was made.  
54. Power of judicial authority to refer parties to arbitration .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in Part I o r in the Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908 (5 of 190 8), a judicial authority, on being 
seized of a dispute regarding a contract made between persons to whom  section 53 applies and including 
an arbitration agreement, whether referring to present or fu ture diffe rences, which is valid under  that 
section and capable of being carried into effect, shall refer the parties on the application of either of them 
or any person  claiming through or under him to the decision of the arbitrators and such reference shall not 
prejudice the competence of the judicial  authority in case the agreement or the arbitration cannot proceed 
or becomes inoperative.  
55. Foreign awards when binding .—Any foreign award which would be enforceable under this 
Chapter shall be treated as binding for  all purposes on the persons as between whom it was made, and 
may accordingly be relied on by any of those persons by way of  defence, set off or otherwise in any legal 
proceedings in India and any references in this Chapter to enforcing a foreign award shall  be construed as 
including references to relying on an award.  
56. Evidence. —(1) The party applying for the enforcement of a foreign award shall, at t he time of 
application produce  before the  Court — 
(a) the original award or a copy thereof duly authent icated in the manner required by the law of 
the country in which it was made;  
(b) evidence proving that the award has become final; and  
(c) such evidence as may be necessary to prove that the conditions mentioned in                            
clauses ( a)  and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section  57 are satisfied.  26 
 (2) Where any document requiring to be produced under sub -section ( 1) is in a foreign language, the 
party seeking to enforce the  award shall produce a translation into English certified as correct by a 
diplomatic or consular agent of the country to which that party  belongs or certified as correct in such 
other manner as may be sufficient according to the law in force in India.  
1[Explanation .—In this section and in the sections following in this Chapter,  “Court” means the High 
Court having original jurisdiction to decide the questions  forming the subject -matter of the arbitral award 
if the same had been the subject -matter  of a suit on its original civil jurisdiction and in other cases, in the 
High  Court  having jurisdiction to hear appeals from decrees of courts subordinate to such  High Court. ] 
57. Conditions for enforcement of foreign awards .—(1) In order that a foreign award may be 
enforceable under this Chapter, it shall  be necessary that — 
(a) the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which is valid under the 
law applicable thereto;  
(b) the subject -matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of India;  
(c) the award has been made by the arbi tral tribunal provided for in the submission to arbitration 
or constituted in the manner  agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the law governing the 
arbitration procedure;  
(d) the award has become final in the country in which it has been made,  in the sense that it will 
not be considered as such if it is  open to opposition or appeal or if it is proved that any proceedings 
for the purpose of contesti ng the validity of the award are  pending;  
(e) the enforcement of the award is not contrary to the public policy or the law of India.  
2[Explanation 1.—For the avoidance of any doubt, it is clarified that an award  is in conflict with the 
public policy of India, only if, — 
(i) the making of the award was induced or affected by fraud or corruption  or was in  violation of 
section 75 or section 81; or   
(ii) it is in contravention with the fundamental policy of Indian law ; or 
(iii) it is in conflict with the most basic notions of morality or justice.   
Explanation 2.—For the avoidance of doubt, the test as to whether there is a  contravention with the 
fundamental policy of Indian law shall not entail a review on  the merits of the dispute .] 
(2) Even if the conditions laid down in sub -section ( 1) are fulfilled, enforcement of the award shall be 
refused if the Court is satisfied  that— 
(a) the award has been annulled in the country in which it was made;  
(b) the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of the 
arbitration proceedings in sufficient ti me to  enable him to present his case; or that, being under a 
legal incapacity, he was not properly represented;  
(c) the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration or that it  contain s decisions on matters beyond  the scope of the 
submission to arbitration:  
Provided that if the award has not covered all the differences submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the 
Court may, if it thinks fit,  postpone such enforcement or grant it subject to s uch guarantee as the Court 
may decide.  
(3) If the party against whom the award has been made proves that under the law governing the 
arbitration procedure there is a  ground, other than the grounds referred to in clauses ( a) and ( c) of                 
sub-section ( 1) and clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 2) entitling him to contest the validity of the award, 
the Court may, if it thinks fit, either refuse enforcement of the award or adjourn the  consideration thereof, 
giving such party a reasonable time  within which to have the award annulled by the competent tribunal.  
                                                           
1. Sub s. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 23 , for the Explanation  (w.e.f.  23-10-2015).  
2. Subs. by s. 24, ibid., for the Explanation  (w.e.f.  23-10-2015).  
 27 
 58. Enforcement of foreign awards .—Where the Court is satisfied that the foreign award is 
enforceable under this Chapter, the award  shall be deemed to be a decree of the Court.  
59. Appeala ble orders .—(1) An appeal shall  lie from the order refusing — 
(a) to refer the parties to arbitration under section 54;  and 
(b) to enforce a foreign award under section 57,   
to the court authorised by law to hear appeals from such order.  
(2) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but nothing in this 
section shall affect or take away  any right to appeal to the Supreme Court.   
60. Saving. —Nothing in this Chapter shall prejudice any rights which any person would have had of 
enforcing in India of any award  or of availing himself in India of any award if this Chapter had not been 
enacted.  
PART III  
CONCILIATION  
61. Application and scope. —(1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time being in force 
and unless the parties have  otherwise agreed, this Part shall apply to conciliation of disputes arising out of 
legal relationship, whether contractual or not and to  all proceedings relating thereto.  
(2) This Part shall not apply where by virtue of any law for the time be ing in force certain disputes 
may not be submitted to  conciliation.  
62. Commencement of conciliation proceedings. —(1) The party initiating conciliation shall send to 
the other party a written invitation  to conciliate under this Part, briefly identifying th e subject of the 
dispute.  
(2) Conciliation proceedings , shall commence when the other party accepts in writing the invitation to 
conciliate.  
(3) If the other party rejects the invitation, there will be no conciliation proceedings.  
(4) If the party initiating conciliation does not receive a reply within thirty days from the date on 
which he sends the invitation, or  within such other period of time as  specified in the invitation, he  may 
elect to treat this as a rejection of the invitation to conciliat e and if he so elects, he shall inform in writing 
the other party accordingly.  
63. Number of conciliators. —(1) There shall be one conciliator unless the parties agree that there 
shall be two or three conciliators.  
(2) Where there is more than one conciliat or, they ought, as a general rule, to act joint ly. 
64. Appointment of conciliators .—(1) Subject to sub -section ( 2)— 
(a) in conciliation proceedings , with one conciliator, the parties may agree on the name of a sole 
conciliator;  
(b) in conciliation proceedings with two conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator;  
(c) in conciliation proceedings with three conciliators, each party may appoint one conciliator and 
the parties may agree on the  name of the third conciliator who shal l act as the presiding conciliator.  
(2) Parties may enlist the assistance of a suitable institution or person in connection with the 
appointment of conciliators , and in  particular, — 
(a) a party may request such an institution or person to recommend the names of suitable 
individuals to act as conciliator; or  
(b) the parties may agree that the appointment of one or more conciliators be made directly by 
such a n institution or person:  
Provided  that in recommending or appointing individuals to act as conciliator, the institution or 
person shall have regard to such  considerations as are likely to secure the appointment of an independent 28 
 and impartial conciliator and, with respect to a sole or thi rd conciliator, shall take into account the 
advisability of appointing a conciliator of a nationality other than the nationalities of the   parties.  
65. Submission  of statements to conciliator .—(1) The conciliator, upon his appointment, may 
request each par ty to submit to him a   brief written statement describing the general nature of the dispute 
and the points at issue.  Each  party shall send a copy of such statement to the other party.  
(2) The conciliator may request each party to submit to him a further written statement of his position 
and the facts and grounds in  support thereof, supplemented by any documents and other evidence that 
such party deems appropriate.  The party shall send a  copy of such statement, documents and other 
evidence to the other par ty. 
(3) At an y stage of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may request a party to submit to him 
such additional information as  he deems appropriate.  
Explanation. —In this section and all the following sections of this Part, the term "conciliator"  applies 
to a sole conciliator, two  or three  conciliators , as the case may be.  
66. Conciliator not bound by certain enactments. —The conciliator is not bound by the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908)  or the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872).  
67. Role of conciliator .—(1) The conciliator shall assist the parties in an independent and impartial 
manner in their attempt to reach  an amicable settlement of their dispute.  
(2) The conciliator shall be guided by principles of objectivity, fairness and justi ce, giving 
consideration to, among other things, the  rights and obligations of the parties, the usages of the trade 
concerned and the circumstances surrounding the dispute, including  any previous business practices 
between the parties.  
(3) The conciliator may conduct the conciliation proceedings in such a manner as he considers 
appropriate, taking into account the  circumstances of the case, the wishes the parties may express, 
including any request by a party that the conciliator hear oral  statements, and the need for a speedy 
settlement of the dispute.  
(4) The conciliator  may, at any stage of the conciliation proceedings, make proposals for a settlement 
of the dispute.  Such proposals  need not be  in writing and need not be accompanied by a statement of the 
reasons therefor.  
68. Administrative assistance. —In order to facilitate the conduct of the conciliation proceedings, the 
parties, or the conciliator with the  consent of the parties, may arrange for administrative assistance by a 
suitable institution or per son. 
69. Communication between conciliator and parties .—(1) The conciliator may invite the parties to 
meet him or may communicate with  them orally or in writing.  He may meet or communicate with the 
parties together or with each of them separately.  
(2) Unless the parties have agreed upon the place where meetings with the conciliator are to be held, 
such place shall be   determined by the conciliator, after consultation with the parties, having regard to the 
circumstances of the conciliation proceedings.  
70. Disclosure of information. —When the conciliator receives factual information concerning the 
dispute from a party, he shall  disclose the substance of that information to the other party in order that the 
other party may have the opportunity to present an y explanation which he considers appropriate:  
Provided that when a party gives any information to the conciliator subject to a specific condition that 
it be kept confidential,  the conciliator shall not disclose that information to the other party.  
71. Co-operation of parties with conciliator. —The parties shall in good faith co -operate with the 
conciliator and, in particular, shall  endeavour to comply with requests by the conciliator to submit written 
materials, provide evidence and attend meetings.  
72. Suggestions by parties for settlement of dispute .—Each party may, on his own initiative or at 
the invitation of the conciliator,  submit to the conciliator suggestions for the settlement of the dispute.  29 
 73. Settlement agreement. —(1) When it appears to the c onciliator that there exist elements of a 
settlement which may be acceptable  to the parties, he shall formulate the terms of a possible settlement 
and submit them to the parties for their observations.  After  receiving the observations of the parties, the 
conciliator may reformulate the terms of a possible settlement in the light of such  observations.  
(2) If the parties reach agreement on a settlement of the dispute, they may draw up and sign a written 
settlement agreement.  If requested by the parties, the c onciliator may draw up, or assist the parties in 
drawing up, the settlement agreement.  
(3) When the parties sign the settlement agreement, it shall be final and binding on the parties and 
persons claiming under them  respectively.  
(4) The conciliator shall authenticate the settlement agreement and furnish a copy thereof to each of 
the parties.  
74. Status and effect of settlement agreement. —The settlement agreement shall have the  same 
status  and effect as if it is an arbitral award on  agreed terms on the substance of the dispute rendered by 
an arbitral tribunal under section 30.  
75. Confidentiality .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in 
force, the conciliator and the parties  shall keep confidential all matter s relating t o the conciliation 
proceedings.  Confidentiality shall extend also to the settlement  agreement, except where its disclosure is 
necessary for purposes of implementation and enforcement.  
76. Termination of conciliation proceedings. —The conciliation proceeding s shall be terminated — 
(a) by the signing of the sett lement agreement by the parties,  on the date of the agreement; or  
(b) by a written declaration of the conciliator, after c onsultation with the parties, to  the effect that 
further efforts at conciliation are no  longer justified, on the date of the declaration; or  
(c) by a written declaration of the parties addressed to the conciliator to the effect that the 
concilia tion proceedings are terminated , on the date of the declaration; or  
(d) by a written declara tion of a party to the other party and the conciliator, if appointed, to the 
effect that the conciliation  proceedings are terminated, on the date of the declaration.  
77. Resort to arbitral or judicial proceedings .—The parties shall not initiate, during the  
conciliation proceedings, any arbitral or judicial  proceedings in respect of a dispute that is the                
subject -matter of the conciliation proceedings except that a party may initiate arbitral  or judicial 
proceedings  where, in his opinion, such proceedings are necessary for preserving his rights.  
78. Costs. —(1) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator shall fix the cos ts of 
the conciliation and give  written  notice thereof to the parties.  
(2) For the purpose of sub -section ( 1), “costs”  means  reasonable costs relating to — 
(a) the fee and expenses of the conciliator and witness es requested by the conciliator  with the 
consent of the parties;  
(b) any  expert advice requested by the conciliator with the consent of the parties;  
(c) any assistance provided pursuant to clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 64 and section 68.  
(d) any  other expenses incurred in connection with the conciliation proceedings and the 
settlement agreement.  
(3) The costs shall be borne equally by the parties unless the settlement agreement prov ides for a 
different apportionment . All other  expenses incurred b y a party shall be borne by that party.  
79. Deposits. —(1) The conciliator may direct each party to deposit an equal amount as an advance 
for the costs referred to in sub -section  (2) of section 78 which he expects will be incurred.  
(2) During the course of the conciliation proceedings, the conciliator may direct supplementary 
deposits in an equal amount from  each party.  30 
 (3) If the required deposits under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) are not paid in full by both parties within 
thirty days, the conciliator may  suspend the proceedings or may make a written declaration of termination 
of the proceedings to the parties, effective on the date of  that declaration.  
(4) Upon termination of the conciliation proceedings , the conciliator shall render an accounting to the 
parties of the deposits received  and shall return any  unexpended balance to the parties.  
80. Role of conciliator in other proceedings. —Unless othe rwise agreed by the parties ,— 
(a) the conciliator shall not act as an arbitrator or as a representative or counsel of a party in any 
arbitral or judicial proceeding in  respect of a dispute that is the subject of the conciliation 
proceedings;  
(b) the conciliator shall not be presented by the p arties as a witness in any arbitral or judicial 
proceedings.  
81. Admissibility of  evidence in other proceedings. —The parties shall not rely on or introduce as 
evidence in arbitral or judicial  proceedings, whether or not such proceedings relate to the dispu te that is 
the subject o f the conciliation proceedings, — 
(a) views expressed or suggestions made by the other party in respect of a possible settlement of 
the dispute;  
(b) admissions made by the other party in the course of the conciliation proceedings;  
(c) proposals made by the conciliator;  
(d) the fact that the other party had indicated  his willingness  to accept a proposal for settlement 
made by the conciliator.  
PART IV  
SUPPLEMENTARY PROVISIONS  
82. Power of High Court to make rules. —The High Court may make rules consistent with this Act 
as to all proceedings before the   Court under this Act.  
83. Removal of difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by  order published in the Offi cial Gazette, make such provisions, not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be  necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall  made  be after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
Houses of Parliament.  
84. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the  provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be, after 
it is made before each House  of Parliament  while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions  aforesai d, both Ho uses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the  rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such  modification or ann ulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
85. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Arbitration (Protocol and Co nvention) Act, 1937 (6 of 1937) , the 
Arbitration Act, 1940 (10 of 1940)  and the Foreign Awards (Recog nition and Enforcement)                         
Act, 1961 (45 of 1961) are hereby repealed.  
  31 
 (2) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) the provisions of the said enactments shall apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which 
commenced before this Act came into force unless otherwise agreed by the parties but this Act shall 
apply in relation to arbitral proceedings which commenced on or after  this Act comes into force;  
(b) all rules made and notifications published, under the said enactments shall, to the ex tent to 
which they are not repugnant to this  Act, be deemed respectively to have been made or issued under 
this Act .  
86. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Third) Ordinance, 1996 (Ord.  27 of 
1996) is  hereby repealed.   
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, any order, rule, notification or scheme made or anything done or  
any action taken in pursuance of any provision of the said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been 
made,  done or taken under the corresponding provisions of thi s Act.  
 32 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 44)  
CONV ENTION ON THE RECOGNITION AND ENF ORCEMENT OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS  
ARTICLE 1  
1. This Convention shall apply to the recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards made in the 
territory of a State other than  the State where the recognition and enforcement of such awards are sought , 
and arising out of differences between persons, whether  physical or legal.  It shall also apply to arbitral 
awards not considered as domestic awards in the State where their recogni tion and  enforcement are 
sought.  
2. The term “arbitral awards”  shall include not only awards made by arbitrators appointed for each 
case but also those made by  permanent arbitral bodies to which the parties have submitted.  
3. When signing, ratifying or acc eding to this Convention, or notifying exten sion under article X 
hereof, any  State may on the basis  of reciprocity declare that it will apply the Convention to the 
recognition and enforcement of awards made only in the territory of  another Contracting Stat e. It may 
also declare that it will apply the Convention only to differences arising out of legal relationships,  
whether contractual or not, which are cons idered as commercial under the national law of the State 
making such declaration.  
ARTICLE II  
1. Each Contracting State shall recognise an agreement in writing und er which the parties undertake  
to submit to arbitration all or  any differences which have arisen or which may arise between them in 
respect of defined legal relationship, whether contractual or  not, concerning a subject -matter capable of 
settlement by arbitration.  
2. The term “agreement in writing”  shall include an arbitral clause in a contract or an arbitration 
agreement, signed by the parties or  contained in an exchange of letters or telegrams.   
3. The court of a Contracting State, when seized of an action in a matter in respect of which the 
parties have made an agreement  within the meaning of this article, shall, at the request of one of the 
parties, refer the parties to arbitration, unless in f inds that the  said agreement is null and void, inoperative 
of incapable of being performed.  
ARTICLE III  
Each Contracting State shall recognize arbitral a wards as binding and enforce  them in accordance 
with the rules of procedure  of the territory where the award is relied upon, under the conditions laid down 
in the following articles.  There shall not be imposed  substantially more onerous conditions or higher fees 
or charges on the recognition or enforcement of arbitral awards to which this  Convention applies  than are 
imposed on the recognition or enforcement of domestic arbitral awards.  
ARTICLE IV  
1. To obtain the recognition and enforce ment mentioned in the preceding  article, the party applying 
for recognition and  enforcement shall, at the time of the applic ation, supply — 
(a) the duly authenticated original award o r a duly certified copy thereof;  
(b) the original agreement referred to in article II or a duly certified copy thereof.  
2. If the said award or agreement is not made in an official language of the c ountry in which the 
award is relied upon, the party  applying for recognition and enforcement of the award shall produce a 
translation of these documents into such language.  The translation shall be certified by an official or 
sworn translator or by a diplomatic or consular agent.  
  33 
 ARTICLE V  
1. Recognition and enforcement of the award may be refused, at the request of the party against 
whom it is invoked, only if that  party furnishes to the competent authority where the recognition and 
enfor cement is sought, proof that — 
(a) the parties to the agreement referred to in article II were, under the law applicable to them, 
under some incapacity, or the said  agreement is  not valid under the law to which the parties have 
subjected it or, failing any indication  thereon, under the law of the  country where the award was 
made; or  
(b) the party against whom the award is invoked was not given proper notice of the appointment 
of the arbitrator or of the arbitration  proceedings or was otherwise unable to present his ca se; or  
(c) the award deals with a difference not contemplated by or not falling within the terms of the 
submission to arbitration, or it  contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the submission to 
arbitration, provided that, if the decisions on mat ters submitted to arbitration can be separated from 
those not so submitted, that part of the award which contains decisions on matters  submitted to 
arbitration may be recognised and enforced; or  
(d) the composition of the arbitral authority or the arbitral  procedure was not in accordance with 
the agreement of the parties, or,  failing such agreement, was not in accordance with the law of the 
country where the arbitration took place; or  
(e) the award has not yet become binding on the parties, or has been set aside or suspended by a 
competent authority of the  country in which, or under the law of which, that award was made.  
2.  Recognition and enforcement of an arbitral award may also be refused if the competent authority 
in the country where recognition  and en forcement is sought finds that — 
(a) the subject -matter of the difference is not capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of 
that country; or  
(b) the recognition or enforcement of the award would be contrary to the public policy of that 
country.  
ARTICLE VI  
If an application for the setting aside or suspension of the award has been made to a competent 
authority referred to in article V( 1) (e), the authority before which the award is sought to be relied upon 
may, if it considers it proper, adjourn th e decision on the  enforcement of the award and may also, on the 
application of the party claiming enforcement of the award, order the other party to  give suitable security.  
ARTICLE VII  
1. The provisions of the present Convention shall not affect the validity of multilateral or bilateral 
agreements concerning the  recognition and enforcement of arbitral awards entered into by the Contracting 
States nor deprive any interested party of any right  he may have to avail himself of an arbitral award in 
the man ner and to the extent allowed by the law or the treaties of the country  where such award is sought 
to be relied upon.  
2. The Geneva Protocol on Arbitration Clauses of 1923 and the Geneva Convention on the Execution 
of Foreign Arbitral Awards of  1927 shall cease to have effect between Contracting States on their 
becoming bound and to the extent that they become bound by  this Convention.  
ARTICLE VIII  
1. This Convention shall be open  until 31st December, 1958 for signature on behalf of any Member of 
the United  Nations and also  on behalf of any other State which is or hereafter becomes member of any 
specialised agency of the United Nations, or which is or  hereafter becomes a party to the Statute of the 
International Court of Justice, or any other State to which an invitation has been  addressed by the General 
Assembly of the United Nations.  
2. This Convention shall be ratified and the instrument of ratification shall be deposited with the 
Secretary -General of the United  Nations.  
ARTICLE 1X  
1. This Conv ention shall  be open  for accession to all States referred to in article VIII.  
2. Accession shall be effected by the deposit of an instrument of accession with the Secretary -General 
of the United Nations.  34 
 ARTICLE X  
1. Any State may, at the time of signature, ratificati on or accession, declare that this Convention shall 
extend to all or any of the  territories for the international relations of which it is responsible.  Such a 
declaration shall take effect when the Convention enters  into force for the State concerned.  
2. At any time thereafter any such extension shall be made by notification addressed to the           
Secretary -General of the United Nations  and shall take effect as from the ninetieth day after the day of 
receipt by the Secretary -General of the United Nation s of this  notification , or as from the date of entry 
into force of the Convention for the State concerned, whichever is the later.  
3. With respect to those territories to which this Convention is not extended at the time of signature, 
ratification or accession, each  State concerned shall consider the possibility of taking the necessary steps 
in order to extend the application of this Convention to  such territories, subject, where necessary for 
constitutional reasons, to the consent of the Governments o f such territories.  
ARTICLE XI  
In the case of a federal or non -unitary State, the foll owing provisions shall apply: — 
(a) with respect of those articles of this Convention that come within the legislative jurisdiction of 
the federal authority, the  obligatio ns of the federal Government shall to this extent be the same as 
those of Contracting States which are not federal States;  
(b) with respect to those articles of this Convention that come within the legislative jurisdiction of 
constituent States or provinces  which are not, under the constitutional system of the federation, bound 
to take legislative action, the federal Government shall bring  such articles with a favourable 
recommendation to the notice of the appropriate authorities of constituent Stat es or provinces at the  
earliest possible moment;  
(c) a federal State Party to this Convention shall, at the request of any other Contracting State 
transmitted through the Secretary -General of the United Nations, supply a statement of the law and 
practice o f the federation and its constituent units in regard to any  particular provision of this 
Convention, showing the extent to which effect has been given to that provision by legislative or 
other  action.  
ARTICLE XII  
1. This Convention shall come into force on  the ninetieth day following the date of deposit of the 
third instrument of ratification or  accession.  
2. For each State ratifying or acceding to this Convention after the deposit of the third instrument of 
ratification or accession, this  Convention shall enter into force on the ninetieth day after deposit by such 
State of its instrument of ratification or accession.  
ARTICLE XIII  
1. Any Contracting State may denounce this Convention by a written notification to the                  
Secretary -General of the United  Nations.  Denunciation shall take effect one year after the date of receipt 
of the notification by the Secretary -General.  
2. Any State which has made a declaration or notification under article X may, at any time thereafter, 
by notification to the Se cretary -General of the United Nations, declare that this Convention shall cease to 
extend to the territory concerned one year after the date  of the receipt of the notification by the                
Secretary -General.  
3. This Convention shall continue to be  applicable to arbitral awards in respect of which recognition 
or enforcement proceedings  have been instituted before the denunciation takes effect.  
ARTICLE XIV  
A Contracting State shall not be entitled to avail itself of the present Convention against other 
Contracting States except to the  extent that it is itself bound to apply the Convention.  
  35 
 ARTICLE XV  
The Secretary -General of the United Nations shall notify the States contemplated in ar ticle VIII of the 
following: — 
(a) signatures  and ratifications in accordance with article VIII;  
(b) accessions in accordance with article IX;  
(c) declarations and notifications under articles I, X and XI;  
(d) the date upon which this Convention enters into force in accordance with article XII;  
(e) denunciations and notifications in accordance with article XIII.  
ARTICLE XVI  
1. This Convention, of which the Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish texts shall be 
equally authentic, shall be deposited  in the archives of the United Nations.  
2. The Se cretary -General of the United Nations shall transmit a certified copy of this Convention to 
the State s contemplated in article  XIII.  
  36 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 53)  
PROTOCOL ON ARBITRATION CLAUSES  
The undersigned, being duly authorised, declare that  they accept, on behalf of the countries which 
they represent, the following  provisions: — 
1. Each of the Contracting States recognises the validity of an agreement whether relating to existing 
or future differences between  parties subject respectively to t he jurisdiction of different Contracting States 
by which the parties to a contract agree to submit to  arbitration all or any differences that may arise in 
connection with such contract relating to commercial matters or to any other  matter capable of settle ment 
by arbitration, whether or not the arbitration is to take place in a country to whose jurisdiction none of  the 
parties is subject.  
Each Contracting State reserves the right to limit the obligation mentioned above to contracts which 
are considered as c ommercial  under its national law.  Any Contracting State which avails itself of this 
right will notify the Secretary -General of the League of Nations  in order that the other Contracting States 
may be so informed.  
2. The arbitral procedure, including the con stitution of the Arbitral Tribunal, shall be governed by the 
will of the parties and by the law  of the country in whose territory the arbitration takes place.  
The Contracting States agree to facilitate all steps in the procedure which require to be taken i n their 
own territories, in accordance  with the provisions of their law governing arbitral procedure applicable to 
existing differences.  
3. Each Contra cting State undertakes to ensure  the execution by its authorities and in accordance with 
the provisions of its national  laws of arbitral awards made in its own territory under the preceding articles.  
4. The Tribunals of the Contracting Parties, on being seized of a dispute regarding a co ntract made 
between persons to whom  Article I applies and including an Arbitration Agreement whether referring to 
present or fu ture differences wh ich is valid in virtue of  the said article and capable of being carried into 
effect, shall refer the parties o n the application of either of them to the decision of  the Arbitrators.  
Such reference shall not prejudice the competence of the judicial tribunals in case the agreement or 
the arbitration cannot proceed  or becomes inoperative.  
5. The present Protocol, whi ch shall remain open for signature by all States, shall be ratified.  The 
ratification shall be deposited as  soon as possible with the Secretary -General of the League of Nations, 
who shall notify such deposit to all the Signatory States.  
6. The present Prot ocol will come into force as soon as two ratifications have been deposited.  
Thereafter it will take effect, in the  case of each Contracting State, one month after the notification by the 
Secretary -General of the deposit of its ratification.  
7. The present Protocol may be denounced by any Contracting State on giving one year's notice.  
Denunciation shall be effected by a  notification addressed to the Secretary -General of the League, who 
will immediately transmit copies of such notification to all the  other Si gnatory States and inform them of 
the date on which it was received.  The denunciation shall take effect one year after the  date on which it 
was notified to the Secretary -General, and shall operate only in respect of the notifying State.  
8. The Contracting States may declare that their acceptance of the present Protocol does not include 
any or all of the  undermentioned territories:  that is to say, their colonies, overseas possessions or 
territories, protectorates or the territories over  which they exercise a  mandate.  
The said States may subsequently adhere separately on behalf of any territory thus excluded.  The 
Secretary -General of the League  of Nations shall be informed as soon as possible of such adhesions.  He 
shall notify such adhesions to all Signatory States.  They will  take effect on e month after the notification 
by the Secretary -General to all Signatory States.  
The Contracting States may also denounce the Protocol separately on behalf of any of the territories 
referred to above.  Article 7  applies to su ch denunciation.  37 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section  53) 
CONVENTION ON THE EXECUTION OF FOREIGN ARBITRAL AWARDS  
ARTICLE  1.—(1) In the territories of any High Contracting Party to which the   present Convention 
applies, an arbitral award made in pursuance of  an agreement whether relating to existing or future 
differences (hereinafter call ed “a submission to arbitration” ) covered by the  Protocol on A rbitration 
Clauses ope ned at Geneva on September 24th,  1923, shall be recognised as binding and shall be enforced  
in accordance with the rules of the procedure of the territory where the award is relied upon, provided that 
the said award has been  made in a territory of one of the High Contracting Parties to which the present 
Convention applies and between persons who  are subject to the jurisdiction of one of the High 
Contracting Parties.  
(2) To obtain such recognition or enforcement, it shall, further, be necessary: — 
(a) that  the award has been made in pursuance of a submission to arbitration which is valid under 
the law applicable thereto;  
(b) that the subject -matter of the award is capable of settlement by arbitration under the law of the 
country in which the award is  sought  to be relied upon;  
(c) that the award has been made by the Arbitral Tribunal provided for in the submission to 
arbitration or constituted in the manner  agreed upon by the parties and in conformity with the law 
governing the arbitration procedure;  
(d) that  the award has become final in the country in which it has been made, in the sense that it 
will not be considered as such if it  is open to opposition, appeal or pourvoi en cassation                       
(in the countries where such forms of procedure exist ) or if it is proved that  any proceedings for the 
purpose of contesting the validity of the award are pending;  
(e) that the recognition or enforcement of the award is not contrary to the public policy or to the 
principles of the law of the country in   whic h it is sought to be relied upon.  
ARTICLE 2 .—Even if the c onditions laid down in Article 1  hereof are fulfilled, recognition and 
enforcement of the award shall be refused if the  Court is satisfied: — 
(a) that the award has been annulled in the country in wh ich it was made;  
(b) that the party against whom it is sought to use the award was not given notice of the 
arbitration proceedings in sufficient time to  enable him to present his case; or that, being under a legal 
incapacity, he was not properly represente d; 
(c) that the award does not deal with the differences contemplated by or falling within the terms 
of the submission to arbitration or  that it contains decisions on matters beyond the scope of the 
submission to arbitration.  
If the award has not covered a ll the questions submitted to the arbitral tribunal, the competent 
authority of the country where  recognition or enforcement of the award is sought can, if it thinks fit , 
postpone such recognition or enforcement or grant it subject to  such guarantee as that authority may 
decide.  
ARTICLE 3 .—If the party against whom the award has been made proves that, under the law 
governing the arbitration procedure, there is a  ground, other than the grounds referred to in                 
Article 1( a) and ( c), and Artic le 2(b) and ( c), entitling him to contest the validity of the  award in a Court 
of Law, the Court may, if it thinks fit, either refuse recognition or enforcement of the award or adjourn the  
consideration thereof, giving such party a reasonable time within w hich to have the award annulled by the 
competent tribunal.  
  38 
 ARTICLE 4 .—The party relying upon an award or claiming its enforceme nt must supply, in 
particular:  — 
(1) the original award or a copy thereof duly authenticated, according to the requirements of the 
law of the country in which it was  made;  
(2) documentary or other evidence to prove that the award has become final, in  the sense defined 
in Article 1 (d), in the country in  which it was made;  
(3) when  necessary, documentary or other evidence to prove that the cond itions laid down in 
Article 1, p aragraph ( 1) and  paragraph ( 2) (a) and ( c), have been fulfilled.   
A translation of the award and  of the other documents mentioned in this Article into the official 
language of the  country where the award is sought to be relied upon may be demanded.  Such translations 
must be certified correct by a diplomatic  or consular agent of the country to which t he party who seeks to 
rely upon the award belongs or by a sworn translator of the country  where the award is sought to be relied 
upon.  
ARTICLE 5 .—The provisions of the above A rticles s hall not deprive any interested party of the right 
of availing himself o f an arbitral award in the  manner and to the extent allowed by the law or the treaties 
of the country where such award is sought to be relied upon.  
ARTICLE 6 .—The present Convention applies only to arbitral awards made after the coming into 
force of the Pr otocol on Arbitration Clauses  opened at Geneva on September 24th, 1923.  
ARTICLE 7 .—The present Convention, which will remain open to the signature of all the signatories 
of the Protocol of 1923 on Arbitration  Clauses, shall have been ratified.  
It may be ratified only on behalf of those Members of the League of Nations and Non -Member States 
on whose behalf the Protocol  of 1923 shall have been ratified.   
Ratification shall be deposited as soon as possible with the Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations,  who will notify such  deposit to all the signatories.  
ARTICLE 8 .—The present Convention shall come into force three months after it shall have been 
ratified on behalf of two High Contracting  Parties.  Thereafter, it shall take effect, in the case of each Hi gh 
Contracting Party, three months after the deposit of the ratification  on its behalf with the                      
Secretary -General of the League of Nations.  
ARTICLE 9 .—The present Convention may be denounced on behalf of any Member of the League or 
Non-Member State.  Denunciation shall be  notified in writing to the Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations, who will immediately send a copy thereof, certified to be  in conformity with the notifications, to 
all the other Contracting Parties, at the same time informing them of the date on which he  received it . 
The denunciation shall come into force only in respect of the High Contracting Party which shall have 
notified it and one year after  such notification shall have reached the  Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations.   
The denunciation of the Protocol on A rbitration Clauses shall entail , ipso facto , the denunciation of 
the present Convention.  
ARTICLE 10 .—The present Convention does not apply to the colonies, protectorates or territories 
under suzerain ty or mandate of any High  Contracting Party unless they are specially mentioned.  
The application of this Convention to one or more of such colonies, protectorates or territories to 
which the Protocol on Arbitration  Clauses opened at Geneva on September 24t h, 1923, applies, can be 
effected at any time by means of a declaration addressed to  the Secretary -General of the League of 
Nations by one of the High Contracting Parties.  
  39 
 Such declaration shall take effect three months after the deposit thereof.  
The Hig h Contracting Parties can at any time denounce the Convention for all or any of the colonies, 
protectorates or territories  referred to above.  Article 9 hereof applied to such denunciation.  
ARTICLE 11 .—A certified copy of the present Convention shall be transmitted by the             
Secretary -General of the L eague of Nations of every Member  of the League of Nations and to every            
Non-Member State which sign s the same.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 40 
  
1[THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 11 (14)] 
 
 
Sum in dispute  Model fee  
 
Up to Rs. 5,00,000  Rs. 45,000  
 
Above Rs. 5,00,000 and up to Rs. 20,00,000  Rs. 45,000 plus 3.5 per cent. of the claim amount  
over and above Rs. 5,00,000  
 
Above Rs . 20,00,000 and up to Rs. 1,00,00,00 0 Rs. 97,500 plus 3 per cent. of the claim amount  
over and above Rs. 20,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 1,00,00,000 and up to  
Rs. 10,00,00,000  Rs. 3,37,500 plus 1 per cent. of the claim amount  
over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 10,00,00,000 and up to   
Rs. 20,00,00,000   Rs. 12,37,500 plus 0.75 per cent. of the claim  
amount over and above Rs. 1,00,00,000  
 
Above Rs. 20,00,00,000  Rs. 19,87,500 plus 0. 5 per cent. of the claim 
amount over and above Rs. 20,00,00,000 with a 
ceiling  of Rs. 30,00,000  
 
Note: —In the event, the arbitral tribunal is a sole arbitrator, he shall be entitled to an additional amount of 
twenty -five per cent. on the fee payable as per the table set out above.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 3 of 2016, s. 25 (w.e.f.23 -10-2015).  41 
  
 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 12(1) (b)] 
The following grounds give rise to justifiable doubts as to the independence or  impartiality of 
arbitrators:  
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel  
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or pre sent business 
relationship with a party.  
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of  one of the parties.  
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one  of the parties.  
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the  parties.  
5. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involved in  the matters in dispute in 
the arbitration.  
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a previous but terminated involvement in the case  without the 
arbitrator being involved himself or herself.  
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with  one of the parties 
or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
8. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party even 
though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm deriv es a significant financial  income therefrom.  
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of the parties and in the case  of companies 
with the persons in the management and controlling the company.  
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of  the parties or 
an affiliate of one of the parties.  
11. The arbitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the arbitration.  
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the managem ent, or has a similar  controlling 
influence in one of the parties.  
13. The arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of the parties or the  outcome of the case.  
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party, and the 
arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom.  
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute  
15. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute  to a party or an 
affiliate of one of the parties.  
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case.   
Arbitrator’s direct or indirect interest in the dispute  
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an  affiliate of one 
of the parties that is privately held.  
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the  outcome of the 
dispute.  
19. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship  with a third party  
who may be liable to recourse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the  dispute.  
  42 
 Previous services for one of the parties or other involvement in the case  
20. The arbitrator has within the past three years served as counsel for one of the  parties or an affiliate 
of one of the parties or has previously advised or been consulted by  the party or an affiliate of the party 
making the appointment in an unrelated matter, but the  arbitrator and the party or the affiliate of the party 
have no ongoing relations hip. 
21. The arbitrator has within the past three years served as counsel against one of the  parties or an 
affiliate of one of the parties in an unrelated matter.  
22. The arbitrator has within the past three years been appointed as arbitrator on two  or mor e 
occasions by one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
23. The arbitrator’s law firm has within the past three years acted for one of the parties  or an affiliate 
of one of the parties in an unrelated matter without the involvement of the arbitrator.  
24. The arbitrator currently serves, or has served within the past three years, as arbitrator in another 
arbitration on a related issue involving one of the parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
Relationship between an arbitrator and another arbitrator or counsel  
25. The arbitrator and another arbitrator are lawyers in the same law firm.  
26. The arbitrator was within the past three years a partner of, or otherwise affiliated  with, another 
arbitrator or any of the counsel in the same ar bitration.  
27. A lawyer in the arbitrator’s law firm is an arbitrator in another dispute involving the  same party or 
parties or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
28. A close family member of the arbitrator is a partner or employee of the law firm  represe nting one 
of the parties, but is not assisting with the dispute.  
29. The arbitrator has within the past three years received more than three appointments  by the same 
counsel or the same law firm.  
Relationship between arbitrator and party and others involve d in the arbitration  
30. The arbitrator’s law firm is currently acting adverse to one of the parties or an  affiliate of one of 
the parties.  
31. The arbitrator had been associated within the past three years with a party or an  affiliate of one of 
the partie s in a professional capacity, such as a former employee or  partner.  
Other circumstances  
32. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, which by reason of number  or 
denomination constitute a material holding in one of the parties or an affiliate of one of  the parties that is 
publicly listed.  
33. The arbitrator holds a position in an arbitration institution with appointing authority  over the 
dispute.  
34. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties, where the affiliate is not directly  involved in the matters in 
dispute in the arbitration.  
Explanation 1.—The term “close family member” refers to a spouse, sibling, child,  parent or life 
partne r. 
Explanation 2.—The term “affiliate” encompasses all companies in one group of  companies including 
the parent company.  
Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in  certain specific 
kinds of arbitration, such as  maritime or commodities arbitration, to draw  arbitrators from a small, 
specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for  parties frequently to appoint the same 
arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to  be taken into acc ount while applying the rules set out 
above.  43 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 12 (1) (b)] 
NAME:  
CONTACT DETAILS:  
PRIOR EXPERIENCE (INCLUDING EXPERIENCE WITH ARBITRATIONS):  
NUMBER OF ONGOING ARBITRATIONS:  
CIRCUMSTANCES DISCLOSING ANY PAST OR PRESENT RELATIONSHIP WITH OR  
INTEREST IN ANY OF THE PARTIES OR IN RELATION TO THE SUBJECT -MATTER IN  
DISPUTE, WHETHER FINANCIAL, BUSINESS, PROFESSIONAL OR OTHER KIND,  WHICH IS 
LIKELY TO GIVE RISE TO JUSTIFIABLE DOUBTS AS TO YOUR  INDEPENDENCE OR 
IMPARTIALITY (LIST O UT):  
CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH ARE LIKELY TO AFFECT YOUR ABILITY TO DEVOTE 
SUFFICIENT TIME TO THE ARBITRATION AND IN PARTICULAR YOUR ABILITY TO FINISH 
THE ENTIRE ARBITRATION WITHIN TWELVE MONTHS (LIST OUT):  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 44 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 12 (5)] 
Arbitrator’s relationship with the parties or counsel  
1. The arbitrator is an employee, consultant, advisor or has any other past or present  business 
relationship with a party.  
2. The arbitrator currently represents or advises one of the parties or an affiliate of  one of the parties.  
3. The arbitrator currently represents the lawyer or law firm acting as counsel for one  of the parties.  
4. The arbitrator is a lawyer in the same law firm which is representing one of the  parties.  
5. The arbit rator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence, in an affiliate of one of the parties if the affiliate is directly involved in  the matters in dispute in 
the arbitration.  
6. The arbitrator’s law firm had a pre vious but terminated involvement in the case  without the 
arbitrator being involved himself or herself.  
7. The arbitrator’s law firm currently has a significant commercial relationship with  one of the parties 
or an affiliate of one of the parties.  
8. The ar bitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party even 
though neither the arbitrator nor his or her firm derives a significant financial  income therefrom.  
9. The arbitrator has a close family relationship with one of t he parties and in the case  of companies 
with the persons in the management and controlling the company.  
10. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in one of  the parties or 
an affiliate of one of the parties.  
11. The ar bitrator is a legal representative of an entity that is a party in the arbitration.  
12. The arbitrator is a manager, director or part of the management, or has a similar  controlling 
influence in one of the parties.  
13. The arbitrator has a significant fina ncial interest in one of the parties or the  outcome of the case.  
14. The arbitrator regularly advises the appointing party or an affiliate of the appointing  party, and the 
arbitrator or his or her firm derives a significant financial income therefrom.  
Relationship of the arbitrator to the dispute  
15. The arbitrator has given legal advice or provided an expert opinion on the dispute  to a party or an 
affiliate of one of the parties.  
16. The arbitrator has previous involvement in the case.  
Arbitrator’s dir ect or indirect interest in the dispute  
17. The arbitrator holds shares, either directly or indirectly, in one of the parties or an  affiliate of one 
of the parties that is privately held.  
18. A close family member of the arbitrator has a significant financial interest in the  outcome of the 
dispute.  
19. The arbitrator or a close family member of the arbitrator has a close relationship  with a third party 
who may be liable to recourse on the part of the unsuccessful party in the  dispute.  
Explanation 1.—The term “close family member” refers to a spouse, sibling, child,  parent or life 
partner.  
Explanation 2.—The term “affiliate” encompasses all companies in one group of  companies including 
the parent company.  
Explanation 3.—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that it may be the practice in  certain specific 
kinds of arbitration, such as maritime or commodities arbitration, to draw  arbitrators from a small, 
specialised pool. If in such fields it is the custom and practice for  parties frequently to appoi nt the same 
arbitrator in different cases, this is a relevant fact to  be taken into account while applying the rules set out 
above. ] 
 45 
 APPENDIX  
 EXTRACTS FROM THE ARBITRATION AND  CONCILIATION (AMENDMENT ) ACT, 2015  
(3 OF 2016)  
 *   *   *   *   * 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Arbitration and Conciliation 
(Amendment) Act, 2015.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come  into force on the 23rd October, 2015.  
*   *   *   *   * 
 26. Act no t to apply to pending arbitral proceedings. —Nothing contained in this Act shall apply 
to the arbitral proceedings commenced, in accordance with the provisions of section 21 of the principal 
Act, before the commencement of this Act unless the parties otherwise agree but this Act shall apply in 
relati on to arbitral proceedings commenced on or after the date of commencement of this Act.  
27. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Arbitration and Conciliation (Amendment) Ordinance,                   
2015 (Ord. 9 of 2015), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such  repeal, anything done or any action taken under the principal Act, as 
amended by the said Ordinance, shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding 
provisions of the principal Act, as amended by this Act.  
--------------------------The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996--------------------------
  1 
 THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1996  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application . 
2. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
THE ADVISORY COMMITTEES AND EXPERT COMMITTEES  
3. Central Advisory Committee . 
4. State Advisory Committee . 
5. Expert committees . 
 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS  
6. Appointment of registe ring officers.  
7. Registration of establishments . 
8. Revocation of registration in certain cases.  
9. Appeal . 
10. Effect of non -registration.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF BUILDING WORKERS AS BENEFICIARIES  
11. Beneficiaries of the Fund . 
12. Registration o f building workers as beneficiaries . 
13. Identity cards.  
14. Cessation as a benefici ary. 
15. Register of beneficiaries . 
16. Contribution of building wo rkers . 
17. Effect of non -payment of contribution . 
 
CHAPTER V  
BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS ’ WELFARE BOARDS  
18. Constitution of State Welfare Boards . 
19. Secretary and other officers of Boards . 
20. Meetings of Board s. 
21. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Boards . 
22. Functions of the Boards . 
23. Grants and loans by the Central Gove rnment . 
24. Building and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Fund and its application .   2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Budget.  
26. Annual report . 
27. Accounts and audit . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
HOURS OF WORK, WELFARE MEASURES AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF BUILDING WORKERS  
28. Fixing hours for normal working day, etc . 
29. Wages f or overtime work . 
30. Maintenance of registers and records . 
31. Prohibition of employment of certain persons in certain building or other construction  work . 
32. Drinking water . 
33. Latrines and urinals . 
34. Accommodation . 
35. Creches.  
36. First-aid 
37. Canteens,  etc. 
 
CHAPTER VII  
SAFETY AND HEALTH MEASURES  
38. Safety Committee and safety o fficers . 
39. Notice of certain accidents.  
40. Power of appropriate Government to make rules for the safety and health of building worker s. 
41. Framing of  model rules for safety measures . 
 
CHAPTER VIII  
INSPECTING STAFF  
42. Appointment of Director -General, Chief Inspector and Inspectors . 
43. Powers of Inspectors . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
44. Responsibility of employers . 
45. Responsibi lity for payment of wages and compensation . 
46. Notice of commencement of building or other construction work . 
 
CHAPTER X  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
47. Penalty for contravention of provisions regarding safety measures . 
48. Penalty for failure to give notice of the commencement of the building or other constructio n 
work . 
49. Penalty for obstructions . 
50. Penalty for other offences . 
51. Appeal . 
52. Recovery of penalty .   3 
 SECTIONS  
53. Offences by  companies . 
54. Cognizance of offences . 
55. Limitation of prosecutions . 
 
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
56. Delegation of powers . 
57. Returns . 
58. Application of Act 8 of 1923  to building workers . 
59. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
60. Power of Central Government to give directions . 
61. Power to remove difficulties . 
62. Power to make rules . 
63. Saving of certain laws . 
64. Repeal and saving . 
    4 
 THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS (REGULATION OF 
EMPLOYMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE) ACT, 1996  
ACT NO. 27 OF 1996  
[19th August,  1996.] 
An Act to regulate the employment and conditions of service of building and other construction 
workers and to provide for their safety, health and welfare measure s and for other matter s 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seven th Year of the Republic of India as fo llows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, exten t, commencement and application .—(1) This Act may be called the Building 
and Other Construction Wo rkers (Regulation of Employment a nd Conditions of Service) Act, 1996.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st  day of March, 1996.  
(4) It applies to every establishment which employs, or had employed on any day of the preceding 
twelve months, ten or more building workers in any building or other construction work.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the building workers employed in different relays 
in a day either by the employer or the contractor shall be taken into account in computing the number o f 
building workers employed in the establishment.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means,— 
(i) in relation to an establishment (which employs building workers either directly or through 
a contractor) in respect of which the appropriate Government under the Industrial Disputes Act, 
1947 (14 of 1947), is the Central Government, the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to any such establishment, being a public sector undertaking, as the Central 
Government may by notification specify which employs building workers either directly or 
through a contractor, the Central Government ; 
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -clause ( ii), “public sector undertaking ” means any 
corporation established b y or under any Central, State or P rovincial Act or a Government 
company as defined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) which is owned, 
controlled or managed by the Central Government;  
(iii) in relation to any other establishment which emp loys building workers either directly or 
through a contractor, the Government of the State in which that other establishment is situate;  
(b) “beneficiary ” means a building worker registered under section 12;  
(c) “Board ” means a Building  and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Board constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 18;  
(d) ”building or other construction work ” means the construction, alteration, repairs, maintenance 
or demoli tion, of or, in relation to, buildings, streets, roa ds, railways, tramways, airfields, irrigation, 
drainage, embankment and navigation works, flood control works (including storm water drainage 
works), generation, transmission and distribution of power, water works (including channels for 
distribution of wa ter), oil and gas installations, electric lines, wireless, radio , television, telephone, 
telegraph and overseas communication s, dams, canals, reservoirs, watercourses, tunnels, bridges, 
viaducts, aqu educts, pipelines, towers, cooling towers, transmission t owers and such other work as 
may be specified in this behalf by the appropriate Government, by notification but does not include   5 
 any building or other construction work to which the provisions of the Factories Act, 1948               
(63 of 1948), or the Mi nes Act, 1952 (35 of 1952), apply;  
(e) “building worker ” means a person who is employed to do any skilled, semi -skilled or 
unskilled , manual, supervisory, technical or clerical work for hire or reward, whether the terms of 
employment be expressed or implied, in connection with any building or other construction work but 
does not include any such person — 
(i) who is employed mainly in a m anagerial  or administrative capacity; or  
(ii) who, being employed in a supervisory capacity, draws wages exceeding one thousand six 
hundred rupees per mensem or exercises, either by the nature of the duties attached to the office 
or by reason of the powers  vested in him, functions mainly of a managerial nature;  
(f) “Chief Inspector ” means the Chief Inspector of Inspection of Building and Construction 
appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 42;  
(g)  “contractor ” means a person who undertakes to produce a given result for any establishment, 
other than a mere supply of goods or articles of manufacture, by the employment of building workers 
or who supplies building workers for any work of the establishment; and incl udes a sub -contractor;  
(h) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of Inspection appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 42;  
(i) “employer ”, in relation to an establishment, means t he owner thereof, and includes, — 
(i) in relation to a building or other construction work carried on by or under the authority of 
any department of the Government, directly without any contractor, the authority specified in this 
behalf, or where no authority is specified, the head of the department;  
(ii) in relation to a  building or other construction work carried on by or on behalf of a local 
authority or other establishment, directly without any contractor, the chief executive officer of 
that authority or establishment;  
(iii) in relation to a building or other construction work carried on by or th rough a contractor, 
or by the employment of building workers supplied by a contractor, the contractor;  
(j)  “establishment ” means any establishment belonging to, or under the control of, Government, 
any body corporate o r firm, an individual or association or other body of individuals which or who 
employs building workers in any building or other construction work; and includes an establishment 
belonging to a contractor, but does not include an individual who employs such  workers in any 
building or construction work in relation to his own residence the total cost of such construction not 
being more than rupees ten lakhs;  
(k) “Fund ” means the Building and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Fund of a Board 
constituted under  sub-section ( 1) of section 24;  
(l) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(m) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act by the Central Government or, as 
the case may be, the State Government;  
(n) “wages ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( vi) of section 2 of the 
Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936).  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any law which is not in force in any area shall, in relation to that area, 
be construed as a referenc e to the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area.  
CHAPTER II  
THE ADVISORY COMMITTEES AND EXPERT COMMITTEES  
3. Central Advisory Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be, constitute 
a Committee to be called the Central Building and Other Construction Workers’  Advisory Committee   6 
 (hereinafter referred to as the Central Advisory Committee) to advise the Central Government on s uch 
matters arising out of the administration of this Act as may be referred to it.  
(2) The Central Advi sory Committee shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government;  
(b) three  Members of Parliament of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People a nd 
one by the Council of States —members;  
(c) the Director -General—member,  ex officio ; 
(d) such number of other members, not exceeding thirteen but not less  than nine, as the Ce ntral 
Government may nominate to represent the employers, building workers, associations of architects, 
engineers, accident insurance institutions and any other interests which, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, ought to be represented on the Centr al Advisory Committee.  
(3) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in  
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of , the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge of the ir functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members 
of the Central Advisory Committee shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the members nominated to represent the building workers shall not be less than the 
number of members  nominated to represent the employers.  
(4) It is hereby declared that the office of member of the Central Advisory Committee shall not 
disqualify its holder for being chosen as, or for being, a Member of either House of Parliament.  
4. State Advisory Commit tee.—(1) The State Government shall constitute a committee to be called 
the State Building and Other Construction Workers’  Advisory Committee (hereinafter referred to as the 
State Advisory Committee) to advise the State Government on such matters arising o ut of the 
administration of this Act as may be referred to it.  
(2) The State Advi sory Committee shall consist of — 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the State Government;  
(b) two members of the State Legislature to be elected fro m the State Legislature —members;  
(c) a member to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(d) the Chief Inspector —member , ex officio ; 
(e) such number of other members, not exceeding eleven, but not less than seven , as the State 
Government may nominate to represent the employers, building workers, associations of architects, 
engineers, accident insurance institutions and any other interests which, in the opinion of the State 
Government, ought to be represented on the  State Advisory Committee.  
(3) The number of persons to be appointed as members from each of the categories specified in  
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2), the term of office and other conditions of service of , the procedure to be 
followed in the discharge of  their functions by, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members 
of State Advisory Committee shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the number of members nominated to represent the building workers shall not be less 
than the number of  members nominated to represent the employers.  
5. Expert committees .—(1) The appropriate Government may constitute one or more expert 
committees consisting of persons specially qualified in building or other construction work for advising 
that Government f or making rules under this Act.  
(2) The members of the expert committee shall be paid such fees and allowances for attending the 
meetings of the committee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no fee or allowances shall be payable to a member who is an offic er of Government or 
of any body corporate established by or under any law for the time being in force.    7 
 CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF ESTABLISHMENTS  
6. Appointment of registering officers .—The appropriate Government may, by order no tified in the 
Official Gazette,— 
(a) appoint such persons , being Gazetted Officers of Government, as it thinks fit, to be the 
registering officers for the purposes of this Act; and  
(b) define the limits within which a registering officer shall exercise the powers conferred on hi m 
by or under this Act.  
7. Registration of establishments .—(1) Every e mployer shall, — 
(a) in relation to an establishment to which this Act applies on its commencement, within a period 
of sixty days from such commencement; and  
(b) in relation to any other establishment to which this Act may be applicable at any time after 
such commencement, within a period of sixty days from the date on which this Act becomes 
applicable to such establishment,  
make an application to the registering off icer for the registration of such establishment:  
Provided that the registering officer may entertain any such application after the expiry of the periods 
aforesaid, if he is satisfied that the applicant was prevented by sufficient cause from making the 
application within such period.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and shall contain such particular s 
and shall be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) After the receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the registering officer shall register the 
establishment and issue a certificate of registration to the employer thereof in such form and within such 
time and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.  
(4) Where, after the registration of an establishme nt under this section, any change occurs in the 
ownership or management or other prescribed particulars in respect of such establishment, the particulars 
regarding such change shall be intimated by the employer to the registering officer within thirty days  of 
such change in such form as may be prescribed.  
8. Revocation of registration in certain cases .—If the registering officer is satisfied, either on a 
reference made to him in this behalf or otherwise, that the registration of any establishment has been 
obtained by misrepresentation or suppression of any material fact or that the provisions of this Act are not 
being complied with in relation to any work carried on by such establishment, or that for any other reason 
the registration has become useless or in effective and, therefore, requires to be revoked, he may, after 
giving an opportunity to the employer of the establishment to be heard, revoke the registration.  
9. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order made under section 8 may, within thirty days from 
the date on which the order is communicated to him, prefer an appeal to the appellate officer who shall be 
a person nominated in this behalf by the appropriate Government:  
Provided that the appellate officer may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty 
days if he is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(2) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate officer shall, after giving the appellant 
an opportun ity of being heard, confirm, modify or reverse the order of revocation as expeditiously as 
possible.  
10. Effect of non -registration .—No employer of an establishment to  which this Act applies shall, — 
(a) in the case of an establishment required to be regist ered under section 7, but which has not 
been registered under that section;  
(b) in the case of an establishment the registration in respect of which  has been revoked under 
section 8 and no appeal has been preferred against such order of revocation under se ction 9 within the   8 
 period prescribed for the preferring of such appeal or where an appeal has been so preferred, such 
appeal has been dismissed,  
employ building workers in the establishment after the expiry of the period referred to in clause ( a) or 
clause  (b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 7, or after the revocation of registration under section 8 or after the 
expiry of the period for preferring an appeal under section 9 or after the dismissal of the appeal, as the 
case may be.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF BUILDING WORKERS AS BENEFICIARIES  
11. Beneficiaries of the Fund .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, every building worker 
registered as a beneficiary under this Act shall be entitled to the benefits provided by the Board from its 
Fund under this Act.  
12. Registration of building workers as beneficiaries .—(1) Every building worker who has 
completed eighteen years of age, but has not completed sixty years of age, and who has been engaged in 
any building or other construction work for not less than ninety days during the preceding twelve months 
shall be eligible for registration as a beneficiary under this Act.  
(2) An application for registration shall be made in such form, as may be prescribed, to the officer 
authorise d by the Board in this behalf.  
(3) Eve ry application under sub -section ( 2) shall be accompanied by such documents together with 
such fee not exceeding fifty rupees as may be prescribed.  
(4) If the officer authorise d by the Board under sub -section ( 2) is satisfied that the applicant has 
complie d with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, he shall register the name of the 
building worker as a beneficiary under this Act:  
Provided that an application for registration shall not be rejected without giving the applicant an 
opportunity of being heard.  
(5) Any person aggrieved by the decision under sub -section ( 4) may, within thirty days from the date 
of such decision, prefer an appeal to the Secretary of the Board or any other officer specified by the Board 
in this behalf and  the decision of the Secretary or such other officer on such appeal shall be final:  
Provided that the Secretary or any other officer specified by the Board in this behalf may entertain the 
appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days if he is satisfied that the building worker was 
prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in time.  
(6) The Secretary of the Board shall cause to maintain such registers as may be prescribed.  
13. Identity cards .—(1) The Board shall give to every beneficia ry an identity card with his 
photograph duly affixed thereon and with enough space for entering the details of the building or other 
construction work done by him.  
(2) Every employer shall enter in the identity card the details of the building or other con struction 
work done by the beneficiary and authenticate the same and return it to the beneficiary.  
(3) A beneficiary who has been issued an identity card under this Act shall produce the same 
whenever demanded by any officer of Government or the Board, any  inspector or any other authority for 
inspection.  
14. Cessation as a beneficiary .—(1) A building worker who has been registered as a beneficiary 
under this Act shall cease to be as such when he attains the age of sixty years or when he is not engaged 
in building or other construction work for not less than ninety days in a year:  
Provided that in computing the period of ninety days under this sub -section, there shall be excluded 
any period of absence from the building or other construction work due to any personal injury caused to 
the building worker by accident arising out of and in the course of his employment.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), if a person had been a beneficiary for at 
least three years continuously immediately be fore attaining the age of sixty years, he shall be eligible to 
get such benefits as may be  prescribed.    9 
 Explanation .—For computing the period of three years as a beneficiary with a Board under this    sub-
section, there shall be added any period for which a  person had been a beneficiary with any other Board 
immediately before his registration.  
15. Register of beneficiaries .—Every employer shall maintain a register in such form as may be 
prescribed showing the details of employment of beneficiaries employed i n the building or other 
construction work undertaken by him and the same may be inspected without any prior notice by the 
Secretary of the Board or any other officer duly authorise d by the Board in this behalf.  
16. Contribution of building workers .—(1) A b uilding worker who has been registered as a 
beneficiary under this Act shall, until he attains the age of sixty years, contribute to the Fund at such rate 
per mensem, as may be specified by the State Government, by notification in the Official Gazette and 
different rates of contribution may be specified for different classes of building workers:  
Provided that the Board may, if satisfied that a beneficiary is unable to pay his contribution due to any 
financial hardship, waive the payment of contribution for a period not exceeding three months at a time.  
(2) A beneficiary may authorise  his employer to deduct his contribution from his monthly wages and 
to remit the same, within fifteen days fro m such deduction, to the Board.  
17. Effect of non -payment of contribution .—When a beneficiary has not paid his contribution 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 16 for a continuous period of not less than one year, he shall cease to be a 
beneficiary:  
Provided that if the Secretary of the Board is satisfied that the non -payment of contribution was for a 
reasonable ground and that the building worker is willing to deposit the arrears, he may allow the building 
worker to deposit the contribution in arrears and on such deposit being made, the registration of building 
worker shall stand restored.  
CHAPTER V  
BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS ’ WELFARE BOARDS  
18. Constitution of State Welfare Boards .—(1) Every State Government shall, with effect from 
such date as it may, by notification, appoint, constitute a Board to be known as the  …… (name of the 
State) Building and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Board to exercise the powers conferred on, and 
perform the functions assigned to, it under this Act.  
(2) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The Board shall consist of a chairperson, a person to be nominated by the Central Government 
and such number of other members, not exceeding fifteen, as may be appointed  to it by the State 
Government:  
Provided that the Board shall include an equal number of members representing the State 
Government, the employers and the building workers and that at least one membe r of the Board shall be a 
woman.  
(4) The terms and conditi ons of appointment and the salaries and other allowances payable to the 
chairperson and the other members of the Board, and the manner of filling of casual vacancies of the 
members of the Board, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
19. Secretary and other o fficers of Boards .—(1) The Board shall appoint a Secretary and such other 
officers and employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The secretary of the Board shall be its chief executive officer.  
(3) The terms a nd conditions of appointment and  the salary  and allowances payable to the Secretary 
and the other officers and employees of the Board shall be such as may be prescribed.  
20. Meetings of Board s.—(1) The Board shall meet at such time and place and observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at such meetings) 
as may be prescribed.    10 
 (2) The chairperson or, if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the Board, any member 
nominated by the chairperson in this behalf and in the absence of such nomination, any other member 
elected by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of th e Board shall be decided by a majority of 
votes of the members present and voting, and in the event of equality of votes, the chairperson, or in his 
absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or a casting vote.  
21. Vacancies,  etc. , not to invalidat e proceedings of the Boards .—No act or proceedings of a 
Board shall  be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Board; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Board; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Board not affecting the merits of the case.  
22. Functions of the Boards .—(1) The Board m ay— 
(a) provide immediate assistance to a beneficiary in case of accident;  
(b) make payment of pension to the beneficiaries w ho have completed the age of sixty years;  
(c) sanction loans and advances to a beneficiary for construction of a house not exceeding such 
amount and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed;  
(d) pay such amount in connection with premia   for Group  Insurance Scheme of the beneficiaries 
as it may deem fit;  
(e) give such financial assistance for the education of children of the beneficiaries as may be 
prescribed;  
(f) meet such medical expenses for treatment of major ailments of a beneficiary or, such 
dependant, as may be prescribed;  
(g) make payment of maternity benefit to the female beneficiaries; and  
(h) make provision and improvement of such other welfare measures and facilities as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The Board may grant loan or subsidy to a local authority or an employer in aid of any scheme 
approved by the State Government for the purpose connected with the welfare of building workers in any 
establishment . 
(3) The Board may pay annually grants -in-aid to a local authority or to an employer wh o provides to 
the satisfaction of the Board welfare measures and facilities of the standard specified by the Board for the 
benefit of the building workers and the members of' their family, so, however, that the amount payable as 
grants -in-aid to any local authori ty or employer shall not exceed — 
(a) the amount spent in providing welfare measures and facilities as determined by the State 
Government or any person specified by it in this behalf, or  
(b) such amount as may be prescribed,  
whichever is less:  
Provid ed that no grant -in-aid shall be payable in respect of any such welfare measures and facilities 
where the amount spent thereon determined as aforesaid is less than the a mount prescribed in this behalf.  
23. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Ce ntral Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to a Board grants and loans of such sums of 
money as the Go vernment may consider necessary.  
24. Building and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Fund and its appli cation .—(1) There 
shall be constituted by a Board a fund  to be called the Building and O ther Construction Workers’  Welfare  
   11 
 Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Board by the Centr al Government under section 23;  
(b) all contributions made by the beneficiaries;  
(c) all sums received by the Board from such other sources as may be de cided by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The Fu nd shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) expenses  of the Board in the discharge of its functions under section 22; and  
(b) salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and other employees of 
the Board;  
(c) expenses on objects and for purposes authorise d by this Act.  
(3) No Board shall, in any financial year, incur expenses towards salaries, allowances and other 
remuneration to its members, officers and other employees and for meeting the other administrative 
expenses exceeding five per  cent. of its total expenses during that finan cial year.  
25 Budget .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year, as may be 
prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Board and forward the same to the State Go vernment and the Central Gov ernment.  
26. Annual report .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time each financial year as 
may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year, and subm it a copy thereof to the State Government and the Central Government.  
27. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed in consultat ion with the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the auditing of the accounts of the Board under this Act shall have the same rights and 
privileg es and the authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of 
India has in connection with the auditing of the Government accounts and , in particular shall have the 
right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected  vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect any of the offices of the Board under this Act.  
(3) The accounts of the Board shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
annually and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Board to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(4) The Board shall furnish to the State Government before such date as may be prescribed its audited 
copy of accounts together with the auditor's report.  
(5) The State Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's report to be laid, as soon as may 
be after they are received, before the State Legislature.  
CHAPTER VI  
HOURS OF WORK, WELFARE MEASURES AND OTHER CONDITIONS OF SERVICE OF BUILDING WORKERS  
28. Fixi ng hours for normal working day, etc .—(1) The approp riate Government may, by rules, — 
(a) fix the number of hours of work which shall constitute  a normal working day for a building 
worker, inclusive of one or more specified intervals;  
(b) provide  for a day of rest in every period of seven days which shall be allowed to all building 
workers and for the payment of remuneration in respect of such days of rest;  
(c) provide for payment of work on a day of rest at a rate not less than the overtime rate specified 
in section 29.    12 
 (2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall, in relation to the following classes of building workers, 
apply only to such extent, and subject to such conditions, as may be prescrib ed, namely: — 
(a) persons engaged on urgent work, or  in any emergency which could not have been foreseen or 
prevented;  
(b) persons engaged in a work in the nature of preparatory or complementary work which must 
necessarily be carried on outside the normal hours of work laid down in the rules;  
(c) persons en gaged in any work which for technical reasons has to be c ompleted before the day 
is over;  
(d) persons engaged in a work which could not be carried on except at times dependant on the 
irregular action of natural forces.  
29. Wages for overtime work .—(1) Wher e any building worker is required to work on any day in 
excess of the number of hours constituting a normal working day , he shall be entitled to wages at the rate 
of twice his ordinary rate of wages.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, “ordinary rates of  wages ” means the basic wages plus such 
allowances as the worker is for the time being entitled to but does not include any bonus.  
30. Maintenance of registers and records .—(1) Every employer shall maintain such registers and 
records giving such particular s of building workers employed by him, the work performed by them, the 
number of hours of work which shall constitute a normal working day for them, a day of rest in every 
period of seven days which shall be allowed to them, the wages paid to them, the rec eipts given by them 
and such other particulars in such form as my be prescribed.  
(2) Every employer shall keep exhibited, in such manner as may be prescribed, in the place where 
such workers may be employed, notices in the prescribed form containing the pr escribed particulars.  
(3) The appropriate Government may, by rules, provide for the issue of wage books or wage slips to 
building workers employed in an establishment and prescribe the manner in which entries shall be made 
and authenticated in such wage bo oks or wage slips by the employer or his agent.  
31. Prohibition of employment of certain persons in certain building or other construction 
work .—No person about whom the employer knows or has reason to believe that he is a deaf or he has a 
defective vision  or he has a tendency to giddiness shall be  required or allowed to work in any such 
operation of building or other construction work which is likely to involve a risk of any accident either to 
the building worker himself or to any other person.  
32. Drinking water .—(1) The employer shall make in every place where building or other 
construction work is in progress, effective arrangements to provide and maintain at suitable points 
conveniently situated for all persons employed therein, a sufficient supp ly of wholesome drinking water.  
(2) All such points shall be legibl y marked “Drinking Water ” in a language understood by a majority 
of the person s employed in such place and no such point shall be situated within six metres of any 
washing place, urinal or latrine.  
33. Latrines and urinals .—In every place where building or other construction work is carried on, 
the employer shall provide sufficient latrine and urinal accommodation of such types as may be 
prescribed and they shall be so conveniently situated as may be accessible to the building workers at all 
times while they are in such place:  
Provided that it shall not be necessary to provide separate urinals in any place where less than fifty 
persons are employed or where the latrines are connected to a wat er-borne sewage system.  
34. Accommodation .—(1) The employer shall provide, free of charges and within the work site or as 
near to it as may be possible , temporary living accommodation to all building workers employed by him 
for such period as the building or other construction work is in progress.  
(2) The temporary accommodation provided under sub -section ( 1) shall have separate cooking place , 
bathing, washing and lavatory facilities .   13 
 (3) As soon as may be, after the building or other construction work is over, the employer shall, at his 
own cost, cause removal or demolition of the temporary structures erected by him for the purpose of 
providing living accommodation , cooking place or other facilities to the building workers as required 
under sub -section ( 1) and restore the ground in good level and clean condition.  
(4) In case an employer is given an y land by a Municipal Board or  any other local authority for the 
purposes of providing temporary accommodation for the building workers under this section, he sha ll, as 
soon as may be after the construction work is over, return the possession of such land in the same 
condition in which he received the same.  
35. Creches .—(1) In every place wherein , more than  fifty female building workers are ordinarily 
employed, there shall be provided and maintained a suitable room or rooms for the use of children under 
the age of six years of such female workers.  
(2) Such rooms shall — 
(a) provide adequate accommodation;  
(b) be adequately lighted and ventilated;  
(c) be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition;  
(d) be under the charge of women trained in the care of children and infants.  
36. First -aid.—Every  employer shall provide in all the places where building or other construction 
work is carried on such first -aid facilities as may be prescribed.  
37. Canteens,  etc.—The appropriate Government may , by rules , require the employer — 
(a) to provide and maintain  in every place wherein not less than two hundred and fifty building 
workers are ordinarily employed, a canteen for the use of the workers;  
(b) to provide such other welfare measures for the benefit of building workers as may be 
prescribed.  
CHAPTER VII  
SAFETY AND HEALTH MEASURES  
38. Safety Committee and safety officers .—(1) In every establishment wherein five hundred or 
more building workers are ordinarily employed, the employer shall constitute a Safety Committee 
consisting of such number of representati ves of the employer and the building workers as may be 
prescribed by the State Government:  
Provided that the number of persons representing the workers, shall, in no case, be less than the 
persons representing the employer.  
(2) In every establishment refer red to in sub -section ( 1), the employer shall also appoint a safety 
officer who shall possess such qualifications and perform such duties as may be prescribed.  
39. Notice of certain accidents .—(1) Where in any establishment an accident occurs which causes 
death or which causes any bodily injury by reason of which the person injured is prevented from working 
for a period of forty -eight hours or more immediately following the accident, or which is of such a nature 
as may be prescribed, the employer shall give  notice thereof to such authority, in such form and within 
such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) On receipt of a notice under sub -section ( 1) the authority referred to in that sub -section may make 
such investigation or inquiry as it considers necessary.  
(3) Where a notice given under sub -section ( 1) relates to an accident causing death of five or more 
persons, the authority shall make an inquiry into such accident within one month of the receipt of the 
notice.  
40. Power of appropriate Gover nment to make  rules  for the safety and health of building 
workers .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification, make rules regarding the measures to 
be taken for the safety and health of building workers in the course of their employment and the   14 
 equipment and applian ces necessary to be provided to them for ensuring their safety, health and 
protection, during such employment.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following mat ters, namely: — 
(a) the safe means of access to, and the safety of, any working place, including the provision of 
suitable and sufficient scaffolding at various stages when work cannot be safely done from the ground 
or from any part of a building or from a ladder or such other means of support;  
(b) the precautions to be taken in connection with the demolition of the whole or any substantial 
part of a building or other structure under the supervision of a competent person and the avoidance of 
danger from coll apse of any building or other structure while removing any part of the framed 
building or other structure by shoring or otherwise;  
(c) the handling or use of explosive under the control of competent persons so that there is no 
exposure to the risk of injur y from explosion or from flying material;  
(d) the erection , installation, use and maintenance of transporting equipment, such as 
locomotives, trucks, wagons and other vehicles and trailers and appointment of competent persons to 
drive or operate such equip ment;  
(e) the erection, installation, use and maintenance of hoists, lifting appliances and lifting gear 
including periodical testing and examination and heat treatment , where necessary, precautions to be 
taken while raising or lowering loads, restrictions  on carriage of persons and appointment of 
competent persons on hoists or other lifting appliances;  
(f) the adequate and suitable lighting of every workplace and approach thereto, of every place 
where raising or lowering operations with the use of hoists, lifting appliances or lifting gears are in 
progress and of all openings dangerous to building workers employed;  
(g) the precautions to be taken to prevent inhalation of dust, fumes , gases or vapours during any 
grinding, cleaning,  spraying or manipulation o f any material and steps to be taken to secure and 
maintain adequate ventilation of eve ry working place or confined spa ce; 
(h) the measures to be taken during stacking or unstacking, stowing or unstowing  of materials or 
goods or handling in connection therewith;  
(i) the safeguarding of machinery including the fencing of every fly -wheel and every moving part 
of a prime mover and every part of transmission or other machinery, unless it is in such a position  or 
of such construction as to be safe to every worker working on  any of the operations an d as if it were 
securely fenced;  
(j) the safe handling and use of plant, including tools and equipment operated by compressed air ; 
(k) the precaution s to be taken in case of fire;  
(l) the limits of weight to be lifted or moved by workers;  
(m) the safe transport of workers to or from any workplace by water and provision of means for 
rescue from drowning;  
(n) the steps to be taken to prevent danger to workers from live e lectric wires or apparatus 
including electrical machinery and tools and from overhead wires;  
(o) the keeping of safety nets, safety sheets and safety belts where the special nature or the 
circumstances of work render them necessary for the safety of the wo rkers;  
(p) the standards to be complied with regard to scaffolding, ladders and stairs, lifting appliances , 
ropes, chains and accessories, earth moving equipment s and floating operational equipments;  
(q) the precautions to be taken with regard to pile driving, concrete work, work with hot asphalt, 
tar or other similar things, insulation work, demolition operations, excavation, underground 
construction and handling materials;    15 
 (r) the safety policy, that is to say, a policy relating to steps to be taken t o ensure the safety and 
health of the building workers, the administrative arrangements therefor and the matters connected 
therewith, to be framed by the employers and contractors for the operations to be carried on in a 
building or other construction work ; 
(s) the information to be furnished to the Bureau of Indian Standard s established under the 
Bureau of Indian Standards Act, 1986 (63 of 1986), regarding the use of any article or process 
covered under that Act in a buil ding or other construction work;  
(t) the provision and maintenance of medical facilities for building workers;  
(u) any other matter concerning the safety and health of workers working in any of the operations 
being carried on in a building or other construction work.  
41. Framing of model ru les for safety measures .—The Central Government may, after considering 
the recommendation of the expert committee constituted under section 5, fra me model rules in respect of 
all or any of the matters specified in section 40 and where any such model rules have been framed in 
respect of any such matter, the appropriate Government shall , while making any rules in respect of that 
matter under section 40, so far as is practicable, conform to such model rules.  
CHAPTER VIII  
INSPECTING STAFF  
42. Appointment of Director -General, Chief Inspector and Inspectors .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint a Gazetted Officer of that  Government to be the Director -
General of Inspection who shall be responsible for laying down the standa rds of inspection and shall also 
exercise the powers of an Inspector throughout India in relation to all the establishments for which the 
Central Government is the appropriate Government.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification, appoint a Gazetted Of ficer of that Government to be 
the Chief Inspector of Inspection of Building and Construction who shall be responsible for effectively 
carrying out the provisions of this Act in the State and shall also exercise the powers of an Inspector 
under this Act th roughout the State in relation to establishments for which the State Government is the 
appropriate Government.  
(3) The appropriate Government may, by notification, appoint such number of its officers as it thinks 
fit to be Inspectors for the purposes of th is Act and may assign to them such local limits as it may think 
fit. 
(4) Every Inspector appointed under this section shall be  subject to the control of the Director -General 
or the Chief Inspector, as the case may be, and shall exercise his powers and perf orm his functions under 
this Act subject to general control and supervision of the Director -General or the Chief Inspector.  
(5) The Director -General , the Chief Inspector and every Inspector shall be deemed to be public 
servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
43. Powers of Inspectors .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, an Inspector may, within the 
local limits for which he is appointed, — 
(a) enter, at all reasonable hours, with such assistants (if any) being persons in the service of the 
Government or any local or other public authority as he thinks fit, any premises or place where 
building or other con struction work is carried on, for the purpose of examining any register or record 
or notices required to be kept or exhibited by or under this Act, and require the production thereof for 
inspection;  
(b) examine  any person whom he finds in any such premises or place and who, he has reasonable 
cause to believe, is a building worker employed therein;  
(c) require any person giving out building or other construction work to any building worker, to 
give any informatio n, which is in his power to give with respect to the names and addresses of the   16 
 persons to, for and whom the building or other construction work is given out or received, and with 
respect to the payments to be made for the building or other construction wo rk; 
(d) seize or take copies of such register, record of wages or notices or portions thereof as he may 
consider relevant in respect of an offence under this Act which he has reason to believe has been 
committed by the employer; and  
(e) exercise such other  powers as may be prescribed.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, the Director -General or the Chief Inspector, as the case may be, 
may employ experts or agencies having such qualifications and experience and on such terms and 
conditions as may be prescri bed. 
(3) Any person required to produce any document or to give any information required by an Inspector 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 175 and 
section 176 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall, so far as may be, apply 
to such search or seizure under sub -section ( 1) as they apply to any search or seizure made under the 
authority of a warrant issued under section 94 of the said Code.  
CHAPTER IX  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS  
44. Responsibility of employers .—An employer shall be responsible for providing constant and 
adequate supervision of any building or other construction work in his establishment as to ensure 
compliance with the provisions of this Act relating to safety and for taking all practical steps necessary to 
prevent accidents.  
45. Responsibility for payment of wages and compensation .—(1) An employer shall be responsible 
for payment of wages to each building worker employed by him and such wages shall be paid on or 
before such date as may be prescribed.  
(2) In case the contractor fails to make payment of compensation in respect of a building worker 
employed by him, where he is liable to make such payment when due, or makes short payment thereof, 
then, in the case of death or disablement of the building worker, the employer shall be liable to make 
payment of that compensation in full or the unpaid balance due in accordance with the provisions of the 
Workmen's Co mpensation Act, 1923 (8 of 1923), and recover the amount so paid from the contractor 
either by deduction from any amount payable to the contractor under any contract or as a debt payable by 
the contractor.  
46. Notice of commencement of building or other co nstruction work .—(1) An employer shall, at 
least thirty days before the commencement of any building or other construction work, send or cause to be 
sent to the Inspector having jurisdiction in the area where the proposed building or other construction 
work is to be execut ed, a written notice containing — 
(a) the name and situation of the place where the building or other construction work is proposed 
to be carried on;  
(b) the name and address of the person who is undertaking the buil ding or other construction 
work;  
(c) the address to which communications relating to the building or other construction work may 
be sent;  
(d) the nature of the work involved and the facilities, including any plant and machinery, 
provided;  
(e) the arrangements for the st orage of explosives, if any, to be used in the building or other 
construction work;  
(f) the number of workers likely to be employed during the various stages of building or other 
construction work;    17 
 (g) the name and designation of the person who will be in overall charge of the building or other 
construction work at the site;  
(h) the approximate duration of the work;  
(i) such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where any change occurs in any of the particulars furnished under sub -section ( 1), the employe r 
shall intimate the change to the Inspector within two days of such change.  
(3) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall apply in case of such class of building or other 
construction work as the appropriate Government may by notification specify to be e mergent works.  
CHAPTER X  
PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
47. Penalty for contravention of provisions regarding safety measures. —(1) Whoever contravenes 
the provisions of any rules made under section 40 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both, and in 
the case of a continuing contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to one hundred rupees 
for every day during which such contravention continue s after conviction for the first such contravention.  
(2) If any person who has been convicted of any offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) is again 
guilty of an offence involving a contravention or failure of compliance of the same provision, he shall b e 
punishable on a subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months or 
with fine which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but which may extend to two thousand rupees 
or with both:  
Provided that for the purposes of th is sub -section, no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction 
made more than two years before the commission of the offence for which the person is subsequently 
being convicted:  
Provided further that the authority imposing the penalty, if it is satisfied that there are exceptional 
circumstances warranting such a course may, after recording its reasons in writing, impose a fine of less 
than five hundred rupees.  
48. Penalty for failure to give notice of the commencement of the building or other construction 
work .—Where an employer fails to give notice of the commencement of the building or other 
construction work under section 46, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees, or with both.  
49. Penalty for obstructions .—(1) Whoever obstructs an Inspector in the discharge of his duties 
under this Act or refuses or wil fully neglects to afford the Inspector any reasonable facility for making 
any inspection, examina tion, inquiry or investigation authorise d by or under this Act in relation to an 
establishment shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months, or 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever wilfully refuses to produce on the demand of an Inspector any register or other 
document kept in pursuance of this Act or prevents or attempts to prevent or does anything which he has 
reason to believe is likely to prevent any person from appeari ng before, or being examined by , an 
Inspector acting in pursuance of his duties under this Act shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three months, or with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees, or with 
both.  
50. Penalt y for other offences .—(1) Whoever contravenes any other provision of this Act or any 
rules made thereunder or who fails to comply with any provision of this Act or any rules made thereunder 
shall, where no express penalty is elsewhere provided for such con travention or failure, be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one thousand rupees for every such contravention or failure, as the case 
may be, and in the case of a continuing contravention or failure, as the case may be , with an additional 
fine which may extend to one hundred rupees for every day during which such contravention or failure 
continues after the conviction for the first such contravention or failure.    18 
 (2) A penalty under sub -section ( 1) may be imposed — 
(a) by the Director -General where the contravention or failure relates to a matter to which the 
appropriate Government is the Central Government; and  
(b) by the Chief Inspector where the contravention or failure relates to a matter to which the 
appropriate Gover nment is the State Government.  
(3) No penalty shall be imposed unless the person concern ed is given a notice in writing — 
(a) informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to impose a penalty ; and 
(b) giving him a reasonable opportunity of making a r epresentation in writing within such 
reasonable time as may be specified in the notice against the imposition of penalty mentioned therein, 
and, if he so desires, of being heard in the matter.  
(4) Without prejudice to any other provision contained in this Act, the Director -General and the Chief 
Inspector shall have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), 
while exercising any powers under this section, in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning an d enforcing the attendance of witnesses;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; and  
(e) issuing  commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent the person concerned from being 
prosecuted under any other provision of this Act or any other law for any offence made punishabl e by this 
Act or by that other law, as the case may be, or for being liable under this Act or any such law to any 
other or higher penalty or punishment than is provided for such offence by this section:  
Provided that no person shall be punished twice for t he same offence.  
51. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by the imposition of any penalty under section 50 may p refer 
an appeal — 
(a) where the penalty has been imposed by the Director -General, to the Central Government;  
(b) where the penalty has been imposed by the Chief Inspector, to the State Government,  
within a period of three months from the date of communication to such person of the imposition of such 
penalty:  
Provided that the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, may, if it i s 
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring an appeal within the 
aforesaid period of three months, allow such appeal to be preferred within a further period of three 
months.  
(2) The appellate authority may, after giving  the appellant an opportunity of being heard, if he so 
desires, and after making such further inquiry, if any, as it may consider necessary, pass such order as it 
thinks fit confirming, modifying or reversing the order appealed against or may send back the  case with 
such directions as it may think fit for a fresh decision.  
52. Recovery of penalty .—Where any penalty imposed on any perso n under section 50 is not paid, — 
(i) the Director -General or, as the case may be, the Chief Inspector may deduct the amount so 
payable from any money owing to such person which may be under his control; or  
(ii) the Director -General or, as the case may be, the Chief Inspector may recover the amount so 
payable by detaining or selling the goods belonging to such person which are u nder his control; or  
(iii) if the amount cannot be recovered from such person in the manner provided in clause ( i) or 
clause ( ii), the Director -General or, as the case may be, the Chief Inspector may prepare a certificate   19 
 signed by him specifying the amoun t due from such person and send it to the Collector of the district 
in which such person owns any property or resides or carries on his business and the said Collector, 
on receipt of such certificate shall proceed to recover from such person t he amount specified 
thereunder as if it were an arrear of land revenue.  
53. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to,  the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall  render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer  of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) ”company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) ”director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
54. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under  this 
Act except on a complaint — 
(a) made by, or with the previous sanction in writing of, the Director -General or the Chief 
Inspector; or  
(b) made by an office -bearer of a voluntary organisation  registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860); or  
(c) made by an office -bearer of any concerned trade union registered under the Trade Unions Act , 
1926 (16 of 1926).  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
55. Limitation of prosecutions .—No court shall take congizance of an offence punishable under this 
Act unless the complaint thereof is made within three months from the  date on which the alleged 
commission of the offence came to the knowledge of the Director -General, the Chief Inspector, an            
office -bearer of a voluntary organisation or, as the case may be, an office -bearer of any concerned trade 
union.  
CHAPTER XI 
MISCELLANEOUS  
56. Delegation of powers .—A Board may, by general or special order, delegate to the Chairperson or 
any other member or to the Secretary or any other officer or employee of the Board, subject to such 
conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers and duties under 
this Act as it may deem necessary.  
57. Returns .—Every Board shall furnish from time to time to the Central Government and to the State 
Government such returns as they may require.  
58. Appli cation of Act 8 of 1923 to building workers .—The provisions of the Workmen's 
Compensation Act, 1923, shall so far as may be, apply to building workers as if the employment to which 
this Act applies had been included in the Second Schedule to that Act.    20 
 59. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance 
of this Act or any rule or order made thereunder.  
(2) No prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Government, any Board or 
Committees constituted under this Act or any member of such Board or any officer or employee of the 
Government or the Board or any other person authorise d by the Gove rnment or any Board or committee, 
for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of this Act or any rule or order made or issued thereunder.  
60. Power of Central Government to give d irections .—The Central Government may give 
directions to the Government of any State or to a Board as to the carrying into execution in that State of 
any of the provisions of this Act.  
61. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in givin g effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty : 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
62. Power to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, after consultation with the expert 
committee, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such ru les may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of persons to be appointed as members representing various interests on the 
Central Advisory Committee and the State Advisory Committees, the term of their office and other 
conditions of service, the procedure to be followed in the discharge of their functions and the manner 
of filling vacancies under sub -section ( 3) of section 3 or, as the case may be, under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4;  
(b) the fees and allowances that may be  paid to the members of the expert committee for 
attending its meetings under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(c) the form of application for the registration of an establishment, the levy of fees therefor and 
the particulars it may contain under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(d) the form of certificate of registration, the time within which and the conditions subject to  
which such certificate may be issued under sub -section ( 3) of section 7;  
(e) the form in which the change in ownership or management or other particulars shall be 
intimated to the registering officer under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  
(f) the form in whi ch an application for registration as a beneficiary shall be made under          
sub-section ( 2) of section 12;  
(g) the document and the fee which shall accompany the application under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 12;  
(h) the registers which the Secretary of  the Board shall cause to be maintained under                 
sub-section ( 6) of section 12;  
(i) the benefits which may be given under sub -section ( 2) of section 14;  
(j) the form in which register of beneficiaries shall  be maintained under section 15;  
(k) the terms and conditions of appointment, the salaries and other allowances payable to, and the 
manner of filling of casual vacancies of, the Chairperson and other members of the Board under    
sub-section ( 4) of section 18;    21 
 (l) the terms and conditions o f service and the salaries and allowances payable to the Secretary 
and the other officers and employees of the Board under sub -section ( 3) of section 19;  
(m) the time and place of the meeting of the Board and the rules of procedure to be followed at 
such m eeting under sub -section ( 1) of section 20 including quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business;  
(n) the amount payable as house building loans or advances, the terms and conditions of such 
payment under clause ( c), educational assistance under claus e (e), medical expenses payable and the 
persons who shall be the dependent of the beneficiaries under clause ( f), and the other welfare 
measures for which provision may be made under clause ( h), of sub -section ( 1) of section 22;  
(o) the limits of grants -in-aid payable to the local authorities and employers under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 22;  
(p) the form in which and the time within which the budget of the Board shall be prepared and 
forwarded to Government under section 25;  
(q) the form in w hich and the time within which the annual report of the Board shall be submitted 
to the State Government and the Central Government under section 26;  
(r) the form of annual statement of accounts under sub -section ( 1), and the date before which the 
audited copy of the accounts together with the auditor's report shall be furnished under sub -section ( 4) 
of section 27:  
(s) the matters required to be provided under sub -section ( 1) of section 28 and the extent up to 
which, and the conditions subject to which, the  provisions of that sub -section shall apply to the 
building workers under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(t) the registers and records that shall be maintained by the employer and the form in which such 
registers and records shall be maintained and the p articulars to be included therein under sub -section 
(1) of section 30;  
(u) the form and manner in which a notice shall be exhibited and the particulars it may contain 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 30;  
(v) the issue of wage books or wage slips to buildin g workers and the manner in which entries are 
to be made and authenticated in wage books or wage slips under sub -section ( 3) of section 30;  
(w) the types of latrines and urinals required to be provided under section 33;  
(x) the first -aid facilities which a re to be provided under section 36;  
(y) the canteen facilities which are to be provided under clause ( a) of section 37;  
(z) the welfare measures which are to be provided under clause ( b) of section 37;  
(za) the number of representatives of the employer and  the building workers under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 38 and the qualifications of safety officers and the duties to be performed by them under 
sub-section ( 2) of that section;  
(zb) the form of a notice of accident, other matters to be provided in this behalf and the time 
within which such notice shall be given under sub -section ( 1) of section 39;  
(zc) the rules to be made for the safety and health of building workers under section 40;  
(zd) the powers that may be exercised by an Inspector under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 43 and the qualifications and experience which the experts or agencies employed under     
sub-section ( 2) of that section shall possess and the terms and conditions on which such experts or 
agencies may be employed;  
(ze) the date on or before which wages shall be paid to a building worker under section 45;  
(zf) the matters which are required to be prescribed under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of     
section 46;    22 
 (zg) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescr ibed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, th e rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
(4) Every rule made by the State Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or, where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
63. Saving of certain laws .—Nothing contained in this Act shall affect the operation of any 
corresponding law in a State providing welfare schemes which are more beneficial to the building and 
other construction workers than those provided for them by or under this A ct. 
64. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of 
Employment and Conditions of Service) Third Ordinance, 1996 (Ord. 25 of 1996), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Building and Other Construction Workers Welfare Cess Act, 1996--------------------------
1 
 THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’  
WELFARE CESS ACT, 1996  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Levy and collection of cess . 
4. Furnishing of returns . 
5. Assessment of cess . 
6. Power to exempt . 
7. Power of entry . 
8. Interest payable on delay in payment of cess . 
9. Penalty for non -payment of cess within the specified time . 
10. Recovery of amount due under the Act . 
11. Appeals . 
12. Penalty . 
13. Offences by companies . 
14. Power to make rules . 
15. Repeal and saving . 
  2 
  
THE BUILDING AND OTHER CONSTRUCTION WORKERS’  
WELFARE CESS ACT, 1996  
ACT NO. 28 OF 1996  
[19th August , 1996 .]  
An A ct to provide for the levy and collection of a cess  on the cost of construction incurred by 
employers with a view to augmenting the resources of the Building  and Other Construction 
Workers’ Welfare Boards constitut ed under the Building and Other Construction Workers 
(Regulation of Employment and Conditions  of Service) Act, 1996.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Building and Other 
Construction W orkers’ Welfare Cess Act, 1996.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on  the 3rd day of November, 1995.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Board”  means a Building and Other Construction Workers’ Welfare Board constituted by a 
State Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 18 of the Building and Other Construction 
Workers (Regulation of Employment and Co nditions of Service) Act, 1996  (27 of 1996) ; 
(b) “Fund”  means the Building and Other Construction Wor kers’ Welfa re Fund constituted by a 
Board;  
(c) “prescribed”  means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(d) words and expressions used herein but not defined and defined in the Building and Other 
Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 1996  (27 of 1996)  
shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act.  
3. Levy and collection of cess .—(1) There shall be levied and collected a cess  for the purposes of the 
Building and Other Construction Workers (Regulation of Employment and Conditions of Service) Act, 
1996  (27 of 1996) , at such rate not exceeding two per cent. but not less than one per cent. of the cost of 
construction incurred by a n employer, as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gaze tte, from time to time specify.  
(2) The cess levied under sub -section ( 1) shall be collected from every employer in such manner and 
at such time, including deduction at source i n relation to a building or other construction work of a 
Government or of a public sector undertaking or advance collection through a local authority where an 
approval of such building or other construction work by such local authority is required, as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The proceeds of the cess collected under sub -section ( 2) shall be paid by the local authority or the 
State Government collecting the cess to the Board after deducting the cost of collection of such cess not 
exceeding one per  cent. of the  amount collected.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the cess leviable under 
this Act including payment of such cess  in advance may, subject to final assessment to be made, be 
collected at a uniform rate or rates as may be prescribed on the basis of the quantum of the building or 
other construction work involved.  
4. Furnishing of returns .—(1) Every employer shall furnis h such return to such officer or authority, 
in such manner and at such time as may be prescribed.  3 
 (2) If any person carrying on the building or other construction work, liable to pay the cess under 
section 3, fails to furnish any return under sub -section ( 1), the officer or the authority shall give a notice 
requiring such person to furnish such return before such date as m ay be specified in the notice.  
5. Assess ment of cess .—(1) The officer or authority to whom or to which the return has been 
furnished under  section 4 shall, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or it thinks fit and 
after satisfying himself or itself that the particulars stated in the return are correct, by order, assess the 
amount o f cess payable by the employer.  
(2) If the r eturn has not been furnished to the officer or authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 4, 
he or it shall, after making or causing to be made such inquiry as he or it thinks fit, by order, assess the 
amount o f cess payable by the employer.  
(3) An order o f assessment made under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall specify the date within 
which the cess  shall be paid by the employer.  
6. Power to exempt .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt any employer or class of employers in a State from the 
payment of cess payable under this Act where such cess is already levied and payable under any 
correspondin g law in force in that State.  
7. Power of entry .—Any officer or authority of the State Government specially empowered in this  
behalf by that Government may — 
(a) with such assistance, if any, as he or it may think fit, enter a t any reasonable time any place 
where he or it considers it necessary to enter for carrying out the purposes of this Act including 
verification of the correctness of any particulars furnished by any employer under sect ion 4;  
(b) do within such place anythi ng nece ssary for the proper discharge of his or  its duties under this 
Act; and  
(c) exercise such other powers as may be prescribed.  
8. Interest payable on delay in paym ent of cess .—If any employer fails to pay any amount of cess  
payable under section 3 within the time specified in the order of assessment, such employer shall be liable 
to pay interest on the amount to be paid at the rate of two per cent. for every month or part of a month 
comprised in the period from the date on w hich such payment is due til l such amount is actually paid.  
9. Penalty for non -payment of cess within the specified time .—If any amount of cess payable by 
any employer under section 3 is not paid within the date specified in the order of assessment made un der 
section 5, it shall be deemed to be in arrears and the authority prescribed in this behalf may, after making 
such inquiry as it deems fit, impose on such employer a penalty not exceeding the amount of cess:  
Provided that, before imposing any such penal ty, such employer shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard and if after such hearing the said authority is satisfied that the default was for 
any good and sufficient reason, no penalty shall  be imposed under this section.  
10. Recove ry of amount due under the Act .—Any amount due under this Act (including any 
interest or penalty) from an employer may be recovered in the same manner as an arrear of land revenue.  
11. Appeals .—(1) Any employer aggrieved by an order of assessment made under sect ion 5 or by an 
order imposing penalty made under section 9 may, within such time as may be prescribed, appeal to such 
appellate authority in such form and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Every appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1) shall be accomp anied by such fees as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) After the receipt of any appeal under sub -section ( 1), the appellate authority shall, after giving the 
appellant an opportunity of being heard in the matter, dispose of the appeal as expeditiously as possible.  
(4) Every order passed in appeal under this section shall be final and shall not be called i n question in 
any court of law.  4 
 12. Penalty .—(1) Whoever, being under an obligation to furnish a return under this Act, furnishes 
any return knowing, or having reason to believe, the same to be false shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
(2) Whoever, being liable to pay cess under this Act, wilfully or intentionall y evades or attempts to 
evade the payment of such cess shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to six mont hs, 
or with fine, or with both.  
(3) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this section save on a complaint 
made  by or under the author ity of the Central Government.  
13. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded agai nst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall ren der any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, 
manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer sha ll 
also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company”  means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director” , in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
14. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for ca rrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which and the time within which the cess shall be collected un der  
sub-section ( 2) of section 3;  
(b) the rate or rates of advance cess leviable under sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(c) the particulars of the returns to be furnished, the officer or authority to whom or to which such 
returns shall be furnished and the manner and time of furnishing such returns unde r sub -section ( 1) of 
section 4;  
(d) the powers which may be exercised by the of ficer or authority under section 7;  
(e) the authority which may impose penalty under section 9;  
(f) the authority to which an  appeal may be filed under sub -section ( 1) of section 11 and the time 
within which and the form and manner in which such appeal may  be filed;  
(g) the fees which shall accompany an appeal under sub -section ( 2) of section 11; and  
(h) any other matter which ha s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and i f, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 5 
 in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effec t only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
15. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Building  and Other Construction Workers’  Welfare Cess Third 
Ordinance, 1996 (Ord. 2 6 of 1996), is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corr esponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Depositories Act, 1996--------------------------
1 
 THE DEPOSITORIES ACT, 1996  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CERTIFICATE OF COMMENCEMENT OF BUSINESS  
3. Certificate of commencement of business by depositories . 
 
CHAPTER III  
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF DEPOSITORIES, PARTICIPANTS, ISSUERS AND BENEFICIAL OWNERS  
4. Agreement between depository and participant . 
5. Services of depository . 
6. Surrender of certificate of security . 
7. Registration of transfer of securities with depository . 
8. Options to receive security certificate or hold securities with  depository . 
9. Securities in depositories to be in fungible form . 
10. Rights of depositories and beneficial owner . 
11. Register of beneficial owner . 
12. Pledge or hypothecation of  securities held in a depository . 
13. Furnishing of information and records by depository and issuer . 
14. Option to opt out in respect of any security . 
15. Act 18 of 1891 to apply to depositories . 
16. Depositories to indemnify loss in certain cases . 
17. Rights and obligations  of depositories , etc.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
ENQUIRY AND INSPECTION  
18. Power of B oard to call for information and enquiry.  
19. Power of B oard to give directions in certain cases.  
19A. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.  
19B. Penalty for failure to enter into an agreement.  
19C. Penalty f or failure to redress investors ’ grievances.  
19D. Penalty for delay in dematerialisation or issue of certificate of securities.  
19E. Penalty for failure to reconcile records.  
19F. Penalty for failure to comply with di rections issued by Board under section 19 of the Act.  
19G. Penalty for contravention where no separate penalty has been provided.  
19H. Power to adjudicate.  
19-I. Factors to be taken into account by adjudicating officer.  2 
 SECTIONS  
19-IA. Settlement of Administrative and Civil Proceedings.  
19-IB. Recovery of amounts . 
19J. Crediting sums realis ed by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India.  
 
CHAPTER V  
PENALTY  
20. Offences.  
21. Offences by companies.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANE OUS 
22. Cognizance of offences by courts.  
22A.  Composition of certain offences.  
22B.  Power to grant immunity.  
22C. Establishment of Special Courts.  
22D. Offences triable by Special Courts.  
22E. Appeal and revision.   
22F. Application of Code to proceedings before Special Court.  
22G.  Transitional provisions.  
23. Appeals.  
23A. Appeal to Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
23B. Procedure and powers of Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
23C. Right to legal representation.  
23D. Limitation . 
23E. Civil Court not to have jurisdiction . 
23F. Appeal to Supreme Court.  
24. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
25. Power of Board to make regulations.  
26. Power of depositories to make bye -laws.  
27. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
28. Application of other laws not barred.  
29. Removal of difficulties.  
30. [Repealed .] 
30A. Validation of certain acts.  
31. Repeal and s aving . 
THE SCHEDULE. [ Repealed .] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 
 THE DEPOSITORIES ACT , 1996  
ACT NO. 22 OF 1996  
[10th August , 1996.]  
An Act to provide for regulation of depositories in securities and for matters  connected therewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seventh Year of the Republic of India  as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Depositories Act, 1996.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 20th day of  September, 1995.  
2. Definitions. —(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwi se requires, — 
(a) “beneficial owner ” means a person whose name is recorded as  such with a depository;  
(b) “Board ” means the Securities and Exchange Board of India  established under section 3 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of  India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);  
(c) “bye-laws” means bye -laws made by a depository under section  26; 
(d) “Company Law Board ” means the Board of Company Law  Administration constituted under 
section 10E of the Companies Act,  1956 (1 of 1956);  
(e) “depository ” means a company formed and registered under the Companies Act,                        
1956 (1 of 1956) and which has been granted a  certificate of registration under sub -section ( 1A) of 
section 12 of the  Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);  
(f) “issuer ” means any person mak ing an issue of securities;  
(g) “participant ” means a person registered as such under sub -section   (1A) of section 12 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board  of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “record ” includes the records maintained in the form of books or  stored in a computer or in 
such other form as may be  determined by regulations;  
(j) “registered owner ” means a depository whose name is entered  as such in the register of the 
issuer;  
 (k) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Board;  
1[(ka) “Securities Appellate Tribunal ” means a Securities Appellate  Tribunal established under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 15K of the  Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);]   
(l) “security ” means such security as may be specified by the  Board;  
(m) “service ” means any service connected with recording of  allotment of securities or transfer of 
ownership of securities in the  record of a depository.  
(2) Words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the  Companies Act,            
1956 (1 of 1956) or the Securities Contracts (Regulation)  Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) or the Securities and 
Exchange Board of India Act,  1992  (15 of 1992) , shall have the meanings respectively assigne d to them  
in those Acts.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 13 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  4 
 CHAPTER II  
CERTIFICATE OF COMMENCEMENT OF BUSINESS  
3. Certificate of commencement of business by depositories. —(1) No depository shall act as a 
depository unless it obtains a certificate of  commencement of business from the Board.  
(2) A certificate granted under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form as may  be specified by the 
regulations.  
(3) The Board shall not grant a certificate under sub -section ( 1) unless it is  satisfied that the 
depository has adequate systems and safeguards to  prevent manipulation of records and transactions:  
Provided that no certificate shall be refused under this section  unless the depository concerned has 
been given a reasonable  opportunity of being heard.  
CHAPTER III  
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF D EPOSITORIES, PARTICIPANTS,  ISSUERS AND BENEFICIAL OWNERS  
4. Agreement between depository and participant .—(1) A depository shall enter into an agreement 
with one or more participants  as its agent.  
(2) Every agreement under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form as may be  specified by the bye -laws.  
5. Services of depository. —Any person, through a participant, may enter into an agreement, in such 
form  as may be specified by the bye -laws, with any depository for availing its  services.  
6. Surrender of certificate of security. —(1) Any person who has entered into an agreement under 
section 5 shall  surrender the certificate of security, for which he seeks to avail the services of  a 
depository, to the issuer in such manner as may be specified by the  regulat ions.  
(2) The issuer, on receipt of certificate of security under sub -section ( 1), shall cancel the certificate of 
security and substitute in its records the name  of the depository as a registered owner in respect of that 
security and inform  the depository  accordingly.  
(3) A depository shall, on receipt of information under sub -section ( 2), enter  the name of the person 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) in its records, as the  beneficial owner.  
7. Registration of transfer of securities with depository .—(1) Every  depository shall, on receipt of 
intimation from a participant,  register the transfer of security in the name of the transferee.  
1[(1A) Every depository on receipt of intimation from a participant register any transfer of security in 
favour of an asset reconstruction company as defined in clause ( ba) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002            
(54 of 200 2) along with or consequent upon transfer or as signment of financial asset of any bank or 
financial institution under sub -sectio n (1) of section 5 of that Act.  
(1B) Every depository, on receipt of intimation from a participant, register any issue of new shares in 
favour of any bank or financial institu tion or asset reconstruction company or any other assignee of such 
bank or financial institution or asset reconstruction company, as the case may be, by conversion of part of 
their debt into shares pursuant to reconstruction of debts of the company agreed between the company and 
the bank or financial institution or  asset reconstruction company.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, the expressions “asset reconstruction company ”, 
“bank ”, and “financial institution ” shall have the meanings assigned to  them respectively under             
clauses ( ba), (c) and ( m) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of 
Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002  (54 of 200 2).] 
(2) If a beneficial owner or a transferee of any security seeks to have  custody of such security, the 
depository shall inform the issuer  accordingly.  
8. Options to receive security certificate or hold securities with  depository .—(1) Every person 
subscribing to securities offered by an i ssuer shall  have the option either to receive the security 
certificates or hold securities  with a depository.  
(2) Where a person opts to hold a security with a depository, the issuer shall  intimate such depository 
the details of allotment of the security, and on  receipt of such information the depository shall enter in its 
records the  name of the allottee as the beneficial owner of that security.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 44 and the Second Schedule (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  5 
 9. Securities in depositories to be in fungible form. —(1) All securities held by a depository shall be 
demateria lised and shall be in a  fungible form.  
 1[(2) Nothing contained in sections 153, 153A, 153B, 187B, 187C and 372  of the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) shall apply to a depository in  respect of securities held by it on behalf of the beneficial 
owners.]  
10. Rights of depositories and beneficial owner .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
other law for the time being in  force, a depository shall be deemed to be the registered owner for the  
purposes of effecting transfer of ownership of security on beh alf of a  beneficial owner.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), the depository as a  registered owner shall not have 
any voting rights or any other rights in  respect of securities held by it.  
(3) The beneficial owner shall be entitled to all t he rights and benefits and be  subjected to all the 
liabilities in respect of his securities held by a  depository.  
11. Register of beneficial owner .—Every depository shall maintain a register and an index of 
beneficial owners  in the manner provided in secti ons 150, 151 and 152 of the Companies Act,             
1956 (1  of 1956).  
12. Pledge or hypothecation of securities held in a depository .—(1) Subject to such regulations 
and bye -laws, as may be made in this  behalf, a beneficial owner may with the previous approval of the  
depository create a pledge or hypothecation in respect of a security owned  by him through a depository.  
(2) Every beneficial owner shall give intimation of such pledge or  hypothecation to the depository 
and such depository shall thereupon m ake entries in its records accordingly . 
(3) Any entry in the records of a depository under sub -section ( 2) shall be  evidence of a pledge or 
hypothecation.  
13. Furnishing of information and records by depository and issuer. —(1) Every depository shall 
furnis h to the issuer information about the transfer  of securities in the name of beneficial owners at such 
intervals and in such  manner as may be specified by the bye -laws.  
(2) Every issuer shall make available to the depository copies of the relevant  records in respect of 
securities held by such depository.  
14. Option to opt out in respect of any security .—(1) If a beneficial owner seeks to opt out of a 
depository in respect of any  security he shall inform the depository accordingly.  
(2) The depository shall o n receipt of intimation under sub -section ( 1) make  appropriate entries in its 
records and shall inform the issuer.  
(3) Every issuer shall, within thirty days of the receipt of intimation from the  depository and on 
fulfil ment  of such conditions and on payment of such  fees as may be specified by the regulations, issue 
the certificate of  securities to the beneficial owner or the transferee, as the case may be.  
15. Act 18 of 1891 to apply to depositories .—The Bankers ’ Books Evide nce Act, 1891 shall apply 
in relation to a  depository as if it were a bank as defined in section 2 of that Act.  
16. Depositories to indemnify loss in certain cases .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of any 
other law for the time being in  force, any l oss caused to the beneficial owner due to the negligence of the  
depository or the participant, the depository shall indemnify such beneficial  owner.  
(2) Where the loss due to the negligence of the participant under sub -section  (1) is indemnified by the 
depository, the depository shall have the right to  recover the same from such participant.  
17. Rights and obligations of depositories, etc .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the rights 
and obligations of the  depositories, participants and the issuers  whose securities are dealt with  by a 
depository shall be specified by the regulations.   
(2) The eligibility criteria for admission of securities into the depository shall  be specified by the 
regulations.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 8 of 1997, s. 22,  for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15 -1-1997).  6 
 CHAPTER IV  
ENQUIRY AND INSPECTION  
18. Power of Boar d to call for information and enquiry .—(1) The Board, on being satisfied that it 
is necessary in the public interest or  in the interest of investors so t o do, may, by order in writing, — 
(a) call upon any issuer, depository, participant or beneficial owner to furnish in writing such 
information relating to the securities held in a  depository as it may require; or  
(b) authorise any person to make an enquiry or inspection in relation to  the affairs of the issuer, 
beneficial owner, depository or participant,  who shall submit a report of such enquiry or inspection to 
it within such  period as may be specified in the order.  
(2) Every director, manager, partner, secretary, officer or employee of the  depository or issuer or the 
participant or beneficial owner shall  on demand  produce before the person making the enquiry or 
inspection all information  or such records and other documents in his custody having a bearing on the  
subject matter of such enquiry or inspection.  
19. Power of Board to give directions in certain cases.—Save as provided in this Act, if after 
making or causing to be made an  enquiry or inspection, the Board is  satisfied that it is necessary — 
(i) in the interest of investors, or orderly development of securities  market; or  
(ii) to prevent the affairs of any depository or participant being  conducted in the manner 
detrimental to the interests of investors or  securities market,   
it may issue such directions — 
(a) to any depository or participant or any person associated with the  securities market; or  
(b) to any issuer,  
as may be appropriate in the interest of investors or the securities market.  
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that power to issue directions under 
this section shall include and always be deemed to have been in cluded the power to direct any person, 
who made profit or averted loss by indulging in any transaction or activity in contravention of the 
provisions of this Act or regulations  made thereunder, to disgorge an amount equivalent to the wrongful 
gain made or loss averted by such contravention. ] 
2[19A. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc. —Any person, who is required under 
this Act or any rules or regulations or  bye-laws made thereunder, — 
(a) to furnish any information, document, books, returns or report to the  Board, fails to furnish the same 
within the time specified therefor, he shall  be liable to a penalty 3[which shall not be less than one lakh 
rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for eac h day during which such failure  continues 
subject to a maximum of one crore rupees ] for each such failure;  
(b) to file any return or furnish any information, books or other documents  within the time 
specified therefor in the regulations or bye -laws, fails to file  return or furnish the same w ithin the time 
specified therefor, he shall be  liable to a penalty 3[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but 
which may extend to one lakh rupees for eac h day during which such failure  continues subject to a 
maximum of one crore rupees ]; 
(c) to maintain books of account or records, fails to maintain the same, he  shall be liable to a 
penalty 3[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for 
each day during which such failure  continues subject to a maximum o f one crore rupees ]. 
19B. Penalty for failure to enter into an agreement. —If a depository or participant or any issuer or 
its agent or any person, who is  registered as an intermediary under the provisions of section 12 of the  
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) , and is  required under this Act or any 
rules or regulations , made thereunder, to enter  into an agreement, fails to enter into such agreement, such 
depository or  participant or issuer or its agent or intermediary shall be liable to a penalty 4[which shall not 
be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for eac h day during which such 
failure  continues subject to a maximum of one crore rupees ] for every such failure.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014,  s. 41 (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 17 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
3. Subs. by Act 27 of 2014,  s. 42 , for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 43, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).   
 7 
 19C. Penalty f or failure to redress investors ’ grievances .—If any depository or participant or any 
issuer or its agent or any person, who is  registered as an intermediary under the provisions of section 12 
of the   Securities  and  Exchange  Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) , after having been  called  upon by 
the Board in writing, to redress the grievances of the investors, fails  to redress such grievances within the 
time specified by the Board, such  depository or participant or issuer or its agents or intermediary shall be 
liable  to a penalty 1[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees 
for each day during which such failure continues subject to a maximum of one crore rupees ]. 
19D. Penalt y for delay in dematerialisation or issue of certificate of  securities .—If any issuer or 
its agent or any person, who is registered as an intermediary  under the provisions of section 12 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of  India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) , fails to dematerialise or issue the 
certificate of  securities on opting out of a depository by the investors, within the time  specified under this 
Act or regulations or bye -laws made thereunder or abets  in delaying the process of dematerialisation or 
issue the certificate of  securities on opting out of a depository of securities, such issuer or its agent  or 
intermediary shall be liable to a penalty 2[which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may 
extend to one lakh rupees for eac h day during wh ich such failure  continues subject to a maximum of one 
crore rupees ]. 
19E. Penalty for failure to reconcile records. —If a depository or participant or any issuer or its 
agent or any person, who is  registered as an intermediary under the provisions of secti on 12 of the  
Securities and Exchange Board o f India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) , fails to  reconcile the records of 
dematerialised securities with all the securities issued  by the issuer as specified in the regulations, such 
depository or participant or  issuer o r its agent or intermediary shall be liable to a penalty 3[which shall not 
be less than one lakh rupees but which may extend to one lakh rupees for each day during which such 
failure continues subject to  a maximum of one crore rupees ]. 
19F. Penalty for failure to comply with directions issued by Board under  section 19 of the 
Act.—If any person fails to comply with the directions issued by the Board under  section 19, within the 
time specified by it, he shall be liable to a penalty 4[which shall not be les s than one lakh rupees but which 
may extend to one lakh rupees for each day during which such failure continues subject to  a maximum of 
one crore rupees ]. 
19G. Penalty for contravention where no separate penalty has been  provided. —Whoever fails to 
comply w ith any provision of this Act, the rules or the  regulations or bye -laws made or directions issued 
by the Board thereunder for  which no separate penalty has been provided, shall be 5[liable to a penalty 
which shall not be less th an one lakh rupees but which  may extend  to one crore rupees ]. 
19H. Power to adjudicate. —(1) For the purpose of adjudging under sections 19A, 19B, 19C, 19D, 
19E, 19F and 19G, the Board shall appoint any officer not below the rank of a  Division Chief of the 
Securities and Exchange Boar d of India to be an  adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry in the 
prescribed manner after giving  any person concerned a reasonable opportunity of being heard for the  
purpose of imposing any penalty.  
(2) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have power to  summon and enforce the 
attendance of any person acquainted with the facts  and circumstances of the case to give evidence or to 
produce any document,  which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant  to 
the subject -matter of the inquiry and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that  the person has failed to 
comply with the provisions of any of the sections  specified in sub -section ( 1), he may impose such 
penalty as he thinks fit in  accordance with the provisions of any of those sections.  
                                                           
1. Subs.  by Act 27 of 2014, s.  44 for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
2. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 8-9-2014).  
4. Subs. by s. 47, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 8 -9-2014).  
5. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for certain words  (w.e.f. 28-3-2014 ). 
 8 
 1[(3) The Board may call for and examine the record of any proceedings under  this section and if it 
considers that the order passed by the adjudicating officer is  erroneous to the extent it is not in the 
interests of t he securities market, it may, after  making or causing to be made such inquiry as it deems 
necessary, pass an order  enhancing the quantum of penalty, if the circumstances of the case so justify:  
Provided that no such order shall be passed unless the person concerned has  been given an 
opportunity of being heard in the matter:  
Provided further that nothing contained in this sub -section shall be applicable  after an expiry of a 
period of three months from the date of the order passed by the  adjudicating officer or disposal of the 
appeal under section 23A, whichever is earlier .] 
19-I. Factors to be taken into account by adjudicating officer. —While adjudging the quantum of 
penalty under section 19H, the adjudicating  officer shall have due regard to  the following factors,     
namely:—  
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever  quantifiable, made as a 
result of the default;  
(b) the amount of loss caused to an investor or group of investors as a   result of the default;  
(c) the repetitive nature of the default.   
2[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is clarified that the power of an adjudicating officer 
to adjudge the quantum of penalty under sections 19A to 19F shall be and shall always be deemed to 
have been exercised under the provisions of this section.]   
3[19-IA. Settlement of Administrative and Civil Proceedings .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any other law for the time  being in force, any person, against whom any proceedings have 
been initiated or may  be initiated under section 19 or section 19H, as the  case may be, may file an 
application  in writing to the Board proposing for settlement of the proceedings initiated or to be  initiated 
for the alleged defaults.  
(2) The Board may, after taking into consideration the nature, gravity and impact  of defaults, agree to 
the proposal for settlement, on payment of such sum by the  defaulter or on such other terms as may be 
determined by the Board in accordance with  the regulations made under the Securities and Exchange 
Board of India Act, 1992  (15 of 1992) .  
(3) For  the purpose of settlement under this section, the procedure as specified  by the Board under the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) shall apply.  
(4) No appeal shall lie under section 23A against any order passed by the Board  or the adjudicating  
officer under this section.]  
4[19-IB.  Recovery of amounts. —(1) If a person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the adjudicating 
officer  or fails to comply with a direction of disgorgement order issued under section 19 or  fails to pay 
any fees due to the Board, the Recovery Officer may draw up under his  signature a statement in the 
specified form specifying the amount due from the person  (such statement being hereafter in this Chapter 
referred to as certificate) and shall  proceed to recover  from such person the amount specified in the 
certificate by one or  more of the following modes, namely: — 
(a) attachment and sale of the person ’s movable property;  
(b) attachment of the person ’s bank accounts;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 49 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 149 ( 31-3-2017 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 27  of 2014 , s. 50 (w.e.f. 20-4-2007 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 51, ibid. (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
 9 
 (c) attachment and sale of the person ’s immova ble property;  
(d) arrest of the person and his detention in prison;  
(e) appointing a receiver f or the management of the person ’s movable and  immovable properties,   
and for this purpose, the provisions of sections 220 to 227, 228A, 229, 232, the  Second and Third 
Schedules to the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , and the Income -tax (Certi ficate Proceedings) Rules,                           
1962 as in force from time to time, in so far as  may be, apply with necessary modifications as if the said 
provisions an d the  rules thereunder were the provisions of this Act and referred to the amount due  under 
this Act instead of to income -tax under the Income -tax Act, 1961.  
Explanation 1.—For the purposes of this sub -section, the person ’s movable or immovable property or  
monies held in bank accounts shall include  any property or monies held in bank accounts which has been 
transferred,  directly or indirectly on or after the date when the amount specified in certificate  had become 
due, by the person to his spouse or minor c hild or son ’s wife or  son’s minor child, otherwise than for 
adequate consideration, and which is held  by, or stands in the name of, any of the persons aforesaid; and 
so far as the  movable or immovable property or monies held in bank accounts so transferred  to his minor 
child or his son ’s minor child is concerned, it shall, even after the  date of attainment of majority by such 
minor child or son ’s minor child, as the  case may be, continue to be included in the person ’s movable or 
immovable  property or monies  held in bank accounts for recovering any amount due from  the person 
under this Act.  
Explanation 2.—Any reference under the provisions of the Second and  Third Schedules to the 
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) and the Income -tax (Certificate  Proceedings) R ules, 1962 to the 
assessee shall be construed as a reference to the  person specified in the certificate.  
Explanation 3.—Any reference to appeal in Chapter XVIID and the  Second Schedule to the    
Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , shall be construed as a re ference  to appeal before the Securities 
Appellate Tribunal under section 23A of this Act.  
(2) The Recovery Officer shall be empowered to seek the assistance of the local  district 
administration while exercising the powers under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Notwith standing anything contained in any other law for the time being in  force, the recovery of 
amounts by a Recovery Officer under sub -section ( 1), pursuant  to non -compliance with any direction 
issued by the Board under section 19, shall have  precedence over an y other claim against such person.  
(4) For the purposes of sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3), the expression ‘‘Recovery  Officer ’’ means any 
officer of the Board who may be authorised, by general or special order in writing, to exercise the powers 
of a Recovery  Officer. ] 
19J. Crediting sums reali sed by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund  of India .—All sums 
realised by way of penalties under this Act shall be credited to the  Consolidated Fund of India.]  
CHAPTER V  
PENALTY  
1[20. Offences .—(1) Without prejudice to  any award of penalty by the adjudicating officer under  this 
Act, if any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the  contravention of the provisions of 
this Act or of any rules or regulations or  bye-laws made thereunder, he shall be punishabl e with 
imprisonment for a  term which may extend to ten years, or with fine, which may extend to twenty -five 
crore rupees, or with both.  
(2) If any person fails to pay the penalty imposed by the adjudicating officer or  fails to comply with 
any of his direct ions or orders, he shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a term which shall not be 
less than one month but which  may extend to ten years, or with fine, which may extend to twenty -five 
crore  rupees, or with both.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 18, for section 20 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  10 
 21. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an  offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company,  every  person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of,  and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the  company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence  and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any  such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that  the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an  offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is p roved that  the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is  attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or  other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other  officer shall also b e deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to  be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other  association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
1[22. Cognizance of offences by courts .—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence 
punishable under this Act  or any rules or regulations or bye -laws made thereunder, save on a complaint  
made by the Central Government or State Government or the Securities and  Exchange Board of India or 
by any person.  
2*   *   *   *   * 
22A. Composition of certain offences. —Notwithstanding anything con tained in the Code of 
Criminal P rocedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), any offence punishable under this Act, not being an offence  
punishable with imprisonment only, or with imprisonment and also with fine,  may either before or after 
the institution of any proceeding, be compounded  by a Sec urities Appellate Tribunal or a court before 
which such proceedings  are pending.  
22B. Power to grant immunity. —(1) The Central Government may, on recommendation by the 
Board, if the  Central Government is satisfied, that any person, who is alleged to have  violated any of the 
provisions of this Act or the rules or the regulations made  thereunder, has made a full and true disclosure 
in respect of alleged violation,  grant to such person, subject to such conditions as it may think fit to 
impose,  immunity from pr osecution for any offence under this Act, or the rules or the  regulations made 
thereunder or also from the imposition of any penalty under  this Act with respect to the alleged violation:  
Provided that no such immunity shall be granted by the Central  Govern ment in cases where the 
proceedings for the prosecution for any such  offence have been instituted before the date of receipt of 
application for grant  of such immunity:  
Provided further that recommendation of the Board under this sub -section  shall not be binding upon 
the Central Government.  
(2) An immunity granted to a person under sub -section ( 1) may, at any time,  be withdrawn by the 
Central Government, if it is satisfied that such person  had, in the course of the proceedings, not complied 
with the condit ion on  which the immunity was granted or had given false evidence, and thereupon  such 
person may be tried for the offence with respect to which the immunity  was granted or for any other 
offence of which he appears to have been guilty  in connection with the  contravention and shall also 
become liable to the  imposition of any penalty under this Act to which such person would have  been 
liable, had not such immunity been granted.]  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 1 of 2005, s. 19, for section 22 (w.e.f.  12 -10-2004).  
2. Sub -section ( 2) omitted by Act 27 of 2014, s. 52 (w.e.f.  18 -7-2013).  11 
 1[22C. Establishment of Special Courts .—(1) The Central Government may, for the purpose of 
providing speedy trial  of offences under this Act, by notification, establish or designate as many Special  
Courts as may be necessary.  
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a single judge who shall be appointed by the  Central Government 
with the concurrence of the Chief Justice of the High Court within  whose jurisdiction the judge to be 
appointed is working.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a judge of a Special Court  unless he is, 
immediately before such appointment, holding the office of a Sessions  Judge or an Additional Sessions 
Judge, as the case may be.  
22D. Offences triable by Special Courts. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974) , all offences under this Act committed prior  to the date of 
commencement of the  Securities Laws (Amendment) Act, 2014  (27 of 2014 ) or on or after the date of 
such commencement,  shall be taken cognizance of and tried by the Special Court established for the area 
in which the offence is committed or where there are more Special Courts than one for  such area, by such 
one of them as may be specified in this behalf by the High Court  concerned.  
22E. Appeal and revision .—The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the 
powers  conferred by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  on a 
High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High  Court were a Court 
of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court.  
22F. Application of Code to proceedings before Special Court. —(1) Save as otherwise provided in 
this Act, the provisions of the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall apply to the 
proceedings before a Special Court and for  the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be 
deemed to be a Court of  Session and the person conducting prosecution before a Special Court shall be 
deemed  to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code  of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973.  
(2) The person conducting prosecution referred to in sub -section ( 1) should  have been in practice as 
an advocate for not less than seven years or should have held  a post, for a period of not less than seven 
years, under the Un ion or a State, requiring  special knowledge of law.  
22G.  Transitional provisions. —Any offence committed under this Act, which is triable by a Special 
Court  shall, until a Special Court is established, be taken cognizance of and tried by a Court  of Session 
exercising jurisdiction over the area, notwithstanding anything contained  in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) : 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall affect the powers of the  High Court under section 
407 of the Code to transfer any case or class of cases taken  cognizance by a Court of Session under this 
section. ] 
23. Appeals .—(1) Any person aggrieved by 2[an order of the Board made before the  commencement 
of the Securities Laws (Second Amendment) Act, 1999  (32 of 1999 )] under this Act, or the regulations 
made thereunder may prefer an appeal to  the Central Government within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period  prescribed therefor:  
Provided that an  appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period  prescribed therefor if the 
appellant satisfies the Central Government that  he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal within 
the prescribed  period.  
(3) Every appeal made under this section s hall be made in such form and  shall be accompanied by a 
copy of the order appealed against and by such  fees as may be prescribed.  
 (4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be  prescribed:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by  Act 27 of 2014,  s. 53 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 14, for “an order of the Board made” (w.e.f.16 -12-1999).  12 
 Provided that before disposing of an appeal,  the appellant shall be  given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
1[23A. Appeal to Securities Appellate Tribunal. —(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), any 
person aggrieved by an order  of the Board made, on and after the commencement of the Securities  Laws 
(Second Amendment)  Act, 1999  (32 of 1999) , under this Act, or the regulation s made thereunder,            
2[or by an order made by an adjudicating officer under this Act ] may prefer an appeal to  a Securities 
Appellate Tribunal having  jurisdiction in the matter.  
3*   *   *   *   * 
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of  forty -five days from the date 
on which a copy of the order made by the  Board is received by the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
and it shall  be in such form and be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Securities Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal  after the expiry of  the said 
period of  forty -five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient  cause for not filing it within that period.  
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Securities Appellate  Tribunal may, after giving 
the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being  heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, 
confirming, modifying or  setting aside the order appealed against.  
(5) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order  made by it to the Board and 
parties to the appeal.  
(6) The appeal filed before the Securities Appellate Tribunal under sub -section  (1) shall be dealt with 
by it as expeditiously as possible and  endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within 
six months from the date of receipt of the appeal.  
23B. Procedure and powers of Securities Appellate Tribunal. —(1) The Sec urities Appellate 
Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure  laid down by the Code of Ci vil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , 
but shall be  guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions  of this Act and 
of any rules, the Secur ities Appellate Tribunal shall have  powers to regulate their own procedure 
including the places at which they  shall have their sittings.  
(2) The Securities Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purpose of  discharging their functions under 
this Act, the sa me powers as are vested in a  civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure,                       
1908 (5 of 1908) , while trying a  suit in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and   examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(e) reviewing its decisions;  
(f) dismissing  an application for default or deciding it ex parte;  
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any  order passed by it          
ex parte ; and  
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceeding before the Secu rities Appellate Tribunal shall be  deemed to be a judicial 
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193  and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the Securities Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to  be a civil court for all 
the purposes of sectio n 195  and C hapter XXVI of the  Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 15 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 20 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
3. Sub-section ( 2) omitted by Act 27 of 2014, s.  54 (w.e.f 18-7-2013). 
 13 
 23C. Right to legal representation. —The appellant may eit her appear in person or authoris e one or 
more  chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost accountants or legal  practitioners or any of its 
officers to present his or its case before the  Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, —  
 (a) “chartered accountant ” means a chartered accountant as  defined in clause ( b) of                        
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of Chartered Accountants   Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under  sub-section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) “company secretary ” means a com pany secretary as defined in  clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 of 1980) and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section  (1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) “cost accountant ” means a cost acco untant as defined in clause  (b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959  (23 of 1959)  and who has obtained a certificate 
of practice under sub -section  (1) of section 6 of that Act;   
(d) “legal practitioner ” means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of  any High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
23D. Limitation .—The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963) shall, as far as may  be, 
apply to an appeal made to a Securities Appellate Tribunal.  
23E. Civil c ourt not to have jurisdiction. —No civil c ourt shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
suit or proceeding in  respect of any matter which a Securities Appellate Tribunal is empowered by  or 
under this Act to determine and no injunction shall  be granted by any court  or other authority in respect of 
any action taken or to be taken i n pursuance  of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
1[23F. Appeal to Supreme  Court.—Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Securities 
Appellate  Tribunal m ay file an appeal to the Supreme  Court within sixty days from  the date of 
communication of the decision or order of the Securities  Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of  
law arising out of such order:  
Provided that the Supreme  Court may, if it is satisfied that the  appellant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal within  the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not  
exceeding  sixty days.]  
24. Power of Central Government to make rules. —(1) Th e Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette,  make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.   
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the foll owing matters,  namely:— 
2[(a) the manner of inquiry under sub -section ( 1) of section 19H;  
(aa) the time within which an appeal may be preferred under sub -section  (1) of section 23;]  
(b) the form in which an appeal may be preferred under sub -section ( 3) of section 23 and the fees 
payable in respect of such appeal;  
(c) the procedure for disposing of an appeal under sub -section ( 4) of section 23;  
3[(d) the form in which an appeal may be filed before the Securities  Appellate Tribunal under 
section 23A and the f ees payable in respect of such  appeal .] 
25. Power of Board to make regulations. —(1) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in 
section 30 of the  Securities and Exchange Board o f India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992) , the Board  may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with  the provisions of this Act and the 
rules made thereunder to carry out the  purposes of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 1 of 2005, s. 21, for section 23F (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
2. Subs. by s. 22, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2004).  
3. Ins. by Act 32 of 1999, s. 16 (w.e.f. 16 -12-1999).  14 
 (2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, such regulations may 
provi de for—  
(a) the form in which record is to be maintained under clause ( i) of sub -section  (1) of section 2;  
(b) the form in which the certificate of commencement of business shall be  issued under                    
sub-section ( 2) of section 3;   
(c) the  manner in which the certificate of security shall be surrendered  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6;  
(d) the manner of creating a pledge or hypothecation in respect of security  owned b y a beneficial 
owner under sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(e) the conditions and the fees payable with respect to the issue of  certificate of securities under           
sub-section ( 3) of section 14;  
(f) the rights and obligations of the depositories, participants and the  issuers under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 17;  
(g) the eligibility criteria for admission of securities into the depository   under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 17;  
1[(h) the terms determined by the Board for settlement of proceedings under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 19 -IA; 
(i) any other matter which is requ ired to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision to be made by regulations. ] 
26. Power of depositories to make bye -laws.—(1) A depository shall, with the previous approval of 
the Board, make bye -laws consistent with the provisions of this Act and the regulations.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, such bye -laws shall 
provide for — 
(a) the eligibility criteria for admission and removal of securities in the  depository;  
(b) the conditions subject to which the securities shall be dealt with;  
(c) the eligibility criteria for admission of any person as a participant;  
(d) the manner and procedure for dematerialisation of securities;  
(e) the procedure for transactions within the depo sitory;  
(f) the manner in which securities shall be dealt with or withdrawn from  a depository;  
(g) the procedure for ensuring safeguards to protect the interests of  participants and beneficial 
owners;  
(h) the conditions of admission into and withdrawal fro m a participant  by a beneficial owner;  
(i) the procedure for conveying information to the participants and  beneficial owners on dividend 
declaration, shareholder meetings and  other matters of interest to the beneficial owners;  
(j) the  manner of distribution of dividends, interest and monetary  benefits received from the 
company among beneficial owners;  
(k) the manner of creating pledge or hypothecation in respect of  securities held with a depository;  
(l) inter se rights and obligations among the depository, issuer,  participants and beneficial 
owners;  
(m) the manner and the periodicity of furnishing information to the  Board, issuer and other 
persons;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 55 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  15 
 (n) the procedure for resolving disputes involving depository, issuer,  company or a benef icial 
owner;  
(o) the procedure for proceeding against the participant committing  breach of the regulations and 
provisions for suspension and  expulsion of participants from the depository and cancellation of  
agreements entered with the depository;  
(p) the i nternal control standards including procedure for auditing,  reviewing and monitoring.  
(3) Where the Board considers it expedient so to do, it may, by order in  writing, direct a depository to 
make any bye -laws or to amend or revoke any  bye-laws already made  within such period as it may 
specify in this behalf.  
(4) If the depository fails or neglects to comply with such order within the  specified period, the Board 
may make the bye -laws or amend or revoke the  bye-laws made either in the form specified in the or der or 
with such  modifications thereof as the Board thinks fit.  
27. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. —Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as  may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one  session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the  session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions  aforesaid, both Hou ses agree in making any modification in the rule or  regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be  made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified  form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, h owever, that any such  
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
28. Application of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in d erogation of, any  other law for the time being in force relating to the holding and transfer of  
securities.  
29. Removal of difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order publi shed in the Official Gazette, make  such provisions not 
inconsistent  with the provisions of this Act as appear to it  to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of  a peri od of two years from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after  it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
[30. Amendments to certain enactments. ]—Rep. by the Repealing and  Amending Act ,                 
2001  (30 of 2001) , s. 2 and the First Schedule  (w.e.f . 3-9-2001).  
1[30A. Validation of certain acts. — Any act or thing done or purporting to have been done under the 
principal Act, in respect of settlement of administrative and civil proceedings, shall, for all purposes, be 
deemed to be valid and effective as if the amendments made to the principal Act ha d been in force at all 
material times. ] 
31. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Depositories (Third) Ordinance, 1996 (Ord. 28 of 1996) is hereby  
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the  said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to  have been done or taken under the  corresponding provisions of this Act.  
[THE SCHEDULE.] —Rep. by the Repealing and Amending Act, 2001  (30 of 2001),  s. 2 and the First 
Schedule (w.e.f. 3-9-2001) . 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 27 of 2014, s. 56 (w.e.f. 18 -7-2013).  
--------------------------The Persons With Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995--------------------------
1 
  
THE PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES,  PROTECTION OF 
RIGHTS A ND FULL PARTICIPATION) ACT, 1995  
________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definiti ons. 
 
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL  COORDINATION  COMMITTEE  
3. Central Coordination Committee.  
4. Term of office of Members.  
5. Disqualifications.  
6. Vacation of seats by Members.  
7. Meetings of the Central Coordination Committee.  
8. Functions of the Central Coordination Committee.  
9. Centr al Executive Committee.  
10. Functions of the Central Executive Committee.  
11. Meetings of the Central Executive Committee.  
12. Temporary association  of persons with Central Executive Committee for particular purposes.  
 
CHAPTER III  
THE STATE  COORDINATION  COMMITTEE  
13. State Coordination Committee.  
14. Terms and conditions of service of Members.  
15. Disqualifications.  
16. Vacation of seats.  
17. Meetings of the State Coordination Committee.  
18. Functions of the State Coordination Committee.  
19. State Executive Committee.  
20. Functions of the State E xecutive Committee.  
21. Meetings of the State Executive committee.  
22. Temporary association of persons with State Executive Committee for particular purposes.  
23. Power to give directions.  
24. Vacancies not to in validate proceedings.   2 
 CHAPTER IV  
PREVENTION AND EARLY DETECTION OF DISABILITIES  
SECTIONS  
25. Appropriate Governments and local authorities to take certain steps for the prevention of 
occurrence of disabilities.  
 
CHAPTER V  
EDUCATION  
26. Appropriate Governments and local authorities to provide children with disabilities free 
education, etc.  
27. Appropriate Governments  and local authorities to make schemes and programmes for non -formal 
education, etc.  
28. Research for designing and developing new assistive devices, teaching aids, etc.  
29. Appropriate Government s to set up  teachers’ training institutions to develop trained manpower 
for schools for children with disabilities.  
30. Appropriate Government s to prepare a comprehensive education scheme providing for transport 
facilities, supply of books, etc.  
31. Educational institutions to provide amanuensis to students with visual handicap.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
EMPLOYMENT  
32. Identification of posts which can be reserved for persons with disabilities.  
33. Reservation of posts.  
34. Special Employment Exchange.  
35. Power to inspect record or document in possession  of any establishment.  
36. Vacancies not filled up to be carried forward.  
37. Employers to maintain records.  
38. Schemes for ensuring employment of persons with disabilities.  
39. All education al institutions to reserve seats for persons with disabilit ies. 
40. Vacancies to be reserved in poverty alleviation schemes.  
41. Incentives to empl oyers to ensure five per cent. o f the work force is composed of persons with 
disabilities.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION  
42. Aids and appliances to persons with disabilities.  
43. Schemes for preferential  allotment of land for certain purposes.  
 
  3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
NON-DISCRIMINATION  
SECTIONS  
44. Non-discrimination in transport.  
45. Non-discrimination on the road.  
46. Non-discrimination in the built environment.  
47. Non-discrimination in Government employment.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
RESEARCH AND MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT  
48. Research.  
49. Financial incentives to Universities to enable them to undertake research.  
 
CHAPTER X  
RECOGNITION OF INSTITUTIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES  
50. Competent authority.  
51. No person to establish or maintain an institution for persons with disabilities except in accordance 
with a certificate of registration.  
52. Certificate of registration.  
53. Revocation of certificate.  
54. Appeal.  
55. Act not to apply to institutions established or maintained by the Central or State Government . 
 
CHAPTER XI  
INSTITUTION FOR PERSONS WITH SEVERE DISABILITIES  
56. Institutions for persons with severe disabilities.  
CHAPTER XII  
THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER AND COMMISSIONERS FOR PERSONS WITH  DISABILITIES  
57. Appointment of Chief Commissioner for persons with disabilities.  
58. Functions of the Chief Commissioner.  
59. Chief Commissioner to look into complaints with respect to deprivation of rights of persons with 
disabilities.  
60. Appointment of Commissioners for persons with disabilities.  
61. Powers of the Commissioner.  
62. Commis sioner to look into complaints with respect to matters relating to deprivation of rights of 
persons with disabilities.  
63. Authorities and officers to have certain powers of civil court.  
64. Annual report to be prepared by the Chief Commissioner.  
65. Annual reports to  be prepared by the Commissioners.   4 
 CHAPTER XIII  
SOCIAL SECURITY  
SECTIONS  
66. Appropriate Governments and local authorities to undertake rehabilitation.  
67. Insurance scheme for employees with disabilities.  
68. Unemployment allowance.  
 
CHAPTER XIV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
69. Punish ment for fraudulently availing any benefit meant for persons with disabilities.  
70. Chief C ommissioners, C ommissioners, officers and other staff to be public servants.  
71. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
72. Act to be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law.  
73. Power of appropriate Government to make rules.  
74. [Repealed .] 
  5 
 THE PERSONS WITH DIS ABILITIES (EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES,  PROTECTION OF 
RIGHTS AND FULL PARTICIPATION)  ACT, 1995  
ACT NO. 1 OF 1996  
[1st January , 1996 .]  
An Act to give effect to the Proclamation on the Full Participation and Equality of the People 
with Disabilities i n the Asian and Pacific Region.  
WHEREAS  the Meeting to Launch the Asian and Pacific Decade of Disabled Persons 1993 -2002 
convened by the Economic and Social Commission for  Asia and Pacific held at Beijing on 1st to 5th 
December, 1992, adopted the Proclamation on the Full Participation and Equality of People with 
Disabilities i n the Asian and Pacific Region;  
AND WHEREAS India is a sign atory to the said Proclamation;  
AND WHER EAS it is considered necessary to implem ent the Proclamation aforesaid.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -sixth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) Thi s Act may be called the Persons With 
Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and  Full Participation) Act, 1995.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Ce ntral Government may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appropriate Government ” means, — 
(i) in relation to the Central Government or any establishment wholly or substantially 
financed by tha t Government, or a Cantonment Board constituted under the Cantonment Act, 
1924 (2 of  1924), the Central Government;  
(ii) in relation to a State Government or any establishment wholly or substantially financed 
by that Government, or any local authority, other than a Cantonment Board, the  State 
Government;  
(iii) in respect of the Central Coordination Committee and the Central Executive Com mittee, 
the Central Government;  
(iv) in respect of the State Coordination Committee and the State Executive C ommittee, the 
State Government;  
(b) “blindness ” refers to a condition where a person suffers from any of the  following conditions, 
namely: — 
(i) total absence of sight; or  
(ii) visual acuity not exceeding 6/60 or 20/200 (snellen) in the better  eye with correcting 
lenses; or  
(iii) limitation of the field of vision subtending an angle of 20 degree or worse;  
(c) “Central Coordination Committee ” means the Central Coordination Committee constituted 
unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
                                                           
1. 7th February , 1996, vide notification No. S.O. 107(E), dated 7th February , 1996 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
 6 
 (d) “Central Executive Committee ” means  the Central Executive Committee constituted unde r 
sub-section ( 1) of section 9;  
(e) “cerebral palsy ” means a group of non -progressive conditions of a person characterised by 
abnormal motor control posture resulting from brain insult or injuries occurring in the pre -natal, peri -
natal or in fant period of development;  
(f) “Chief Commissioner ” means the Chief Commissioner appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 57;  
(g) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 60;  
(h) “competent authority ” means the author ity appointed under section 50;  
(i) “disability ” means — 
(i) blindness;  
(ii) low vision;  
(iii) leprosy -cured;  
(iv) hearing impairment;  
(v) locomotor disability;  
(vi) mental retardation;  
(vii) mental illness;  
(j) “employer ” means, — 
(i) in relation to  a Government, the authority notified by the Head of the Department in this 
behalf or where no such authority is notified, the Head of the Department; and  
(ii) in relation to an establishment, the chief executive  officer of that establishment;  
(k) “establishment ” means a corporation established by or under a Central, Provincial or State 
Act, or an authority or a body owned or controlled or aided by the Government or a local authority or 
a Government company as def ined in section 617 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , and 
includ es Departments of a Government;  
(l) “hearing impairment ” means loss of sixty decibels or more in the better year in the 
conve rsational range of frequencies;  
(m) “institution for persons with disabilities ” means an institution for the reception, care, 
protection, education, training, rehabilitation or any other servic e of persons with disabilities;  
(n) “leprosy -cured p erson ” means any person who has been cured of  leprosy but is suffering 
from— 
(i) loss of sensation in hands or feet as well as loss of sensation and paresis in the eye and 
eye-lid but with no manifest deformity;  
(ii) manifest deformity and paresis but having sufficient mobility in their hands and feet to 
enable them to enga ge in normal economic activity;  
(iii) extreme physical deformity as well as advanced age which prevents him from 
undertaking any gainful occupation,  
and the expression “leprosy cured ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(o) “locomotor disability ” means disability of the bones, joints or muscles leading to substantial 
restriction of the movement of the limbs  or any form of cerebral palsy;  
(p) “medical authority ” means any hospital or institution specified for the purposes of this Act by 
notificatio n by the appropriate Government;  7 
 (q) “mental illness ” means any mental disorder  other than mental retardation;  
(r) “mental retardation ” means a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind of a 
person which is specially characterised b y subnorma lity of intelligence;  
(s) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(t) “person with disability ” means a person suffering from not less than forty per cent. of any 
disability as ce rtified by a medical authority;  
(u) “person with low vision ” means a person with impairment of visual functioning even after 
treatment or standard refractive correction but who uses or is potentially capable of using vision for 
the planning or execution of a task with appropriate assistive device;  
(v) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(w) “rehabilitation ” refers to a process aimed at enabling persons with disabilities to reach and 
maintain their optimal physical, sensory, intellectual, psychiatr ic or social functional levels ; 
(x) “Special Employment Exchange ” means any office or place established and maintained by the 
Government for the collection and furnishing of information, either by keeping of reg isters or 
otherwise, respecting — 
(i) persons who seek to engage employees f rom amongst the perso ns suffering from 
disabilities;  
(ii) persons with disability who seek employment;  
(iii) vacancies to which person with disability seeki ng employment may be appointed;  
(y) “State Coordination Committee ” means the State Coordination Comm ittee constituted under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 13;  
(z) “State Executive Committee ” means the State Executive Committee constituted under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 19.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL  COORDINATION  COMMITTEE  
3. Central Coordination Co mmittee .—(1) The Central Government shall by notification constitute 
a body to be known as the Central Coordination Committee to exercise the powers conferred on, and to 
perform the functions assigned to it, under this Act.  
(2) The Central Coordination Com mittee sha ll consist of — 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Department of Welfare in the Central Gover nment, Chairperson, 
ex officio ; 
(b) the Minister of State in -charge of the Department of Welfare in the Central Government , 
Vice -Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(c) Secretaries to the Government of India in -charge of the Departments of Welfare, Education, 
Woman and Child Development, Expenditure, Personnel, Training and Public Grievances, Health, 
Rural Development, Industrial Development, Urban Affairs and Employment,  Science and 
Technology, Legal Affairs, Public En terprises, Members, ex officio ; 
(d) Chief Co mmissioner, Member, ex officio ; 
(e) Chairman Rai lway Board, Member, ex officio ; 
(f) Director -General of Labour, Employment an d Training, Member, ex officio ; 
(g) Director, National Council for Educational Research an d Training, Member, ex officio ; 
(h) three Members of Parliament, of whom two shall be elected by the House of the People and 
one by the Council of States, Members;  8 
 (i) three persons to be nominated by the  Central Government to represent the interests, which in 
the opinion of that Government ought to be represented, Members;  
(j) Directors of the — 
(i) National Institute for the Visually Handicapped, Dehradun;  
(ii) National Institute for the Mentally Handi capped, Secundrabad;  
(iii) National Institute for the Orthopa edically Handicapped, Calcutta;  
(iv) Ali Yavar Jung National Institute for the Hearing Handicappe d, Bombay, Members,  
ex officio ; 
(k) four Members to be nominated by the Central Government by rotation to represent the States 
and the Union territories in such manner as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government:  
Provided that no appointment under this clause shall be made except on the recommendation of 
the State Government or, as the case may be, the Union territory;  
(l) five persons as far as practicable, being persons wi th disabilities, to represent non-
governmental organisations or associations which are concerned with disabilities, to be nominated by 
the Central Government, one from each ar ea of disability, Members:  
Provided that while nominating persons under this clause, the Central Government shall nominate 
at least one woman and one person belonging to Schedu led Castes or Scheduled Tribes;  
(m) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Welfare dealing with the 
welfare of the handicapped , Member -Secretary, ex officio.  
(3) The office of the Member of the Central Coordination Committee shall not disqualify its holder 
for being chosen as or for being a Member of either Hou se of Parliament.  
4. Term of office of Members .—(1) Save as otherwise provided by or under this Act a Member of 
Central Coordination Committee nominated under clause ( i) or clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 
shall hold office for a term of three years f rom the date of his nomination:  
Provided that such a Member shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office 
until his su ccessor enters upon his office.  
(2) The term of office of an ex officio  Member shall come to an end as  soon as he ceases to hold the 
office by virtu e of which he was so nominated.  
(3) The Central Government may if it thinks fit remove any Member nominated under clause ( i) or 
clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3, before the expiry of his term of offic e after giving him a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the same.  
(4) A Member nominated under clause ( i) or clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 may at any time 
resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central Govern ment and the seat of the said 
Member  shall thereupon become vacant.  
(5) A casual vacancy in the Central Coordination Committee shall be filled by a fresh nomination and 
the person nominated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of th e term for which the 
Member in w hose place he was so nominated.  
(6) A Member nominated under clause ( i) or clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 shal l be eligible 
for renomination.  
(7) Members nominated under clause ( i) and clause ( l) of sub -section ( 2) of section 3 shall receive 
such allowances as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
5. Disqualifications .—(1) No person shall be a Member of the Centra l Coordination Committee, 
who— 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudged insolvent or has suspe nded payment of his debts or has 
compounded with his creditors, or  9 
 (b) is of unsound mind and stands so de clared by a competent court, or  
(c) is or has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Governmen t, 
involves moral turpitude, or 
(d) is or at any time has been convicted o f an offence under this Act, or  
(e) has so abused in the opinion of the Central Government his position as a Member as to render 
his continuance in the Central Coordination Committee detrimental to the i nterests  of the general 
public.  
(2) No order of removal shall be made by the Central Government under this section unless the 
Member concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against th e same.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 6) of section 4, a Member 
who has been removed under this section shall not be eligibl e for renomination as a Member.  
6. Vac ation of seats by M embers .—If a Member of the Central Coordination Committee becomes 
subject to any of the disqualifications specified in section 5 , his se at shall become vacant.  
7. Meetings of the Central Coordination Commi ttee.—The Central Coordination Committee shall 
meet at least once in every six months and shall observe such rules of procedure in r egard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
8. Functions of the Central Coordination Committee .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, 
the function of the Central Coordination Committee shall be to serve as the national focal point on 
disabil ity matters and facilitate the continuous evolution of a comprehensive policy towards solving the 
problems face d by persons with disabilities.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the f oregoing, the Central Coordination 
Committee may perform all or any of th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) review and coordinate the activities of all the Departments of Government and other 
Governmental and non -Governmental Organisations which are deali ng with matters relatin g to 
persons with disabilities;  
(b) develop a national policy to address issues face d by persons with disabilities;  
(c) advise the Central Government on the formulation of policies, programmes, legislation and 
proje cts with respect t o disability;  
(d) take up the cause of persons with disabilities with the concerned authorities and the 
international organisations with a view to provide for schemes and projects for the disabled in the 
national plans and other programmes and policies evo lved by the international agencies;  
(e) review in consultation with the donor agencies their funding policies from the perspective of 
their impac t on persons with disabilities;  
(f) take such other steps to ensure barrier free environment in public places, work places, public 
utilities, schools and other institutions;  
(g) monitor and evaluate the impact of policies and programmes designed for achieving equality 
and full participatio n of persons with disabilities;  
(h) to perform such other functions as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
9. Central Executive Committee .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a Committee to be 
known as the Central Executive Committee to pe rform the functions  assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The Central Execut ive Committee shall consist of — 
(a) the Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Welfare, Chair -person, ex officio ; 
(b) the Chief Comm issioner, Member, ex officio ; 
(c) the Director -General for Healt h Services, Member, ex officio ;  10 
 (d) the Director -General, Employment and Training, Me mber, ex officio ; 
(e) six persons not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to represent 
the Ministries or Departments of Rural Development, Education, Welfare, Personnel , Public 
Grievances and Pension and Urban Affairs and Employment, Science and T echnology, Members,  
ex officio ; 
(f) the Financial Advisor, Ministry of Welfare in the Central Government, Member, ex officio ; 
(g) Advisor (Tariff) Rai lway Board, Member, ex officio ; 
(h) four members to be nominated by the Central Government, by rotation, to represent the State 
Governments and the Union territories in such manner as may be prescr ibed by the Central 
Government;  
(i) one person to be nominated by the Central Government to represent the interest, which in the 
opinion of the Central Government o ught to be represented, Member;  
(j) five persons, as far as practicable, being persons with disabilities, to represent non -
governmental organisations or association s which are concerned with dis abilities, to be nominated by 
the Central Government, one from ea ch area of disability, Members:  
Provided that while nominating persons under this clause, the Central Gove rnment shall nominate 
at least one woman and one person belonging to Schedu led Castes or Scheduled Tribes;  
(k) Joint Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Welfare dealing with the welfare 
of the handicapped , Member -Secretary, ex officio . 
(3) Members nominated under clause ( i) and clause ( j) of sub -section ( 2) shall receive such 
allowances as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(4) A Member nominated under clause ( i) or clause ( j) of sub -section ( 2) may at any time resign his 
office by writing under his hand addressed to t he Central Government and the se at of the said Member  
shall thereupon become vacant.  
10. Functions of t he Central Executive Committee .—(1) The Central Executive Committee shall 
be the executive body of the Cen tral Coordination Committee and shall be responsible for carrying out the 
decisions of the Central Coordination Committee.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Executive Committee shall also 
perform such other functions a s may be delegated to it by the Central Coordination Committee.  
11. Meetings of t he Central Executive Committee .—The Central Executive Committee shall meet 
at least once in three months and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction  of 
business at its meetings as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
12. Temporary association of persons with Central Executive Com mittee for particular 
purposes .—(1) The Central Executive Committee may associate with itself in such manner and for  such 
purposes as may be prescribed by the Central Government any person whose assistance or advice it may 
desire to obtain in performing any o f its functions under this Act.  
(2) A person associated with the Central Executive Committee under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose 
shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the Central Executive Committee relevant to that 
purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the said Committee, and shall not be a member 
for any other purpose.  
(3) A person associated wit h the said Committee under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose shall be paid 
such fees and allowances, for attending its meetings and for attending to any other work of the said 
Committee, as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
  11 
 CHAPTER III  
THE STATE  COORDINATION  COMMITTEE  
13. State Coordination Committee .—(1) Every State Government shall, by notification, constitute a 
body to be known as the State Coordination Committee to exercise the powers conferred on, and to 
perform the f unction assigned to it, under this Act.  
(2) the State Coordinat ion Committee shall consist of — 
(a) The Minister in -charge of the Department of Social Welfare in the State Gover nment, 
Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Minister of State in -charge of the Department of Social Welfare, if any , Vice -Chairperson, 
ex officio ; 
(c) Secretaries to the State Government in -charge of the Departments of Welfare, Education, 
Woman and Child Development, Expenditure, Personnel Training and Public Grievances, Health, 
Rural Development, Industrial Development, Urban Affairs and Employment, Science and 
Technology, Public Enterprises, by whatever na me called, Members, ex officio ; 
(d) Secretary of any other Department which the State Government considers  necessary, Member,  
ex officio ; 
(e) Chairman Bureau of Public Enterprises (by whatever n ame called) Member, ex officio ; 
(f) five persons, as far as practicable, being persons with disabilities, to represent non -
governmental organisations or association s which are concerned w ith dis abilities, to be nominated by 
the State Government, one from ea ch area of disability, Members:  
Provided that while nominating persons under this clause, the State Government shall nominate at 
least one woman and one person belonging to Schedu led Cas tes or Scheduled Tribes;  
(g) three Members of State Legislature, of whom two shall be elected by the Legislative 
Assembly and one by t he Legislative Council, if any;  
(h) three persons to be nominated by that State Government to represent agriculture, indus try or 
trade or any other interest, which in the opinion of State Government ought to be re presented, 
Members, ex officio ; 
(i) the Commissioner, Member, ex officio ;  
(j) Secretary to the State Government dealing with the welfare of the handicapped , Member -
Secretary, ex officio . 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no State Coordination Committee shall be 
constituted for a Union territory and in relation to a Union territory, the Central Coordination Committee 
shall exercise the f unctions and perform the functions of a State Coordination Com mittee for the Union 
territory:  
Provided that in relation to a Union territory, the Central Coordination Committee may delegate all or 
any of its powers and functions under this sub -section to s uch person or body of persons as the Central 
Government may specify.  
14. Terms and condition s of service of M embers .—(1) Save as otherwise provided by or under this 
Act, a Member of a State Coordi nation Committee nominated under clause ( f) or clause ( h) of  
sub-section ( 2) of section 13 shall hold office for a term of three years from the date of his nomination:  
Provided that such a Member shall, notwithstanding the expiration of his term, continue to hold office 
until his su ccessor enters upon his offi ce. 
(2) The term of office of an ex officio  Member shall come to an end as soon as he ceases to hold the 
office by virtu e of which he was so nominated.  12 
 (3) The State Government may, if it thinks fit, remove any Member nominated under clause ( f) or 
clause ( h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 13, before the expiry of his term of office after giving him a 
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the same.  
(4) A Member nominated under clause ( f) or clause ( h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 13 may, at any 
time, resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the State Government and the seat of the 
said Member  shall thereupon become vacant.  
(5) A casual vacancy in the State Coordination Committee shall be filled by a fresh nomination and 
the person no minated to fill the vacancy shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the 
Member in w hose place he was so nominated.  
(6) A Member nominated under clause ( f) and clause ( h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 13 shal l be 
eligible for renomina tion. 
(7) Members nominated under clause ( f) and clause ( h) of sub -section ( 2) of section 13 shall receive 
such allowances as may be pres cribed by the State Government.  
15. Disqualifications .—(1) No person shall be a Member of the St ate Coordination Committee, 
who— 
(a) is, or at any time, has been adjudged insolvent or has suspended payment of his debts or has 
compounded with his creditors, or  
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so de clared by a competent court, or  
(c) is or has been convicted of an offence which in the opinion of the State Government involves 
moral turpitud e, or 
(d) is or at any time has been convicted o f an offence under this Act, or  
(e) has so abused, in the opinion of the State Government, his position as a member as to render 
his continuance in the State Coordination Committee detrimental to the interests of the general public.  
(2) No order of removal shall be made by the State Government under this section unless the Member 
concerned has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the same.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 6) of section 14, a Member 
who has been removed under this section shall not be eligibl e for renomination as a Member.  
16. Vacation of seats .—If a Member  of the State Coordination Committee becomes subject to any of 
the disqualifications specified in section 15 , his seat shall become vacant.  
17. Meetings of th e State Coordination Committee .—The State Coordination Committee shall 
meet at least once in every  six months and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its  meetings as may be prescribed.  
18. Functions of th e State Coordination Committee .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the 
function of the State Coo rdination Committee shall be to serve as the state focal point on disability 
matters and facilitate the continuous evolution of a comprehensive policy towards solving the problems 
faced by persons with dis abilities.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing function the State 
Coordination Committee may, within the State perform all or any of th e following functions, namely: — 
(a) review and coordinate the activities of all the Departments of Government and other 
Governmental and non -Gove rnmental Organisations which are  dealing with matters relatin g to 
persons with disabilities;  
(b) develop a State policy to address issues face d by persons with disabilities;  
(c) advise the State Government on the formulation of policies, progra mmes, legislation and 
proje cts with respect to disability;  13 
 (d) review, in consultation with the donor agencies, their funding policies from the perspective of 
their impac t on persons with disabilities;  
(e) take such other steps to ensure barrier free envir onment in public places, work places, public 
utilities, schools and other institutions;  
(f) monitor and evaluate the impact of policies and programmes designed for achieving equality 
and full participatio n of persons with disabilities;  
(g) to perform such other functions as may be pres cribed by the State Government.  
19. State Executive Committee .—(1) The State Government shall constitute a committee to be 
known as the State Executive Committee to perform the functions  assigned to it under this Act.  
(2) The State Execut ive Committee shall consist of — 
(a) the Secretary, Department of Social We lfare, Chairperson, ex officio ; 
(b) the Co mmissioner, Member, ex officio ; 
(c) nine persons not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to the State Government, to represent t he 
Departments of Health, Finance, Rural Development, Education, Welfare, Personnel Public 
Grievances, Urban Affairs Labour and Employment, Science and Technology, Members, ex officio ; 
(d) one person to be nominated by the State Government to represent the  interest, which in the 
opinion of the State Government o ught to be represented, Member;  
(e) five persons, as far as practicable being persons with disabilities, to represent non -
governmental organisations or associations which are concerned w ith dis abilities, to be nominated by 
the State Government, one from ea ch area of disability, Members:  
Provided that while nominating persons under this clause, the State Government shall nominate at 
least one woman and one person belonging to Schedu led Castes or Scheduled Tribes;  
(f) Joint Secretary dealing with the disability division in the Department of Welfare , Member -
Secretary, ex officio . 
(3) Members nominated under clause ( d) and clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) shall receive such 
allowances as may be pres cribed by the State Government.  
(4) A Member nominated under clause ( d) or clause ( e) may at any time resign his office by writing 
under his hand addressed to the State Government and the seat of the said Member  shall thereupon 
become vacant.  
20. Functions of  the State Executive Committee .—(1) The State Executive Committee shall be the 
executive body of the State Coor dination Committee and shall be responsible for carrying out the 
decisions of th e State Coordination Committee.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the State Executive Committee shall also 
perform such other functions as may be delegated to it by th e State Coordination Committee.  
21. Meetings of  the State Executive Committee .—The State Executive Committee shall meet at 
least once in three months and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of 
business at its meetings as may b e pres cribed by the State Government.  
22. Temporary association of persons with State Executive Com mittee for particular 
purposes .—(1) The State Executive Committee may associate with itself in such manner and for such 
purposes as may be prescribed by the State Government any person whose assistance or advice it may 
desire to obtain in performing any o f its functions under thi s Act.  
(2) A person associated with the State Executive Committee under sub -section ( 1) for any purpose 
shall have the right to take part in the discussions of the State Executive Committee relevant to that 
purpose, but shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the said Committee , and shall not be a member 
for any other purpose.  14 
 (3) A person associated wit h the said Committee under sub -section ( 1) for any purpos e shall be paid 
such fees and allowances, for attending its meetings and for attending to any other work of the said 
Committee, as may be pres cribed by the State Government.  
23. Power to give directions .—In the performance of  its functions under this Act, — 
(a) the Central Coordination Committee shall be bound by such directions in writing, as t he 
Central  Government may give to it; and  
(b) the State Coordination Committee shall be bound by such directions in writing, as the Central 
Coordination Committee or the State Government may give to it:  
Provided that where a direction given by the State Government is inconsistent with any direction 
given by the Central Coordination Committee, the matter shall be referred to the Centr al Government for 
its decision.  
24. Vacancies  not to invalidate proceedings .—No act or proceeding of the Central Coordination 
Committee, the Central Executive Committee, a State Coordination Committee or a State Executive 
Committee shall be called in question on the ground merely on the existence of any vacancy in or any 
defect in the c onstitution of such Committees.  
CHAPTER IV  
PREVENTION AND EARLY DETECTION OF DISABILITIES  
25. Appropriate Governments and local authorities to take certain steps for the prevention  of 
occurrence of disabilities .—Within the limits of their economic capacity and development, the 
appropria te Governments and the local authorities, with a view to preventing the occ urrence of 
disabilities, shall — 
(a) undertake or cause to be undertaken surveys, investigations and research concerning the cause  
of occurrence of disabilities;  
(b) promote various meth ods of preventing disabilities;  
(c) screen all the children at least once in a year for the purpose of identifying “at-risk” cases;  
(d) provide facilities for training to the staff  at the primary health centres;  
(e) sponsor or cause to be sponsored awareness campaigns and disseminate or cause to be 
disseminated information for general hygiene, health and sanitation;  
(f) take measures for  pre-natal, perinatal and post -natal care of mother and child;  
(g) educate the p ublic through the pre -schools, schools, primary health centres, village level 
workers  and anganwadi workers;  
(h) create awareness amongst  the masses through television, radio and other mass media on the 
causes of disabilities and the preventive measures to  be adopted.  
CHAPTER V  
EDUCATION  
26. Appropriate Governments and local authorities to provide children with di sabilities free 
education, etc .—The appropriate Governments a nd the local authorities shall — 
(a) ensure that every child with a disability has access to free education in an appropriate 
environment till he att ains the age of eighteen years;  
(b) endeavour to promote the integration of students with disa bilities in the normal schools;  
(c) promote setting up of special schools in Government and priv ate sector for those in need of 
special education, in such a manner that children with disabilities living in any part of the count ry 
have access to such schools;  15 
 (d) endeavour to equip the special schools for children with disabilities with vocational tra ining 
facilities.  
27. Appropriate Governments and local authorities to make schemes and programmes for non -
formal education, etc .—The appropriate Governments and the local authorities shall by  notification 
make schemes for — 
(a) conducting part -time classes  in respect of children with disabilities who having completed 
education up to class fifth and could not continue their  studies on a whole -time basis;  
(b) conducting special part -time classes for providing functional literacy for children in the age 
group of sixteen and above;  
(c) imparting non -formal education by utilizing the available manpower in rural areas after givin g 
them appropriate orientation;  
(d) imparting education through ope n schools or open universities;  
(e) conducting class and discussions through interac tive electronic or other media;  
(f) providing every child with disability free of cost special books and equip ments needed for his 
education.   
28. Research for designing and developing new assisti ve devices, teaching aids, etc .—The 
appropriate Governments shall initiate or cause to be initiated research by official and non -governmental 
agencies for the purpose of designing and developing new assistive devices, teaching aids, special 
teaching materials or such other items as are neces sary to give a child with disability eq ual opportunities 
in education.  
29. Appropriate  Governments to set up teachers’  training institutions to develop trained 
manpower for schools for children with disabilities .—The appropriate Governments shall set up 
adequate number of teachers ’ training institutions and assist the national institutes and other voluntary 
organisations to develop teachers’ training programmes specialising  in disabilities so that requisite trained 
manpower is available for special schools and integrated schools for children with disabilities.  
30. Appropriate Governments to prepare a comprehensive education scheme providing for 
transport fa cilities, supply o f books, etc .—Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the 
appropriate Governments shall by notification prepare a comprehensive education scheme which shall 
make provision for — 
(a) transport facilities to the children with disabilities or in the alt ernative financial incentives to 
parents or guardians to enable their children with disabilities to attend schools;  
(b) the removal of archi tectural barriers from schools, colleges or other institutions imparting 
vocati onal and professional training;  
(c) the supply of books, uniforms and other materials to children with  disabilities attending 
school;  
(d) the grant of scholarship  to students with disabilities;  
(e) setting up of appropriate fora for the redressal of grievances of parents regarding the 
placeme nt of th eir children with disabilities;  
(f) suitable modification in the examination system to eliminate purely mathematical questions for 
the benefit of blind student s and students with low vision;  
(g) restructuring of curriculum for the benefit  of childr en with disabilities;  
(h) restructuring the curriculum for benefit of students with hearing impairment to facilitate them 
to take only one langua ge as part of their curriculum.  
31. Educational institutions to provide amanuensis to  students with visual handicap .—All 
educational institutions shall provide or cause to be provided amanuensis to blind students a nd students 
with or low vision.  16 
 CHAPTER VI  
EMPLOYMENT  
32. Identification of posts which can be reserved  for persons with disabi lities .—Appropriate 
Governments shall — 
(a) identify posts, in the establishments, which can be reserved f or the persons with disability;  
(b) at periodical intervals not exceeding three years, review the list of posts identified and up -date 
the list taking into consideration the developments in technology.  
33. Reservation of posts .—Every appropriate Government shall appoint in every establishm ent such 
percentage of vacancies not less than three per cent. for persons or class of persons with disability of 
which one per cent. each shall be reser ved for persons suffering from — 
(i) blindness or low vision;  
(ii) hearing impairment;  
(iii) locomotor d isability or cerebral palsy,  
in the posts identified for each disability:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, having regard to the type of work carried on in any 
department or establishment, by notification subject to such conditions, if any, a s may be specified in 
such notification, exempt any establishment from the provisions of this section.  
34. Special Employment Exchange .—(1) The appropriate Government may , by notification, require 
that from such date as may be specified, by notification, the employer in every establishment shall furnish 
such information or return as may be prescribed in relation to vacancies appointed for persons with 
disability that have occurred or are  about to occur in that establishment to such Special Employment 
Excha nge as may be prescribed and the establishment shall thereupo n comply with such requisition.  
(2) The form in which and the intervals of time for which information or returns shall be furnished 
and the particulars, they shall contain shall be such as may be  prescribed.  
35. Power to inspect record or document in p ossession of any establishment .—Any person 
authorised by the Special Employment Exchange in writing, shall have access to any relevant record or 
document in the possession of any establishment and ma y enter at any reasonable time and premises 
where he believes such record or document to be, and inspect or take copies of relevant records or 
documents or ask any question necessary for obtaining any information.  
36. Vacancies not f illed up to be carried forward .—Where in any recruitment year any vacancy 
under section 33, cannot be filled up due to non -availability of a suitable person with disability or, for any 
other sufficient reason, such vacancy shall be carried forward in the succeeding recruitment y ear and if in 
the succeeding recruitment year also suitable person with disability is not available, it may first be filled 
by interchange among the three categories and only when there is no person with disability available for 
the post in that year, the employer shall fill up the vacancy by appointment of a person, other  than a 
person with disability:  
Provided that if the nature of vacancies in an establishment is such that a given category of person  
cannot be employed, the vacancies may be interchanged among the three categories with the prior 
approval  of the appropriate Government.  
37. Employers t o maintain records .—(1) Every employer shall maintain such record in relation to 
the person with disability employed in his establishment in such form and in s uch manner as may be 
prescribed  by the appropriate Government.  
(2) The records maintained under sub -section ( 1) shall be open to inspection at all reasonable hours 
by such persons as may be authorised in this behalf by general or special order  by the appro priate 
Government.   17 
 38. Schemes for ensuring employmen t of persons with disabilities .—(1) The appropriate 
Governments and local authorities shall by notification formulate schemes for ensuring employment of 
persons with disabilities, an d such schemes may provide for — 
(a) the training and welfar e of persons with disabilities;  
(b) the relaxation of upper age limit;  
(c) regulating the employment;  
(d) health and safety measures and creation of a non -handicapping environment in places where 
persons with disabilities are employed;  
(e) the manner in which and the persons by whom the cost of operating the  schemes is to be 
defrayed; and  
(f) constituting the authority responsible for th e administration of the scheme.  
39. All educational institutions to reserve  seats  for persons with disability .—All Government 
educational institutions and other educational institutions receiving aid from the Government, shall 
reserve not less than three per  cent. seats for persons with disabilities.  
40. Vacancies to be reserved in poverty alleviation schemes .—The appropriate Governments and 
local authorities shall reserve not less than three per cent. in all poverty alleviation schemes for the benefit 
of persons with disabilities.   
41. Incentives to employers to ensure five per  cent. of the work force is composed of pe rsons 
with disabilities .—The appropriate Governments and the local authorities shall, within the limits of their 
economic capacity and development, provide incentives to employers both in public and private sectors t o 
ensur e that at least five per cent. o f their work force is compose d of persons with disabilities.  
CHAPTER VII  
AFFIRMATIVE ACTION  
42. Aids and appliance s to persons with disabilities .—The appropriate Governments shall by 
notification make schemes to provi de aids and appliance s to persons with disabilities.  
43. Schemes for preferential allotmen t of land for certain purposes .—The appropriate 
Governments and local authorities shall by notification frame schemes in favour of persons with 
disabilities, for the preferential allotment of land at concessional rates for — 
(a) house;  
(b) setting up business;  
(c) setting up  of special re creation centres;  
(d) estab lishment of special schools;  
(e) establishment of research centres;  
(f) establishment of factories by e ntrepreneurs with disabilities.  
CHAPTER VIII  
NON-DISCRIMINATION  
44. Non -discrimination in tr ansport .—Establishments in the transport sector shall, within the limits 
of their economic capacity and development for the benefit of persons with disabili ties, take special 
measures to — 
(a) adapt rail compartments, buses, vessels and aircrafts in such a way as to perm it easy access to  
such persons;  
(b) adapt toilets in rail compartments, vessels, aircrafts and waiting rooms in such a way as to 
permit the wheel chair users to use them conveniently.   18 
 45. Non -discrimination  on the road .—The appropriate Governments and the local authoritie s shall, 
within the limits of their economic capacit y and development, provide for — 
(a) installation of auditory signals at red lights in the public roads for the benefit of persons with 
visually handicap;  
(b) causing  curb cuts and slopes to be made in pavements for the easy access of wheel chair users;  
(c) engraving on the surface of the zebra crossing for the blind or for persons with low vision;  
(d) engraving on the edges of railway platforms for the blind or for pe rsons with low vision;  
(e) devising app ropriate symbols of disability;  
(f) warning  signals at appropriate places.  
46. Non -discrimin ation in the built environment .—The appropriate Governments and the local 
authorities shall, within the limits of their econo mic capacit y and development, provide for — 
(a) ramps in public buildings;  
(b) adaptation of  toilets for wheel chair users;  
(c) braille symbols and auditory signals in elevators or lifts;  
(d) ramps in hospitals, primary health centres and other medical care  and rehabilitation 
institutions.  
47. Non -discrimin ation in Government employment .—(1) No establishment shall dispense with, 
or reduce in rank, an employee who acquires a  disability during his service:  
Provided that , if an employee , after acquiring disabil ity is not suitable for the post he was holding, 
could  be shifted to some other post w ith the same pay scale and service benefits:  
Provided further that if it is not possible to adjust the employee against any post, he may be kept on a 
supernumerar y post u ntil a suitable post is available or he attains the age of supera nnuation, whichever is 
earlier.  
(2) No promotion shall he denied to a person merely o n the ground of his disability:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may, having regard to the type of  work carried on in any 
establishment, by notification and subject to s uch conditions, if any, as may b e specified in such 
notification, exempt any establishment from the provisions of this section.  
CHAPTER IX  
RESEARCH AND MANPOWER DEVELOPMENT  
48. Research .—The appropriate Governments and local authorities shall promote and sponsor 
research, inter  alia, in the following areas: — 
(a) prevention of disability;  
(b) rehabilitation including community based rehabilitation;  
(c) development  of assistive devices includin g their psycho -social aspects;  
(d) job identification;  
(e) on site modifica tions in offices and factories.  
49. Financial incentives to Universities to ena ble them to undertake research .—The appropriate 
Governments shall provide financial assistance to universities, other institutions of higher learning, 
professional bodies  and non -governmental research -units or institutions, for undertaking research for 
special education, rehabilit ation and manpower development.  
  19 
 CHAPTER  X 
RECOGNITION OF INSTITUTIONS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES  
50. Competent authority .—The State Government shall appoint any authority as it deems fit to be a 
competent authority for the purposes o f this Act.  
51. No person to establish or maintain an institution for persons with disabilities except in 
accordance with  a certificate of registration .—Save as otherwise provided under this Act, no person 
shall establish or maintain any institution for persons with disabilities except under and in accordance  
with a certificate of registration issued in this behalf by the competent authority:  
Provided that a person maintaining an institution for persons with disabilities immediately before the 
commencement of this Act may continue to maintain such institution for a period of six months from such 
commencement and if he h as made an application for such certificate under this section within the said 
period of six months, till the disposal of such application.  
52. Certificate of registration .—(1) Every application  for a certificate of registration shall be made 
to the competent authority in such form and in such manner as may be pres cribed by the State 
Government.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the competent authority shall make such 
enquir ies as it may deem fit and where it is satisfied that the applicant has complied with the requirements 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder it shall grant a certificate of registration to the applicant and 
where it is not so satisfied the competent au thority shall, by order, refuse to gra nt the certificate applied 
for: 
Provided that before making any order refusing to grant a certificate the competent authority shall 
give to the applicant a reasonable opportunity of being heard and every order of refus al to grant a 
certificate shall be communicated to the applicant in such manner as may be pres cribed by the State 
Government.  
(3) No certificate of registrat ion shall be granted under sub -section ( 2) unless the institution with 
respect to which an application has been made is in a position to provide such facilities and maintain such 
standards as may be pres cribed by the State Government.  
(4) A certificate of registrati on granted under this section, — 
(a) shall, unless revoked under section 53, remai n in force for such period as may be pres cribed 
by the State Government;  
(b) may be renewed from time to time for a like period; and  
(c) shall be in such form and shall be subject to such conditions as may be pres cribed by the State 
Government.  
(5) An application for renewal of a certificate of registration shall be made not less than sixty days  
before the period of validity.  
(6) The certificate of registration shall he displayed by the institution in a conspicuous place.   
53. Revocation of certificate .—(1) the competent authority may, if it has reasonable cause to believ e 
that the holder of the certi ficate of registration granted under sub -section ( 2) of section 52 has — 
(a) made  a statement in relation to any application for the issue or renewal of the certificate which 
is incorrect or fa lse in material particulars; or  
(b) committed or has caused to be committed any breach of rules or any conditions subject to 
which the certifica te was granted,  
it may , after making such inquiry, as it deems fit, by order, revo ke the certificate:  
Provided that no such order shall be made until an opportunity is given to the holder of the certificate 
to show cause as to why the cer tificate should n ot be revoked.  20 
 (2) Where a certificate in respect of an institution has been revoked under sub -section  (1), such 
institution shall cease to function from the date of such revocation:  
Provided that where an appeal lies under section 54 against the order of  revocation, such insti tution 
shall cease to function — 
(a) where no appeal has been preferred immediately on the expiry of the period prescribed fo r the 
filing of such appeal, or  
(b) where such appeal has been preferred, but the order of r evocation has bee n upheld, from  the 
date of the order of appeal.  
(3) On the revocation of a certificate in respect of an institution, the competent authority may direct 
that any person with disability who is an inmate of such institution on the dat e of such revocation, shall 
be— 
(a) restored to the custody of her or his parent, spouse or lawful guardian, as the case may be, or  
(b) transferred to any other institution specif ied by the competent authority.  
(4) Every institution which holds a certificate of registration which is revoked under this section shall, 
immediately after such revocation, surrender such certific ate to the competent authority.  
54. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by the order of the competent authority refusing to grant a 
certificate or revoking a certificate may, within such period as may be prescribed by the State 
Government, prefer an appeal to that Government agai nst such refusal or revocation.  
(2) The order of the State Government  on such appeal shall be final.  
55. Act not to apply to instituti ons established or maintained by the Central or  State 
Government .—Nothing contained in this Chapter shall apply to an institution for persons with 
disabilities established or maintained by the Central Go vernment or a State Government.  
CHAPTER XI  
INSTITUTION FOR P ERSONS WITH SEVERE DISABILITIES  
56. Institutions for pe rsons with severe disabilities .—(1) The appropriate Government may 
establish and maintain institutions for persons with severe disabilities a t such places as it thinks fit.  
(2) Where, the appropriate Government is of opinion that any institution other than an institution, 
established under sub -section ( 1), is fit for the rehabilitation of the persons with severe disabilities, the 
Government may recognise such institution as an instituti on for persons with severe disabilitie s for the 
purposes of this Act:  
Provided that no institution shall be recognised under this section unless such institution has complied 
with the requirements of this Act  and the rules made thereunder.  
(3) Every instit ution established under sub -section ( 1) shall be maintained in such manner and satisfy 
such conditions as may be prescribed by the appropriat e Government.   
(4) For the purposes of this section “person with severe disability ” means a person with eighty per 
cent. or mo re of one or more disabilities.  
CHAPTER XII  
THE CHIEF COMMISSIONER  AND COMMISSIONERS FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES  
57. Appointment of Chief Commissioner  for persons with disabilities .—(1) The Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint a Chief Commissioner for persons with disabilitie s for the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chief Commissioner unless he has special 
knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to rehabilit ation.   21 
 (3) The  salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service (including 
pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Chief Commissioner shall be such as may be 
prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall determine the nature and categories of officers and other 
employees required to assist the Chief Commissioner in the discharge of his functions and provide the 
Chief Commissioner with such officers and other  employees as it thinks fit.  
(5) The officers and employees provided to the Chief Commissioner shall discharge their functions 
under the general superintend ence of the Chief Commissioner.  
(6) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and employees provided t o 
the Chief Commissioner shall be such as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
58. Funct ions of the Chief Commissioner .—The Chief Commissioner shall — 
(a) coordinate  the work of the Commissioners;  
(b) monitor the utilisation of funds disbu rsed by th e Central Government;  
(c) take steps to safeguard the rights and facilities made availabl e to persons with disabilities;  
(d) submit reports to the Central Government on the implementation of the Act at such intervals 
as that Government may prescribe.  
59. C hief Commissioner to look into complaints with respect to deprivation of rights of persons 
with d isabilities .—Without  prejudice to the provisions of section 58 the Chief Commissioner may of his 
own motion or on the application of any aggrieved person or otherwise look into complaint s with respect 
to matters relating to— 
(a) deprivation of right s of persons with disabilit ies; 
(b) non -implementation of laws, rules, bye -laws, regulations, executive orders, guidelines or 
instructions made or issued by the appropriate Governments and the local authorities for the welfare 
and protection of rights or persons with disabilities,   
and take up the matter wi th the appropriate authorities.  
60. Appointment of Commissioners  for persons with disabilities .—(1) Every State Government 
may, by notification appoint a Commissioner for persons with disabilitie s for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Commissioner unless he has special 
knowledge or practical experience in respect of matters relating to rehabilit ation.  
(3) The s alary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service ( including pension 
gratuity and other retirement benefits) of the Com missioner shall be such as may b e pres cribed by the 
State Government.  
(4) The State Government shall determine the nature and categories of officers and other employees 
required to assist the Commissioner in the discharge of his functions and provide the Commissioner with 
such officers and ot her employees as it thinks fit.  
(5) The officers and employees provided to the Commissioner shall discharge their functions under 
the general super intendence of the Commissioner.  
(6) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and employees provided to 
the Commissioner shall be such as may be pres cribed by the State Government.  
61. Powers of the Commissioner .—The Commi ssioner within the State shall — 
(a) coordinate with the departments of the State Government for the programmes and schemes for 
the benefit of p ersons with disabilities;  
(b) monitor the utilisation of funds disbursed by the State Government;   22 
 (c) take step s to saf eguard the rights and facilities made availabl e to persons with disabilities;  
(d) submit reports to the State Government on the implementation of the Act at such intervals as 
that Government may prescribe and forward a copy the reof to the Chief Commissioner.  
62. Commissioner to look into complaints with respect to matters relating to deprivation of 
right s of persons with disabilities .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of section 61 the 
Commissioner may of his own motion or on the applicatio n of any aggrieved person or otherwise look 
into complaints with respect to matters relating to — 
(a) deprivation of right s of persons with disabilities;  
(b) non -implementation of laws, rules, bye -laws, regulations, executive orders, guidelines or 
instructi ons made or issued by the appropriate Governments and the local authorities for the welfare 
and protection of right s of persons with disabilities,  
and take up the matter wi th the appropriate authorities.  
63. Authorities and officers to have  certain powers of civil court .—The Chief Commissioner and 
the Commissioners shall, for the purpose of discharging their functions under this Act, have the same 
powers as are vested in a court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit, in 
respect of the foll owing matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforci ng the attendance of witnesses;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof  from any court or office;  
(d) receiv ing evidence on affidavits ; and  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents.  
(2) Every proceeding before the Chief Commissioner and Commissioners shall be a judicial 
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ) and the 
Chief Commissioner, the Commissioner, the competent authority, shall be deemed to be a civil court for 
the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) .  
64. Annual  report to be prep ared by the Chie f Commissioner .—(1) The Chief Commissioner 
shall prepare in such form and at such time for each financial year as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government an annual report giving a full account of his activities during the previous financial year and 
forward a copy the reof to the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall cause the annual report to be laid before each House of Parliament 
along with the recommendations explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the 
recommendation m ade therein in so far as they relate to the Central Government and the reasons for non -
acceptance, if any, of any such recommendation or part.  
65. Annual reports to be  prepared by the Commissioners .—(1) The Commissioner shall prepare 
in such form and at su ch time for each financial year as may be prescribed by the State Government an 
annual report giving a full account of his activities during the previous financial year and forward a copy 
thereof to the State Government.  
(2) The State Government shall caus e the annual report to be laid before each State Legislature along 
with the recommendations explaining the action taken or proposed to be taken on the recommendation 
made therein in so far as they relate to the State Government and the reasons for non -acceptance, if any, 
of any such recommendation or part.  
CHAPTER XIII  
SOCIAL SECURITY  
66. Appr opriate G overnments and local authoriti es to undertake rehabilitation .—(1) The 
appropriate Governments and the local authorities shall within the limits of their economic capacity and 
development undertake or cause to be undertaken rehabilitation of  all persons with disabilities.   23 
 (2) For purposes of sub -section ( 1), the appropriate  Governments and local authorities shall grant 
financial assistance to n on-governmental organisations.  
(3) The appropriate Governments and local authorities while formulating rehabilitation policies shall 
consult the non -governmental organisations working for the caus e of persons with disabilities.  
67. Insurance scheme f or employees with disabilities .—(1) The appropriate Government shall by 
notification frame an insurance scheme for the benefit of i ts employees with disabilities.  
(2) Notwithstanding anythin g contained in this section, the appropriate Government may instead of 
framing an insurance scheme frame an alternative security scheme for i ts employees with disabilities.  
68. Unemployment allowance .—The appropriate Governments shall within the limits of their 
economic capacity and development shall by notification frame a scheme for payment of an 
unemployment allowance to persons with disabilities registered with the Special Employment Exchange 
for more than two years and who could not be pl aced in any ga inful occupation.  
CHAPTER XIV  
MISCE LLANEOUS  
69. Punishment for fraudulently availing any benefit mean t for persons with disabilities .—
Whoever, fraudulently avails or attempts to avail, any benefit meant for persons with disabilities, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine which may extend 
to twenty  thousand rupees or with both.  
70. Chief Commissioners, Commissioners, officers and oth er staff to be public servants .—The 
Chief Commissioner, the Commission ers and other officers and staff provided to them shall be deemed to 
be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
71. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding sha ll 
lie against the Central Government, the State Governments or the local authority or any officer of the 
Government in respect of anything which is done in good faith or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act and any r ules or orders made thereunder.  
72. Act to be in addition to and not in derogation of any other law .—The provisions of this Act, 
or the rules made thereunder shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of any other law for the time 
being in force or any rules, order or any instructio ns issued thereunder, enacted or issued for the benefit  of 
persons with disabilities.  
73. Power of approp riate Government to make rules .—(1) The appropriate Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, na mely: — 
(a) the manner in which a State Government or a Union territory shall be chosen under clause ( k) 
of sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
(b) allowances which members shall receive under  sub-section ( 7) of section 4;  
(c) rules of procedure which the Central Coordination Committee shall observe in regard to the 
transaction of business i n its meetings under section 7;  
(d) such other functions which the Central Coordination Committee may perform under clause ( h) 
of su b-section ( 2) of section 8;  
(e) the manner in which a State Government or a Union territory shall be chosen under clause ( h) 
of sub -section  (2) of section 9;  
(f) the allowances which the Member shall receive unde r sub -section ( 3) of section 9;  
(g) rules of procedure which the Central Executive Committee shall observe in regard to 
transaction of business at its meetings under section 11;   24 
 (h) the  manner and purposes for which a person may be associated unde r sub -section ( 1) of 
section 12;  
(i) fees and allowances which a person associated with the Central Executive Committee shall 
receive under sub-section ( 3) of section 12;  
(j) allowances  which member s shall receive under sub-section ( 7) to section 14;  
(k) rules of procedure which a State Coordination Committee  shall observe in regard to 
transaction of business in  its meetings under section 17;  
(l) such  other functions which a State Coordination Committee may perform under clause ( g) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 18;  
(m) the allowances which Members shall receive under  sub-section ( 3) of section 19;  
(n) rules of procedure which a State Executive Committe e shall observe in regard to transaction 
of business at  its meetings under section 21;  
(o) the manner and purposes for which a person may be associated unde r sub -section ( 1) of 
section 22;  
(p) fees and allowances which a person associated with the State Ex ecutive Committee may 
receive under  sub-section ( 3) of section 22;  
(q) information or return which the employer in every establishment should furnish and the 
Special Employment Exchange to which such information or return shall be furnished under   
sub-section (1) of section 34;  
(r) the form and the manner in which record shall be maintained by an employer under   
sub-section ( 1) of section 37;  
(s) the form and manner in which an application shall be made under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 52;  
(t) the  manner in which an order of refusal shall be communicated unde r sub -section ( 2) of 
section 52;  
(u) facilities or standard s required to be provided or maintained unde r sub -section ( 3) of  
section 52;  
(v) the period for which a certificate of registration s hall be valid under clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 4) of section 52;  
(w) the form in which and conditions subject to which a certificate of registration shall be granted 
under clause ( c) of su b-section ( 4) of section 52;  
(x) period within which an appeal shal l lie under sub-section ( 1) of section 54;  
(y) the manner in which an institution for persons with severe disabilities shall be maintained and 
conditions which have to be satisfied under  sub-section ( 3) of section 56;  
(z) the  salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Chief Commissioner 
under sub-section ( 3) of section 57;  
(za) the salary, allowances and other conditions of service of officers and employees under   
sub-section ( 6) of section 57;  
(zb) intervals at which the Chief Commissioner shall report to the Central Government under 
clause ( d) of section 58;  
(zc) the salary , allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the Commissioner under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 60;  
(zd) the salary , allowances and other conditions of service of officers and employees under   
sub-section ( 6) of section 60;  25 
 (ze) intervals within which the Commissioner shall report to the State Government under  
clause ( d) of section 61;  
(zf) the form and time in which annual report shall be prepared under  sub-section ( 1) of  
section 64;  
(zg) the form and time in which annual report shall be prepared unde r sub -section ( 1) of  
section 65;  
(zh) any other matter which is requi red to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every notification made by the Central Government under the proviso to section 33, proviso to 
sub-section ( 2) of section 47, every scheme framed by it under section 27, section 30, sub -section ( 1) of 
section 38, section 42, section 43, section 67, section 68 and  every rule made by it under sub -section ( 1), 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for 
a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive se ssions, 
and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions 
aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule, notification or scheme, both Houses 
agree that the rule, notification or sche me should not be made, the rule, notification or scheme shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anyth ing previously done 
under that rule, notification  or scheme, as the case may be.  
(4) Every notification made by the State Government under the proviso to section 33, proviso to  
sub-section ( 2) of section 47, every scheme made by it under section 27, secti on 30, sub -section ( 1) of 
section 38, section 42, section 43, section 67, section 68 and every rule made by it under sub -section ( 1), 
shall be laid, as soon as m ay be after it is made, before each House of State Legislature, where it consists 
of two Houses  or where such legislature consists of one House before that House.  
[74. Amendment of Act 39 of 1987 .]—Repealed by the Repealing and Amending Act , 2001  
(30 of 2001) , s. 2 and the First Schedule . (w.e.f . 3-9-2001) . 
  
 
 
--------------------------The Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled Areas) Act, 1996--------------------------
1 
 THE PROVISIONS OF THE PANCHAYATS (EXTENSION TO THE SCHEDULED  
AREAS) ACT, 1996  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definition . 
3. Extension of Part IX of the Constitution . 
4. Exceptions and modifications to Part IX of the Constitution . 
5. Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats . 
  2 
 THE PROVISIONS OF THE PANCHAYATS (EXTENSION TO THE SCHEDULED AREAS) 
ACT, 1996  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1996  
[24th December , 1996 .] 
An Act to provide for the extension of the provisions of Part IX of the Constitution relating to the 
Panchayats to the Scheduled Areas.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Provisions of the Panchayats (Extension to the Scheduled 
Areas) Act, 1996.  
2. Definition .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, “Scheduled Areas” means the 
Scheduled Areas as referred to in clause (1) of article 244  of the Constitution.  
3. Extension of Part IX of the Constitution .—The provision s of Part IX of the Constitution relating 
to Panchayats are hereby extended to the Scheduled Areas subject to such exceptions and modifications 
as are provided in section 4.  
4. Exceptions and modifications to Part IX of the Constitution .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained under Part IX of the Constitution, the Legislature of a State shall not make any law under that 
Part which is inconsistent with any of the following features , namely:— 
(a) a State legislation on the Panchayats that may be made shall be in consonance with the 
customary law, social and religious practices and traditional management practices of community 
resources;  
(b) a village shall ordinarily consist of a hab itation or a group of habitations or a hamlet or a 
group of hamlets comprising a community and managing its affairs in accordance with traditions and 
customs;  
(c) every village shall have a Gram Sabha consisting of persons whose names are included in the 
electoral rolls for the Panchayat at the village level;  
(d) every Gram Sabha shall be competent to safeguard and preserve the traditions and customs of 
the people, their cultural identity, community resources and the customary mode of dispute 
resolution;  
(e) every Gram Sabha shall — 
(i) approve the plans, programmes and projects for social and economic development before 
such plans, programmes and projects are taken up for implementation by the Panchayat at the 
village level;  
(ii) be responsible for the identification or selection of persons as beneficiaries under the 
poverty alleviation and other programmes;  
(f) every Panchayat at the village level shall be required to obtain from the Gram Sabha a 
certification of utilisation of fund s by that Panchayat for the plans, programmes and projects referred 
to in clause( e); 
(g) the reservation of seats in the Scheduled Areas at every Panchayat shall be in proportion to the 
population of the communities in that Panchayat for whom reservation i s sought to be given under 
Part IX of the Constitution : 
Provided that the reservation for the Scheduled Tribes shall not be less than one -half of the total 
number of seats:  
Provided further that all seats of Chairpersons of Panchayats at all levels shall b e reserved for the 
Scheduled Tribes;  
(h) the State Government may nominate persons belonging to such Scheduled Tribes as have no 
representation in the Panchayat at the intermediate level or the P anchayat at the district level:  3 
 Provided that such nomination  shall not exceed one -tenth of the total members to be elected in 
that Panchayat;  
(i) the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level shall be consulted before making 
the acquisition of land in the Scheduled Areas for development projects and bef ore re -settling or 
rehabilitating persons affected by such projects in the Scheduled Areas; the actual planning and 
implementation of the projects in the Scheduled Areas shall be coordinated at the State level;  
(j) planning  and management of minor water bodies in the Scheduled Areas shall be entrusted to 
Panchayats at the appropriate level;  
(k) the recommendations of the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level shall be 
made mandatory prior to grant of prospecti ng licence or mining lease for minor minerals in the 
Scheduled Areas;  
(l) the prior recommendation of the Gram Sabha or the Panchayats at the appropriate level shall 
be made mandatory for grant of concession for the exploitation of minor minerals by auctio n; 
(m) while endowing Panchayats in the Scheduled Areas with such powers and authority as may 
be necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self -government, a State Legislature shall 
ensure that the Panchayats  at the appropriate level and the Gram Sabha are endowed specifically 
with— 
(i) the power to enforce prohibition or to regulate or restrict the sale and consumption of any 
intoxicant;  
(ii) the ownership of minor forest produce;  
(iii) the power to prevent a lienation of land in the Scheduled Areas and to take appropriate 
action to restore any unlawfully alienated land of a Scheduled Tribe;  
(iv) the power to manage village markets by whatever name called;  
(v) the power to exercise control over money lending to  the Scheduled Tribes;  
(vi) the power to exercise control over institutions and functionaries in all social sectors;  
(vii) the power to control over local plans and resources for such plans including tribal sub -
plans;  
(n) the State legislations that may en dow Panchayats with powers and authority as may be 
necessary to enable them to function as institutions of self -government shall contain safeguards to 
ensure that Panchayats at the higher level do not assume the powers and authority of any Panchayat at 
the lower level or of the Gram Sabha;  
(o) the State Legislature shall endeavour to follow the pattern of the Sixth Schedule to the 
Constitution while designing the administrative arrangements in the Panchayats at district levels in 
the Scheduled Areas.  
5. Continuance of existing laws a nd Panchayats .—Notwithstanding anything in Part IX of the 
Constitution with exceptions and modifications made by this Act, any provision of any law relating to 
Panchayats  in force in the Scheduled Areas  immediately before the date on which this Act recei ves the 
assent of the President  which is inconsistent with the provisions of Part IX with such exceptions and 
modifications shall continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislatu re or other 
competent authority or until the expiration of one year from the date on which this Act recei ves the assent 
of the President:  
Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately before such date shall continue till the 
expiration of their dur ation unless sooner dissolved by a resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative 
Assembly of that State or, in the case of a State having Legislative Council, by each House of the 
Legisl ature of that State.  
