--------------------------The Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment) (Inapplicability to Major Ports) Act, 1997--------------------------
1 
 THE DOCK WORKERS (REGULATION OF EMPLOYMENT) (INAPPLICABILITY  
TO MAJOR PORTS) ACT, 1997  
ACT NO. 31 OF 1997  
 [18th August , 1997.]  
An Act to provide for inapplicability of the Dock Workers (Regulation of Employment)                 
Act, 1948 to dock workers of major port trusts and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental  thereto.  
BE it enac ted by Parliament in the Forty -eighth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Dock Workers (Regulation of 
Employment) (Inapplicability to  Major Ports) Act, 1997.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the conte xt otherwise requires,— 
(a) “appointed day ”, in relation to a major port, means the date specified under section 3 for that  
major port;  
(b) “Board” has the same meaning as in the Major Po rt Trusts Act, 1963 (38 of 1963 ); 
(c) “Dock Labour Board ” means a Dock Labour  Board established under section 5A of the Dock  
Workers (Regulation of E mployment) Act, 1948 (9 of 1948 ); 
(d) “major port ” has the same meaning as in the Ind ian Ports Act, 1908 (15 of 1908 ). 
3. Inapplicability of the provisions of the Dock W orkers (Regulat ion of E mployment) Act, 1948  
to major ports. —The Central Government may, after settlement is arrived at between the Dock  Labour 
Board of any major port, its workmen and the management of that major port in  accordance with the 
provisions of  the Industrial D isputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947 ), direct, by  notification in the Official Gazette 
that the provisions of the Dock Workers (Regulation of  Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 1948 ), shall cease 
to have effect in relation to that major port with  effect from the date sp ecified in that notification.  
4. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the Dock Labour Board, etc., to the Board. —(1) On the 
appointed d ay in relation to a major port, — 
(a) all property, assets and funds vested in the Dock Labour Board immediately before s uch day,  
shall vest in the Board;  
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and  
things engaged to be done, by, with or for the Dock Labour Board immediately before such day,  for 
or in connection with th e purposes of the Dock Labour Board, shall be deemed to have been  incurred, 
entered into and engaged to be done by, with or for the Board;  
(c) all sums of mone y due to the Dock Labour Board i mmediately before such day shall be  
deemed to be due to the Board ; 
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings institute d by or against the Dock Labour Board  
immediately before such day for any matter in relation to the Dock Labour Board may be  continued 
by or against the Board . 
                                                      
1. 5th January, 1998,  vide notification No. S.O. 22(E), dated 5th January , 1998, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                      
Part II,  sec. 3(ii).  2 
 (e) every employee and worker serving under  the Dock Labour Board shall hold office or service  
under the Board on the terms and conditions which are not in any way less favo urable than those  
which would have been admissible to him if there had not been transfer of his services to the  Board 
and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment in the Board is duly  terminated or until 
his tenure, remuneration or terms and conditions of service are duly altered by  the Board.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Ac t, 1947 (14 of 1947) , or in  any 
other law for the time being in force, the transfer of the services of any employee under this  section to the 
Board shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or any  other law, and no such 
claim shall  be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
--------------------------The Lalit Kala Akadami (Taking Over of Management) Act, 1997--------------------------
1 
 THE LALIT KALA AKADAMI (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT)  ACT, 1997  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
TAKING OVER OF THE MANAGEMENT OF THE  LALIT  KALA AKADAMI  
3. Management  of the society . 
4. Administrator of society . 
5. No right to compensation for premature termination of a contract . 
6. Relinquishment of administration of the society . 
7. Application of Act 21 of 1860 . 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
8. Penalties . 
9. Offences by companies . 
10. Exclusion of period of operation of Act . 
11. Act to have overriding effect . 
12. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
13. Contracts in bad faith may be cancelled or varied . 
14. Power to terminate contract of employment.  
15. Power to make rules . 
16. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE LALIT KALA AKADAMI (TAKING OVER OF MANAGEMENT)ACT, 1997  
ACT NO. 17 OF 1997  
[25th March,  1997 .]  
An Act to provide for the taking over of the management of the Lalit Kala Akadami  for a limited period 
in the public interest and for matters connected therewith  or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  the Lalit Kala Akadami was set up as a n apex cultural body in the field of visual arts by the 
Government  of India by the Parliament ary Resolutio n passed on the 5th day of August, 1954 to encourage 
and promote visual arts such as painti ngs, graphics, sculptures, etc.;  
AND WHEREAS  the Lalit Kala Akadami was registered as a society under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) on the 11th day of March, 1957;  
AND WHEREAS  the Akadami has full functional autonomy in the field of its activity, even though the 
Government of India is the sole -fundi ng agency for the organisation;  
AND WHEREAS  pursuant to the complaints received with regard to the m isuse of funds by the Lalit 
Kala Akadami from several quarters including from the Hon'ble Members of Parliament, a Committee 
was set up by the Government of India by Resolution dated the 24th day of March, 1988 under the 
Chairmanship of Shri P.N. Haksar to  go into the functioning of National Akadamies including the Lalit 
Kala Akadami and the said Committee, after a detailed scrutiny of the affairs in the management of the 
said Akadami, recommended the restructuring of their General Council , Executive Board and the 
electoral roll, of the artists constituency;  
AND WHEREAS , in view of the serious difficulties which have arisen with regard to the management 
of the Lalit Kala Akadami, it is necessary to take over, for a limited period, the management thereof and  it 
is felt that any delay in taking over the management of the Lalit Kala Akadami would be highly 
detrimental to the inte rests and objective of Akadami;  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -eight h Year of Republic of India as follows: – 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. –(1) This Act may be called the Lalit Kala Akadami (Taking Over 
of Management) Act, 1997.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on  the 24th day of January, 1997.  
2. Definitions. –In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, – 
(a) “Administrator ” means a person appointed as the  Administrator under section 4;  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(c) “Societies Registration Act ” means the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), as in 
force in the National  Capital Territory of Delhi;  
(d) “society” means the Lalit Kala Akadami being a society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act.  3 
 (e) words and expressions used her ein and not defined, but defined in the Societies Registration 
Act shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
TAKING OVER OF THE MANAG EMENT OF THE  LALIT  KALA AKADAMI  
3. Management of the society. –(1) On and from the commencement of this Act, and for a period of 
three years thereafter, the management of the society shall vest in the Central Government:  
Provided that if the Central Government is of opinion that in order to secure the proper management 
of the society, it is expedient that such management should continue to vest in the Central Government 
after the expiry of the said period of three years, it may, from time to time, issue directions for the 
continuance of such management for such period, not e xceeding one year at a time, as it may think fit; so, 
however, that the total period for which such management shall continue to vest in the Central 
Government shall not, in any case, exceed five years.  
(2) The management of the society shall be deemed to include management of all assets, rights, lease -
holds, powers, authorities and privileges and all property, movable and immovable, including lands, 
buildings, works of art, workshops, projects, stores, instruments, library, machinery automobile and other 
vehicles, cash balances, reserve funds, investments and book debts and all other rights and interests 
arising out of such property as were immediately before the commencement of this Act in the ownership, 
possession, power or control of the society, and all  such books of account, registers, maps, plans and all 
other documents of wh atever nature relating thereto.  
(3) Any contracts, whether express or implied, or other arrangement, in so far as it relates to the 
management of the society and affairs of the soc iety and in force immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall be deemed to have t erminated on such commencement.  
(4) All persons in charge of the management of the society, including persons holding offices as 
Chairman, Vice -Chairman, Secretary o r Honorary Secretary, as the case may be, and members of the 
General Council, Executive Board, Finance Committee and all other committees of the society 
immediately before the commencement of this Act shall be deemed to have vacated their offices as such 
on such commen cement.  
4. Administrator of society. –(1) The Central Government shall, as from the commencement of this 
Act, appoint a person as the Administrator of the society for the purpose of taking over the administration 
thereof and the Administrator s hall carry on the management of the society for and on be half of the 
Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the supervision , control and directions of the Administrator, the functions of the finance 
Committee of the Society, before the commencement of this Act , shall be exercised by an officer of the 
Central Government, to b e appointed by that Government.  
(3) The Central Government may issue such directions (including directions as to initiating, 
defending or continuing any legal proceedings before any court, tribunal or other authority) to the 
Administrator as to his powers and duties as that Government may deem desirable and the Administrator 
may apply to the Central Government at any time for instructions as to the manner in which he shall 
conduct the manage ment of the society or in relation to any matter arising in  the course of such 
management.  4 
 (4) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder and to the control of the 
Central Government, the Administrator shall be entitled, notw ithstanding anything contained in the 
Societies Registration Act or any other law for the time being in force, to exercise, in relation to the 
management of the society, the powers of the General Council, or, as the case may be, the Executive 
Board, includ ing the powers to dispose of any property or assets of such society, whether such powers are 
derived under any law f or the time being in force or f rom the memorandum and rules and regulations of 
the so ciety or from any other source.  
(5) Every person having  possession, custody or control of any property forming part of the society 
shall deliver forthwith such  property to the Administrator.  
(6) Any person who, o n the commencement of this Act has in his possession or under his control any 
books, papers, works of art or other documents relating to management of the society, including the 
minutes books containing the resolutions of the persons in charge of the management of the society before 
the commencement of this Act, the current cheque books relating to the management of the society, any 
letters, memoranda, notes or other communications between him and the society shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,  be liable to account for the books, papers, 
works of art an d other documents (including such minutes books, cheque books, letters, memoranda, 
notes or other commun ications) to the Administrator.  
(7) Any perso n in charge of the administration  of the society immediately before the commencement 
of this Act shall, within ten days from that da y or within such further period  as the Central Government 
may allow in this behalf, furnish to the Administrator a complete inventory of all the properties a nd assets 
(including particulars of book debts and investments and belongings) forming part of the society 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, and of all the liabilities and obligations of the society, 
in relation to its administration, subsis ting immediately before such commencement, and also of all 
agreements entered into by the society in relation to its administration and in force immedi ately before 
such commencement.  
(8) The Administrator shall receive from the funds of the society such re muneration as the Central 
Government may fix.  
5. No right to compensation for premature termination of a contract. –Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time being in force, no person in respect of whom any contract of 
management or other arrangement is terminated by reason of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 3) 
of section 3 or who ceases to hold any office by reason of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 4) of 
that section, shall be entitled to claim any compensation for the p remature termination of the contract of 
administration or other arrangement  or for the loss of his office.  
6. Relinquishment of administration of the society. –(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sub-section ( 1) ofsection 3, if, at any tim e before the  expiry of the period referred to in  that sub -section, it 
appears to the Central Government that the  purposes of the vesting of the management of the society in 
that Government have been fulfilled or that for any other reason it is not necessary that the management 
of the society should remain vested in that Government, it may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, relinquish the management of the society with effect from such date as  may be specified in the 
order.  
(2) On and from the date specified u nder sub -section ( 1), the administration of the society shall vest 
in the General Council of the society and such management shall be carried on in accordance with the 5 
 provisions of the Societies Registration Act so, however, that the steps, if any, in rel ation to the 
management of the society may be taken after the publication of the order under sub -section ( 1). 
7. Application of Act 21 of 1860. –(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Societies 
Registration Act or in the memorandum and rules and regulations of the society, but subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 6, so long as the management of the society remains vested in the 
Central Government. – 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the members of the society or any other person to nominate or 
appoint any person to be a member of the General Council of the society;  
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the members of the society or at any meeting of the 
General Council of the society, on or after the commencement of this Act, sh all be given effect to 
unless appr oved by the Central Government;  
(c) no proceeding for the dissolution of the society or for the merger with any other society or for 
the appointment of a Receiver in respect of its administration shall lie in any court exc ept with the 
consent o f the Central Government.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) and subject to such other exception s, 
restrictions and limitations, if any, as may be prescribed, the Societies Registration Act shall continue to 
apply to the society in the same manner as it applied there to before the commencement of this Act.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
8. Penalties. –Any person who, – 
(a) having in his possession or custody or under his control any property forming part of the 
society , wrongfully withholds such property from the Administrator or any perso n authorised under 
this Act, or  
(b) wrongfully obtains poss ession of any such property, or  
(c) wilfully retains, or fails to deliver, any property forming part of the society  or removes or 
destroys it, or  
(d) wilfully withholds or fails to account for any books, papers, works of art or other documents 
which may be in his possession or custody or under his control to the Administrator or any person 
authorised under this Act, or  
(e) fails, without any reasonable cause, to furnish information or particulars as provided in           
sub-section ( 6) of section 4,  
shall be punishable  with imprisonment for a term which may  extend to two years, or with fine which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees, or with both.  
9. Offences by companies. –(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who at the time the offe nce was committed was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for t he conduct of th e business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  6 
 Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render any such person liable to any p unishment 
if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised all due 
diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) “company” means any b ody corporate and include s a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partne r in the firm.  
10. Exclusion of period of operation of Act. –In computing the period of limitation prescribed by 
any law for the time being in force for any suit or application against any person by the society in respect 
of any matter arising out of any transaction in relation to its management, the time during which this Act  
is in force shall be excluded.  
11. Act to have overridin g effect.–The provisions of this Act or any notification, order or rule made 
thereunder shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any law other 
than this Act or in any instrument having effect by virtue of any law other  than this Act or in any decree 
or order of any court.  
12. Protection of action taken in good faith. –(1) No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Administrator or any officer of the Central Government or any other person for anything 
which is in good faith done or inte nded to be done under this Act.  
(2) No Suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central Government or the Administrator or 
any officer of the Central Government or any other person for any damage caus ed or likely to be caused 
by anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
13. Contracts in bad faith may be cancelled or varied. –(1) If the Central Government is satisfied, 
after such inquiry as it may think fit, that any con tract or agreement entered into at any time within  one 
year immediately preceding the commencement of this Act, between the society and any other person, in 
so far as such contract or agreement relates to the management of the society, has been entered int o in bad 
faith, or is detrimental to the interests of the society, it may make an order cancelling or varying (either 
unconditionally or subject to such conditions as it may think fit to impose) such contract or agreement and 
thereafter the contract or agr eement  shall have effect accordingly:  
Provided that no contract or agreement shall be cancelled or varied except after giving to the parties 
to the contract or agreement a reasona ble opportunity of being heard.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order under su b-section ( 1) may make an application to the High 
Court at Delhi for the variation or reversal of such order and thereupon such court may confirm, modify 
or reverse such order.  7 
 14. Power to terminate contract of employment. –If the Administrator is of opinion that any 
contract of employment entered into by the society in relation to its management, at any time before the 
commencement of this Act, is unduly onerous, he may, by giving to the employee one month's notice in 
writing or the salary or wages fo r one month in lieu thereof, terminate such contract of employment.  
15. Power to make rules. –(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central  Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament while it is session for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session  or the successive sessions aforesaid, both House s agree in making any 
modification in the rule or bothHouses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in s uch modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule.  
16. Repeal and saving. –(1) The Lalit Kala Akadami (Taking  Over of Management) Ordi nance, 1997 
(Ord. 10 of 1997) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Lalit Kala Akadami (Taking Over of Management) Ordinance, 
1997  (Ord. 10 of 1997) , anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be deemed to 
have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Act, 1996--------------------------
1 
 THE MAHATMA GANDHI ANTARRASHTRIYA HINDI VISHWAVIDYALAYA  
ACT, 1996  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of the University.  
4. Objects of the University.  
5. Powers of the  University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creeds.  
8. Residence of students.  
9. The Visitor.  
10. Officers of the University.  
11. The Chancellor.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor.  
13. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
14. The Deans of Schools.  
15. The Registrar.  
16. The Finance Officer.  
17. The Librarian.  
18. Other Officers.  
19. Authorities of the University.  
20. The Court.  
21. The Executive Council.  
22. The Academic Council.  
23. The Board of Studies.  
24. The Finance Committee.  
25. Other authorities of the University.  
26. Power to make Statutes.  
27. Statutes how to be made . 
28. Powers to make Ordinances.  
29. Regulations.  
30. Annual report.  
31. Annual accounts.  
32. Conditions of service of employees.  
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
34. Right to appeal.  
35. Provident and pension funds.  
36. Disputes as to constitut ion of University authorities and bodies.  
37. Constitution of Committees.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies.  
39. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
40. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
41. Mod e of proof of University record . 2 
 SECTIONS  
42. Power to remove difficulties.  
43. Transitional provisions.  
44. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE MAHATMA GANDHI ANTARRASHTRIYA HINDI  VISHWAVIDYALAYA ACT, 1996  
ACT NO. 3 OF 1997  
[8th January , 1997 .]  
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching University for the promotion and development of 
Hindi language and literature, through teaching and research, with a view to enabling Hindi 
to achieve greater functional  efficiency and recognition as a major international language and 
to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seventh Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya 
Hindi Vishwavidyalaya Act, 1996.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and the Statutes made hereunder, unless the context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Academic Council of the University;  
(b) “academic staff ” means such categories of staff as are designated as academic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Studies ” means the Boa rd of Studies of the University;  
(d) “Chancellor ”, “Vice -Chancellor ” and Pro -Vice -Chancellor ” mean , respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor  and Pro -Vice -Chancellor  of the University;  
(e) “Court ” means the Court  of the University ; 
(f) “Department ” means a Department of Studies a nd includes a Centre of Studies;  
(g) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses, semina rs, contact 
programmes or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(h) “employee ” means any person appointed by the University, and includes teachers and other 
staff of the University;  
(i) “Executive Council ” means the Executive Cou ncil of the University;  
(j) “Finance Committee ” means the Fina nce Committee of the University;  
(k) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of an 
Institution maintained by the University;  
(l) “Institution ” means an a cademic institution, not being a College, maintained by the University;  
(m) “recognised Institution ” means an institution of higher learning recognised by the University;  
(n) “Regulations ” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under  this Act 
for the time being in force;  
                                                           
1. 29th December , 1997, vide notification No. S.O. 912(E), dated 29th November , 1997 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
  
(o) “School ” means a School of Studies of the University;  
(p) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean , respectively, the Statutes and Ordinances of the University 
for the time being in force;  
(q) “teachers of the University ” means Professors, Readers, Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any 
Institution maintained by the University and are designated as teachers by the Ordinances;  
(r) “University ” means the Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya established 
and incorporated as a University under this Act.  
3. Establishment of the University .—(1) There shall be established a University by the name of 
“Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtr iya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya ”. 
(2) The headquarters o f the University shall be at Wardha.  
(3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the 
Executive Council and the Academic Council and all persons who may hereaft er become such officers or 
members, so long as they continue to hold such office or membership, are hereby constituted a body 
corporate by the name of “Mahatma Gandhi Antarrashtriya Hindi Vishwavidyalaya ”. 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession  and a common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be to promote and develop Hindi 
language and literature in general and, for that purpose, to provide for instructional and rese arch facilities 
in the relevant branches of learning; to provide for active pursuit of comparative studies and research in 
Hindi and other Indian languages; to create facilities for development and dissemination of relevant 
information in the country and a broad; to offer programmes of Research, Education and Training in areas 
like translation, interpretation and linguistics for improving the functional effectiveness of Hindi; to reach 
out to Hindi scholars and groups interested in Hindi abroad and to associ ate them in teaching and research 
and to popularize Hindi through distance education system.  
5. Powers of the University .—The University shall have the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instructions in the relevant branches of learning and to m ake provision for the 
advancement and dissemination of knowledge for furtherance of its object s; 
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on th e basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing on, persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinction s for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extra -mural studies, training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to provide for facilities through distance education system to such persons  as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or academic 
positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such Professorships, Readerships, 
Lecture rships or other teaching or academic positions;  
(vii) to recognise, with the prior approval of the Visitor, an institution of higher learning, within 
or outside India for such purposes as the University may determine and to withdraw such recognition;  
(viii) to appoint persons working in any o ther University or organisation as teacher of the 
University for a specified period;  5 
 (ix) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and to make appointments thereto;  
(x) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or aut hority or institution of 
higher learning in such manner and for such purposes as the University may determine;  
(xi) to establish, with the prior approval of the Visitor, such campuses, special centres and 
specialised laboratories, within or outside India, as are, in the opinion of the University, necessary for 
the furtherance of its objects;  
(xii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xiii) to establish and maintain Institutions and Halls;  
(xiv) to make provisio n for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xv) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators and other academic staff;  
(xvi) to make special arrangements in respect of the residence, discipline and teaching of women 
students as the University may consider desirable;  
(xvii) to appoint on contract or oth erwise visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who may contribute to the advancement of the objects of the 
University;  
(xviii) to confer autonomous status on a Department, in accordance with the Statutes;  
(xix) to determine standards of admission to the University , which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xx) to demand and receive payment of fees and other charges;  
(xxi) to supervise the residences of the students of the Univer sity and to make arrangements for 
promoting their health and general welfare;  
(xxii) to lay down conditions of service of all categories of employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxiii) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be necessary;  
(xxiv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the  employees;  
(xxv) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to acquire, hold, manage and dispose of any 
property, movable or immovable, including trust and endowment properties for the purposes of the 
University;  
(xxvi) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the University;  
(xxvii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of all or any of its objects . 
6. Jurisdiction .—The jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole of India.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creeds .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him  to be 6 
 appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or to be admitted as a student 
in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed  to prevent the University from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, physically handicapped or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
8. Residence of students .—The University shall, primari ly, be a residential University:  
Provided that the requirements of residence shall be regulated in such manner as may be prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
9. The Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall be  the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including any Institution managed by it, and to submit a report thereon; and upon 
receipt of that report the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon through 
the Vice -Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect of 
any of the matters dealt with in the report and the University shall  be bound to comply with such 
directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment and of an Institution and also of 
the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by the University and to cause an inquiry to 
be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the administration or finances of the 
University or Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 2), give notice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made to the University and the University shall have the right to 
make such representations to the Visitor, as it may consider necessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to be 
made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the Univ ersity shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have the right to be present and be heard at such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respect of the University or an y Institution 
address the V ice-Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry together with such 
views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor may be pleased to offer, and 
on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall communicate to the Executive 
Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer upon the action to be taken 
thereon.  
(8) The Executive Council shall  communicate, through the Vice -Chancellor, to the Visitor such 
action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(9) Where, the Executive Council does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the satisfaction of 
the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the 
Executive Council, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Executive Council shall comply with 
such directions.  
(10) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor  may, by order in 
writing, annu l any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  7 
 (11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
10. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Schools;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer;  
(7) the Librarian; and  
(8) such other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to be officer s of the University.  
11. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his office, be the head of the University.  
(3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocation of the University held for conferring 
degrees and the meetings of the Court.  
12. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner and on such terms and conditions of servic e as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive an d academic officer of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions o f all the authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such author ity the action taken by him on such matters:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion that such action ought not to have been taken, it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any perso n in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to appeal against such action to the 
Executive Council within three months from the date on which decision on such ac tion is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the action taken by the Vice - 
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authority  of the University is 
beyond the pow ers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not  in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review  the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
13. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties a s may be prescribed by the Statu tes. 8 
 14. The Deans of Schools .—Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreement, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. The Librarian .—The Librarian shall be appoint ed in such manner and shall exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
University shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
19. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authorities of the University :— 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the Board of Studies;  
(5) the Finance Committee; and  
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be  the authorities of the 
University.  
20. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this  Act, the Court shall have the following powers and functions, 
namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to advise the V isitor in respect of any matter which may be referred to it for advice; and  
(c) to perform such other functions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
21. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, exercise 
general supervision over the academic policies of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its members and its p owers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  9 
 24. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the  Finance Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statu tes. 
25. Other authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other 
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
26. Power to make Statu tes.—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities and other bodies of the University, a s 
may be constituted from time to time;  
(b) the appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
filling up of vacancies of members and all other matters relating to those authorities and other bodies 
for which it ma y be necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other employees of the University, their 
emoluments and other conditi ons of service;  
(e) the appointment of teachers and academic staff working in any other University or 
organisation for specific period for undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance an d 
provident fund, the manner of termination of service and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students an d the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the University;  
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on an Institution or a Department;  
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, Centres, Halls and Institutions;  
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions;  
(n) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or officers of the University;  
(p) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students;  
(q) all other matters whic h by thi s Act are to be or may be provided for by the Statutes.  
27. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal  the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, 
powers or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunit y of expressing an opinion in writing on the p roposed changes and any opinion so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council:  10 
 Provided further that the Executive Council shall not consider to make , amend or repeal any Statute 
relating to the mat ters provided under clauses ( j) and ( k) of section 26 except with the prior approval of 
the Visitor.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or  withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub - sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid before both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt , the Visitor may, 
after considering the reasons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
28. Power to make Ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act an d the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of  the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, qualifications for 
the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examinations, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bodies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arra ngements, if any, which ma y be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and prescribing of special courses of studies for them;  
(j) the appointments and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the estab lishment of Centres of Studies, Board of Studies, Special Centres, Specialised 
Laboratories and other Committees;  
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, Institutions and other 
agencies including learned bodies or associat ions in India or abroad;  11 
 (m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the academic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as a re not 
prescribed by the Statutes;  
(o) the management of Institutions established by the University;  
(p) setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(q) all other matters which, by this Act or the Statutes, ar e to be or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the m anner prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any, 
appointed by them  and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects, and shall be submitted to the Visitor on or before such date as may 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section (1) shall also be submitted to the 
Central Government which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid before both Houses of 
Parliament.  
31. Annual account s.—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the d irections of the Executive Council and shall, once at least every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as he may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the ann ual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Visitor along with the observations of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Executive Coun cil and the views of the Executive Council, if any, on such observation shall be submitted 
to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government, who shall, as soon as may be , cause the same to be laid before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
32. Conditions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  12 
 (3) The de cision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meaning of the Arbitration Act, 1940  (10 of 1940) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
33. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from  appearing at the examination of the University for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse t he decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and th e provisions of sub -section s 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 32 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this sub -section.  
34. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or Institution shall, 
notwithstanding anything con tained in this Act, have a right to appeal within such time as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or authority of the 
University or of Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon, the Executiv e Council may confirm, 
modify or reverse the decision appealed against.  
35. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident fund or pension fund or provide such insurance schemes as it may d eem fit in 
such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provision of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (19 of  1925) , shall apply to such fund,  as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
36. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be , a member of any authority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision thereon shall be 
final.  
37. Constitution of Committees .—Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Committees, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the authority in each case may 
think fit.  
38. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies  among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and any 
person appointed,  elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for 
the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
39. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vaca ncies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
40. Pro tection of action taken in good  faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of  any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  13 
 41. Mode of proof of University record .—A copy of any receipt, application, notice, order, 
proceeding , resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession 
of the University , or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by the 
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, 
resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein where the original thereof would, if produced, have been admissible in 
evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) or in any 
other law for the time being in force.  
42. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedi ent for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before ea ch 
House of Parliament.  
43. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and the said officer shall hold office for a 
term of five years;  
(b) the first  Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner and on such 
conditions as may be deemed fit and the said officer shall hold office for such term, not exceeding 
five years as may be specified by the Visitor;  
(c) the first Registrar and the  first Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(d) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty members 
and eleven members respect ively who shall be nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold office for  
a term of three years;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and shall hold o ffice for a term of thr ee years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the  above office s or authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or 
nominated shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or 
nominated would have held that office, if such vacancy had not occurred.  
44. Statu tes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesai d, both Houses agree in  
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute,  
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made,  the Statute,  Ordinance  or Regulation shall  thereafter have   
 14 
 effect only in such modified form or be of n o effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously down under 
that Statute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulations or any of them but not retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regul ation so as to prejudicially affect the Interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.  
  15 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 27)  
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
 The Chancellor  
1. (1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three persons  
recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of eminence in the academic or public  life 
of the country : 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so recommended he m ay call  for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall cont inue to hold  
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
The Vice -Chancellor  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less than three 
persons  who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause  (2): 
Provided that if the Visitor doe s not approve of any of the persons included in the panel, he may  call 
for a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of three persons, none of whom shall be an  
employee of the University or an institu tion associated with the Univer sity, or a member of the  Executive 
Council or Academic Council or of any other authority of the University. Out of the three  persons, two 
shall be nominated by the Executive Coun cil and one by the Visitor and the  nominee of  the Visitor shall 
be the convenor of the Committee.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor  shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters  
upon his o ffice, and he shall not be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor  after his term has expired, to continue in  
office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as may be specified by him or till  his 
successor is appointed and enters upon his office, whichever is earlier.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( 4) a person appointed as Vice -Chancellor shall, if 
he attains the age of sixty -five years during the term of his office or any e xtension thereof, retire from  
office.  
(6) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor  shall be as follows: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than house rent  
allowances at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to time:  
Provided that if he assumes office after retiring o n superannuation from a pension able post,  his 
salary and allowances shall be reduced by the gross amount of his pension prior to  commutation or 
the payment o f pension shall be held in abeyance until he relinquishes office:  
Provided further that if he assumes office after retiring on superannuation from a non -pension able 
post, his salary and allowances shall be reduced by the gross amount equivalent of  retirement benefits 
availed of by him on superannuation:  16 
 Provided also that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the  
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be entitled to use rent free furnished residential accommodation  
maintained by the University.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be entitled to s uch terminal benefits and allow ances as may be 
fixed  by the Executive Council with the approval of the Visitor from time to time:  
Provided tha t where an employee of the University or an Institution or of any other University  or 
any college or Institution maintained by or affiliated to such other University, is appointed  as the 
Vice -Chancellor  he may be allowed to continue to contribute to any pr ovident fund of  which he is a 
member and the University shall contribute to the account of such person in that  provident fund at the 
same rate at which the person had been contributing immediately before  his appointment as the Vice -
Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been a member of any pension scheme, the  
University shall make the necessary contribution to such scheme.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates as may be fixed by  
the Executive  Council.  
(v) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty days in a 
calendar  year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in two half yearly installments 
of fifteen days each on the 1 st day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor  assumes or relinquishes charge of the office of the Vice -
Chancellor  during the currency of a half year the leave shall be credited proportionately at the  rate of 
two and -a-half days for each complet ed month of service.  
(vi) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause  (v), the Vice -Chancellor  shall also be entitled  
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed year of service. This half pay  leave 
may also be availed of as commuted leave on full pay on medical certificate. When  commuted leave 
is availed, twice the amount of half pay leave shall be debited against half pay  leave due.  
(7) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor  becomes vacant due to death, resignation or otherwis e, or if  he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the Pro -Vice  Chancellor shall  perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor . 
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor  is not available, the senior -most  professor shall perform  the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor  until a new Vice -Chancellor  assumes office or until the existing   
Vice -Chancellor  attends to the duties of his office as the case may be.  
Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor  
3. (1) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be ex officio  Chairman of the Executive Council, the Academic 
Council  and the Finance Committee and shall in the absence of the Chancellor preside at the convocations 
held for conferring degrees and the meetings of the court.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor  shall be ent itled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any authority  
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he is a member of such  
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor  to see that this A ct, the Statutes, the Ordinances and the  
Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers neces sary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor  shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall give effect 
to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.   17 
 (5) The Vice -Chancellor  shall have all the powers necessary for the proper mainte nance of discipline  
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or persons as he deems fit . 
(6) The Vice -Chancellor  shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the meetings of the  
court, the Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance Committee.  
Pro-Vice-Chancellor  
 4. (1) The Pro-Vice -Chancellor  shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation  
of the  Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor  is not accepted by the Executive  
Council the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the person  recommended  by the 
Vice -Chancellor  or ask the Vice -Chancellor  to recom mend another person to  the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor,  
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of the Pro -Vice-Chancellor  in addi tion to his own duties  as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of the Pro -Vice -Chancellor  shall be such as may be decided by the Executive  
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the term of office of the  
Vice -Chancellor,  whichever is earlier:  
Provided that the Pro -Vice -Chancellor  whose term of of fice has expired shall be eligi ble for  
reappointment:  
Provided further that, in any case, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor  shall retire on attaining the age o f sixty -
five years.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Pro -Vice -Chancellor  shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor  shall assist the Vice -Chancellor  in respect of such matt ers as may be  
specified by the Vice -Chancellor  in this behalf from time to time and shall also exercise such powers  and 
perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Registrar  
5. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Exec utive Council on the recommenda tion of a 
Selection  Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment . 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be such as may  
be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years,  continue in 
office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a  period of one 
year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the offi ce of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness, absence  or 
any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the officer shall be performed by 
such person as the Vice -Chancellor  may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the employees, other  
than teachers and academic staff, as may be specified in the Ordinances, to suspend them pending  inquiry, 18 
 to administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of censure or the  withholding of 
increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned has been given a  
reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action proposed to be taken in regard to  him. 
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor  against a ny order of the Registrar impos ing any of  the 
penalties specified in sub -clause  (a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the Registrar is  called 
for, t he Registrar shall, upon concluding of the inquiry make a report to the Vice -Chancellor  along with 
his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an order of the Vice -Chancellor  
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registr ar shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Co urt, the Executive Council, the Academic  
Council and the Boards of Studies, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any of these  authorities.  
(7) It shall be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of the University  
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charges;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic  
Council, the Boa rds of Studies and of any C ommittees appointed by those au thorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all  the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council the Academic  
Council and of any Committees appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council and the Academic  
Council;  
(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in accordance with the  
manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of the 
University  as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the University, sign  
powers -of-attorney  and verify pleadings or depute his representative for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances or the  
Regulations or as may be required from time to time by the Executive Council or the  
Vice -Chancellor.  
The Finance Officer  
6. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the  Executive Council on the recom mendations of a  
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole time salaried officer of the  
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be such as  
may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:   19 
 Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years  
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his of fice or until the expiry of a  period 
of one year whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of  
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the office  shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor  may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio  Secretary of the Finance Committee but shall not be  
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Fina nce Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it as regards its  
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the Executive Council or  
as may be prescri bed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Council, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust and endowed  
property;  
(b) ensure  that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring  
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are expended on the purpose for  which 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual  accounts and the budget of the University and for  
their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state of  
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of re venue and ad vise on the methods of collection  
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking  is conducted, of equipment and other consumable materials in all offices , 
Special Centres, Specialised Laboratories and Institutions;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor  unauthorised expenditure and other financial  
irregularities and suggest disciplinary a ction against persons at fault; and 
(h) call for from any offic e, Cent re, Laboratory or Institution any information or returns that he 
may consider necessary for the performance of his duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised in this behalf by  
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be sufficient discharge for  payment 
of such money.  
Deans of Schools of Studies  
7. (1) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor  from among the  
Professors in the School for a period of three years and he shal l be eligible for reappointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty years shall cease to hold office as such:  
Provided further that if at any time there is no Dean in a School, the Vice -Chancellor,   
Pro-Vice -Chancellor  or a Dean authorised by the Vice -Chancellor  in this behalf, shall exercise the powers 
of the Dean of the School.  20 
 (2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence or any  
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be performed by such  
person as the Vice -Chancellor  may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct and  
maintenance of the standards of t eaching and research in the School and shall have such other  functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Board of Studies or  
Committees of the School as the case may b e, but shall not have the right to vote thereat unless he is  a 
member thereof.  
Heads of Departments  
8. (1) In the case of Departments which have more than one Professor the Head of the Department 
shall  be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor  from among 
the Professors.  
(2) In the case of Departments where there is no Professor or there is only one Professor, the  
Executive Council shall have the option to appoint, on the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, either 
the Professor or a Reader as the Head of the Department:  
Provided that it shall be open to a Professor or Reader to decline the offer of appoint ment as the  Head 
of the Department . 
(3) A person appointed as the Head of the Department shal l hold office as such for a period of three  
years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
(4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of office.  
(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Proctor  
9. (1) The Proctor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the   
Vice -Chancellor  and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to him by 
the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Proctor  shall hold office for a term of two years  and shall be eligible for reap pointment.  
Librarian  
10. (1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Exec utive Council on the recommenda tions of the 
Selection  Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a who le-time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties and shall have such  
emoluments, terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by the Executive Council.  
The Court  
11. Ten members of the  Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
The Executive Council   
12. Five members of the Executive Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Executive 
Council.  
  21 
 Powers and functions of the Executive Council  
13. (1) The Executive Council shall have the power of management and administration of the revenue 
and property of the University and the conduct of all administrative affairs of the University not otherwise  
provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive Council shall,  
in addition to all other powers vested in it, ha ve the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments of such posts  
and to define the duties and conditions of serv ice of Professors, Readers, Lec turers and other  
academic staff and Principals of Institutions maintained by the University:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect of the number,  
qualifications and the e moluments of teachers and academic staff otherwise than after  consideration 
of the recommendations of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may be necessary  
and Principals of Institution main tained by the University on the recommendation of the Selection  
Committee constituted for the purpose  and to fill up temporary vacan cies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other  necessary posts and to make ap pointments  
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the Chancellor and the  
Vice -Chancellor,  and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the functions of such  
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with the Statutes and the  
Ordinances.  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business and all other  
administrative affairs of the University a nd for that purpose to appoint such agents as it may think  fit; 
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring  expenditure for a year on the  
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to inves t any money belonging to the Unive rsity, including any unapplied income, in such  
stocks, funds, share or securities, from time to time as it may think fit or in the purchase of  
immovable property in India with the like powers of varying such investment from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on behalf of the  
University;  
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed for carrying  
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry o ut and cancel contracts on behalf of the University;  
(xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the employees  
and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel aggrieved;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them and to fix their  fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody a nd use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence and discipline of  
women students;  22 
 (xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor,  the Pro -Vice -Chancellor,  the Deans, 
the Registrar or the Finance  Officer or such other employee or authority of the University or to a  
committee appointed by it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for inviting Writers -in-Residence  and determine the terms and condi tions of 
such invitations;  
(xix) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Profe ssors, Emeritus Professors; Con sultants and  
Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such appointments; and  
(xx) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed  
on it by the Act, or the Statutes.  
The Academic Council  
14. Ten members of the Academic Council shall form quorum for a meeting of the Academic 
Council.  
Powers and functions of the Academic Council  
15. Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all 
other  powers vested in it, have the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the Un iversity and to give  
directions regarding methods of instructions, co -ordinating teaching among the Insti tutions and  
evaluation of research or improvement in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -School  co-ordination,  to establish or appoint committees or boards, for  
taking up projects on an inter -School  basis;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a reference  
by a School or the Executive Council and to take appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances regarding  
the academic  functioning of the University, discipline, residence, admissions, award of fellowship  
and studentships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attenda nce. 
Schools of Studies and Departments  
16. (1) The University shall have the following Schools of Studies, namely: — 
(i) School of Language;  
(ii) School of Literature;  
(iii) School of Culture; and  
(iv) School of Translation and Interpretation.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall be  
nominated by the Executive Council and shall hold office for a period of three years.  
(3) The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such meetings shall  
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Each School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the Ordinances:  23 
 Provided that the Executive  Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council,  establish 
Centre s of Studies to which may be as signed such teachers of the Uni versity as the  Executive Council 
may consider necessary.  
(b) Each Department shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in accordanc e with the  provisions of 
the Ordinances.  
17. (1) Each Departmen t shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitution of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall be prescribed  
by the Ordinances.  
(3) Subject to the overall control and  supervision of  the Academic Council, the func tions of the Board  
of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for various degrees and other requirements of  research 
degrees and to recommend to the concerned School Board in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) courses of studies and appointment of examiners for Post -graduate  courses, but excluding  
research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of post -graduate  teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall during the period of three years  
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the Department.  
Finance Committee  
18. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) three persons nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall be a  
member of the Executive Council; and  
(iv) three persons nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Finance  
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee other than ex officio  members, shall hold office for a  
term of three years.  
(4) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twi ce every year to examine the ac counts and to  
scrutinise proposals for expenditure.  
(5) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included in the  
Budget should be examined by the Finance Committee for consideration and comments and thereafter  
submitted to the Executive Council.  24 
 (6) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the Finance Officer  
shall be laid before the Finance Comm ittee for consideration and com ments and thereafter submitted  to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(7) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and the total  
non-recurring  expenditure for the year, based on the income and resources of the University ( which in  the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds  of loans).  
Selection Committees  
19. (1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations to the Executive Council 
for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer, Registrar, Finance Officer, Librarian and  
Principals of Institutions.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of the Table shall  
consist of the Vice -Chancellor,  Pro-Vice -Chancellor,  a nominee of the Visitor and the pe rsons specified  
in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table: — 
TABLE  
 
 
 1  2 
Professor  (i) The Dean of the School concerned.  
 (ii) The Head of the Department concerned 
if he is a Professor.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the  
University, nominated by the Executive  
Council, out of a panel of names recom -
mended by the Academic Council for 
their special knowledge of, or interest 
in, the subject with which the Professor 
will be concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Dean of the School concerned.  
 (ii) The Head of the Department concerned.  
 (iii) Two persons not in the service of the 
University, nominated by the Executive 
Council, out of a panel of names 
recommended by the Academic Council  
for their special knowledge of, or  
interest in, the subject with which the  
Reader or a Lecturer will be concerned.  
Registrar, Finance Officer  (i) Two members of the Executive Council 
nominated by it.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the  
University nominated by the Executive  
Council.  25 
 1  2 
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the  
University, who have special 
knowledge  of the subject of the Library 
Science/Library Administration to be 
nominated  by the Executive Council.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the  
University, nominated by the Executive  
Council.  
Head of the Institution   Three persons  not in the service of the  
University  of whom two shall be nomi -
nated and one by the Academic Council 
for thei r special by the Executive 
Coun cil knowledge of, or interest in, a 
subject in  which instruction is being 
provided by the Institution.  
Note:  1. Where the appointment is being made for an int er-disciplinary project, the head of the project shall be 
deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
 2. The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned with the speciality for which the selection is 
being made and that the Vice-Chancellor shall consult the Head of the Department and the Dean of School 
before nominating the Professor.  
 
(3) The Vice -Chancellor,  or in his absence, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor  shall preside the meetings of a  
Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee sh all be fixed after prior consul tation with  the 
subject to the convenience of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive  Council 
under clause ( 2): 
Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not be valid unless — 
(a) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Co uncil  is 
four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting; and  
(b) where the number of Visitor's nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council  is 
three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor  or in his absence  
by the Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection  Committee in making recommenda tions shall be laid  
down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by a Selec tion 
Committee,  it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated bel ow: 
(i) if the temporary vacancy is for a duration longer than one academic session, it shall he filled  
on the advice of the Selection Committ ee in accordance wit h the proce dure indicated in the  foregoing 
clauses:   26 
 Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor  is satisfied that in the interest of work i t is neces sary to fill  the 
vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely temporary basis by a local Selection  Committee 
referred to in sub -clause  (ii) for a period not exceeding six months;  
(ii) if the temporary vacancy is for a period less than one year, an appointment to such vacancy  
shall be made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee consisting of the Dean of the  
School concerned, the Head of the Department and a nominee of the Vic e-Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the Head of the Department,  the 
Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case sudden vacancies of teaching posts caused by  death or any other  reasons, 
the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of the Department concerned make a  temporary appointment 
for a month and report to the Vice -Chancellor  and the Registrar about  such appointment;  
(iii) no teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on such temporary  
employment, unless he is subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee of a  regular  Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the case may be.  
Special mode of appointment  
20. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 19 , the Executive Council may invite a person 
of high  academic distinction and pro fessional attainments to accept a post of Professor or Reader or any 
other  academic post in the University, as the case may be, on such terms and conditions as it deems fit,  
and on the person agreeing to do so appoint him to the post.  
(2) The Executive Cou ncil may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any other  
University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the manner laid down in  the 
Ordinances.  
Appointment for a fixed tenure  
21. The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in accordance with procedure laid down in  
Statute 19 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as it deems fit.  
Committees  
22. (1) Any authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special Com mittees as it 
may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who are not members of such authority.  
(2) Any such Committees appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it subject  
to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc  
23. (1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any 
agreement  to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service and code  of conduct as are  
specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a written  
contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited with the Regis trar. 
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees  
24. All the employees of the University other than the teachers and other academic staff of the 
University,  shall in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions 
of service and code of conduct as are specified in the statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  27 
 Seniority list  
25. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an office or be a member of 
an authority of the University by rotation acco rding to seniority, such senior ity shall be determined  
according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and in acco rdance with such  
other principles as the Executive Council may frame from time to time.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of persons to  
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance  with 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or the  relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may on h is own motion  and shall at 
the request of any such person submit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision  thereon shall be 
final.  
Removal of employees of the University  
26. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the academic staff 
or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor  in the case of the teacher or member of the  
academic staff and the authority  competent to appoint (hereinaf ter referred to as the appointing  authority) 
in the case of other employee may, by order in writing place such teacher, member of the  academic staff 
or other employee, as the case may be, under suspension and shall forthwith report to  the Executive 
Council the circum stances in which the order was made:  
Provided tha t the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion that the circumstances or the case  do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such  order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract o f appointment or of any other  
terms and conditions of service of the employee, the Executive Council in respect of teachers and  other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority, in respect of other employees, shall have the  power to 
remove a teacher or a  member of the academic staff, or as the case may be, other  employee on ground of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council or as the case may be, the appointing authority shall not  
be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic s taff or other employee except for a  good 
cause and after giving three months notice or on payment of three months salary in lieu thereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the action  proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take effect from  
the date on which the order of removal  is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee is under  suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date on which he  was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything con tained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a teacher, member  
of the academic staff or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months' notice in writing to the  
Executive Council or the appointing autho rity, as the case may be, or by paying three months'  salary 
in lieu thereof ;  28 
 (b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after gi ving one month's notice in writ ing to the  
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or by paying one month's salary  in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the resignation is  accepted 
by the Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be.  
Honorary degrees  
27. (1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council and by a 
resolution  passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds  of the members present and voting, make 
proposals  to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emerge ncy the Executive Council may on its own motion, make such  
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds  of the  
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the Visitor, an y honorary degree  
conferred by the University.  
Withdrawal of degrees, etc.  
28. The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -
thirds  of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic distinction conferred on, or 
any certificate or diploma gr anted to, any person by the Uni versity for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given to that  person 
calling upon him to sho w cause within such time as may be specified in the notice why such  a resolution 
should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any evidence he may  produce in support of 
them, have been c onsidered by the Executive Coun cil. 
Maintenance of discip line among students of the University  
29. (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of the 
University  shall vest in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor  may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to a Proctor and to  
such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline, and  
taking such action as may seem to him appr opriate for the maintenance of  discipline, the Vice -Chancellor  
may, in exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student or students be expelled,  or rusticated, for 
specific period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in an Institution  or Department of the 
Univers ity for stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be  specified in the order, or be 
debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the  University, Institution or 
Department or a School for one or more years, or that the resu lts of the  student or students concerned in 
the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared  be can celled.  
(4) The Heads of Institutions, Deans of Schools of S tudies and Heads of teaching De partments in the  
University shall have the author ity to exercise all such powers over the students in their respective  
Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments as may be necessary for the proper conduct of such  
Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor,  and other persons specified in clause ( 4), 
detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the Univer sity. The Principals of  
Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching Departments in the University  may also 
make the supplem entary rules as they deem neces sary for the aforesaid purposes.  
  29 
 Convocations  
30. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes shall be held in  
such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinan ces. 
Acting Chairman of meetings  
31. Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to preside over a meeting of any 
authority of  the University or any Committee of such authority or when the President or Chairman so 
provided for  is absent, the members present shall elect one from among themselves to preside at such 
meeting.  
Resignation  
32. Any member other than an ex officio  member, of the Court, the Executive Council, the Academic  
Council or any other authority of the University or any Committe e of such authority may resign by  letter 
addressed to the Registrar and the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is  received by the 
Registrar.  
Disqualification  
33. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being a member of any of the  
authorities of the university: — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an undischarged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude and  
sentenced in respect thereof to impriso nment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the  
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his decision  
shall be final and no sui t or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such decision.  
Residence condition for membership and office  
34. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in 
India  shall not be eligible to be an officer of the University or a member of any authority of the 
University.  
Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies  
35. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post i n the University 
or is a member of any authority or body of the University in his capacity as a member of a particular  
authority or body or as the holder of a particular appointment shall hold such office or membership  only 
for so long as he continues to b e a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of  that 
particular appointment, as the case may be.  
Ordinances how made  
36. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section  (2) of section 28 may be amended, repealed or  
added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinance in respect of the matters enumerated in section 28, other than the one enumerated  in 
clause ( m) of sub -section  (1) thereof, shal l be made by the Executive Coun cil unless a draft of such  
Ordinance has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed by the  
Academic Council under clause ( 2) but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the Academic  30 
 Counci l for re -consideration  either in whole or in part, together with any amendment which the  Executive 
Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returne d the draft of an Ordinance pro posed by the  
Academic Council, the Academic Counci l may consider the question afresh and in case the original  draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds  of the members present and voting and  more than 
half the tot al number of members of the Aca demic Council, the draft may be sent back t o the Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two 
weeks  from the date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University within four  
weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such Ordinance and he shall, as  
soon as pos sible, inform the Executive Council about his objection to the proposed Ordinance. The  
Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the order suspending the  
Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance and his decision shall be final . 
Regulations  
37. (1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the Act, the Statutes 
and the Ordinances for the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying  down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of members  
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) pro viding for all matters which are  required by the Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances to be  
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely con cerning such authorities or com mittees appointed by  
them and not provided for by th e Act, the Statutes or the Ordi nances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice to the  
members  of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be considered at meetings  and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceeding of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any 
Regulation  made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
Delegation of powers  
38. Subject to the provisions of the Act and the Statutes any officer or authority of the University may  
delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or its respective  control and 
subject to the condition that overall responsibility for the exercise of the powers so  delegated shall 
continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
--------------------------The Maulana Azad National Urdu University Act, 1996--------------------------
1 
 THE MAULANA AZAD NATIONAL URDU UNIVERSITY ACT, 199 6 
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title  and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of the University.  
4. Objects of the  University.  
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Jurisdiction.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creeds.  
8. The Visitor.  
9. Officers of the University.  
10. The Chancellor.  
11. The Vice -Chancellor.  
12. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
13. The Deans of Schools.  
14. The Registrar.  
15. The Finance Officer.  
16. The Librarian.  
17. Other Officers.  
18. Authorities of the University.  
19. The Court.  
20. The Executive Council.  
21. The Academic Council.  
22. The Board of studies.  
23. The Finance Committee.  
24. Other authorities of the University.  
25. Power to make Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made.  
27. Power to make Ordinance.  
28. Regulations.  
29. Annual report.  
30. Annual accounts.  
31. Conditions of service of employees.  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
33. Right to appeal.  
34. Provident and pension funds.  
35. Disputes as to consti tution of University authorities and bodies.  
36. Constitution of Committees.  
37. Filling of casual vacancies.  
38. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
39. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
40. Mode of proof of University records.  
41. Power to remove difficulties.  
42. Transitiona l provisions.  
43. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  2 
 THE MAULANA AZAD NAT IONAL URDU UNIVERSITY ACT, 1996  
ACT NO. 2 OF 1997  
[8th January , 1997.]  
An Act to establish and incorporate in University at the national level mainly to promote and dev elop 
Urdu language and to import vo cational and technical education in Urdu medium through 
conventional teaching and distance education system and to provide for matters connected t herewith 
or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -seventh Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Maulana Azad Nati onal Urdu 
University Act, 1996.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and the Statutes made hereunder, unless t he context otherwise 
requires, — 
(a) “Academic Council ” means the Acad emic Counci l of the University;  
(b) “academic staff' means such categories of staff as are designated as ac ademic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Studies ” means the Boar d of Studies of the University;  
(d) “Chancellor ”, “Vice -Chance llor” and “Pro-Vice -Chancellor ” mean , respectively, the 
Chancellor, Vice -Chancellor and Pro -Vice  Chancellor of the University ; 
(e) “Court ” means the Court of the University;  
(f) “Department ” means a Department of Studies; an d includes a Centre of Studies;  
(g) “distance education system ” means the system of imparting education through any means of 
communication such as broadcasting, telecasting, correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes or the combination o f any two or more of such means;  
(h) “employ ee” means any person appointed by the University and includes teachers and  other 
staff of the University;  
(i) “Executive Council ” means the Execu tive Council of the University;  
(j) “Finance Committee ” means the Finan ce Committee of the University;  
(k) “Hall” means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the students of the University, or of an 
Institution, maintained by the  University;  
(l) “Institution ” means an academic institutio n maintained by the University;  
(m) “recognised Institution ” means an inst itution of higher learnin g recognised by the University;  
(n) “Regulations ” means the Regulations made by any authority of the University under thi s Act 
for the time being force;  
(o) “School ” means a schoo l of Studies of the University;  
(p) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean , respectively, the Statutes and Ordinances of the Universi ty 
for the time being in force;  
(q) “Teachers of the University ” means Professors, Readers, Lecture rs and such other persons as 
may be appointed for imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any 
Institution maintained by the University and who are designated as teachers by the  Ordinances;  
                                                           
1. 9th January , 1998, vide notification No. S.O 1 (E), dated 1 st January , 1998 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 
3(ii). 3 
 (r) “University ” means the Maulana Azad National Urdu University established and incorporated 
as a University und er this Act.  
3. Establishment of the University .—(1) There shall be established a University by the name of 
“Maulana Azad National Urdu University ”. 
(2) The headquarters of the Un iversity shall be at Hyderabad.  
(3) The first Chancellor and the first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the Court, the 
Executive Council and the Academic Council and all persons who may hereafter become such officers or 
members, so long as they continue to  hold such office or membership, are hereby constituted a body 
corpor ate by the name of “Maulana Azad National Urdu University ”. 
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and shall su e and be sued by 
the said name.  
4. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be to promote and  develop Urdu 
language; to impart education and training in vocational and technical subjects through the medium of 
Urdu; to provide wider access to people desirous of pursuing programmes of higher education and 
training in Urdu medium through teaching on the Campus as well as  at a distance and to provide focus on 
women education . 
5. Power s of the University .—The University shall have  the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instructions and research in such branches of learning as are relevant for  
furtherance of  the objects of the University.  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer degrees or other academic distinctions on the basis of examinations, evaluation or any 
other m ethod of testing, on persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates, degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extra -mural studies, t raining and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the mann er prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to institute Professorships, Readerships, Lecturerships and other teaching or academic 
positions, required by the University and to appoint persons to such Profess orships, Readerships, 
Lecturerships or other teaching or a cademic positions;  
(vi) to appoint persons working in any other University or organisation as teacher or the 
University for a specified  period;  
(vii) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts an d to make appointments thereto;  
(viii) to co -operate or collaborate or associate with any other University or authority or institution 
of higher learning in such manner and for such purposes a s the Univ ersity may determine;  
(ix) to establish, with the prior approval of the Central Government, such centres and specialised 
laboratories, within or outside India, as are, in the opinion of the University necessary for the 
furtherance of its objects;  
(x) to in stitute and award fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(xi) to establish and maint ain Institutions and Halls;  
(xii) to make provision for research and advisory services and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements with other institutions, industrial or other organisations as the  University may deem 
necessary;  
(xiii) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops, seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evalu ators and other academic staff;  
(xiv) to make special arrang ements in respect of the residence, discipline and teaching of women 
students as the University may consi der desirable;  4 
 (xv) to appoint, on contract or otherwise, visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such other persons who ma y contribute to the advancement of  the objects of the 
University;  
(xvi) to confer autonomous status on a Department i n accordance with the Statutes;  
(xvii) to determine standards of admission to the University which may include examination, 
evaluation or any other method of testing;  
(xviii) to demand and receive pay ment of fees and other charges;  
(xix) to supervise the residences of the students of the University and to make arrangements for 
promoting th eir health and general welfare;  
(xx) to lay down condi tions of service of all categories of employees i ncluding their code of 
conduct;  
(xxi) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students and the employees and to take such 
disciplinary measures in this regard as may be deemed by the University to be ne cessary;  
(xxii) to make arrangements for promoting the health and general welfare of the employees;  
(xxiii) to receive benefactions,  donations and gifts and to acqu ire, hold, manage and dispose of 
any property, movable or immovable, including trust and end owment properties for the purposes of 
the University;  
(xxiv) to borrow, with the approval of the Central Government, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the University;  
(xxv) to organise suitable  distance education programmes;  
(xxvi) to establish maintain or recognise Study Centres for the delivery of the distance education 
system in the mann er laid down by the Ordinances;  
(xxvii ) to provide for the preparation of instructional materials including  films, cassettes, tapes, 
video cassettes and other software in collaboration with various Open Universities and other 
Institutions dealing with  the distance education system;  
(xxviii ) to devise and implement suitable schemes for providing a base for promo tion and 
dissemination of Urdu and to bring about the essential continuity in education with special reference 
to the delivery system in distance education consistent with th e objectives of the University; and 
 (xxix) to do all such other acts and things a s may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainmen t of all or any of its objects.  
6. Jurisdiction .—The jurisdiction of the University shal l extend to the whole of India.  
7. University open to all classes, castes and creeds .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be la wful for the University to adopt  
or impose on any person any test whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle him to be 
appointed as a teacher of the University or to hold any other office therein or to be admitted as a student 
in the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any privilege thereof:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent the Univer sity from making special 
provisions for the employment or admission of women, physically handicapped or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society and, in particular, of the Scheduled C astes and the Scheduled Tribes.  
8. The Visitor .—(1) The  President of India shall be the Visitor  of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress 
of the University, including Institution managed by it, and to submit a report thereon; and upon  receipt of 
that report the Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive Council thereon through the Vice -
Chancellor, take such action and issue such directions as he considers necessary in respect of any of the 
matters dealt with in the report and the University shall be bound to comply with such directions.  5 
 (3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be made by such person or persons as he 
may direct of the University, its buildings, laboratories and equipment and of any Inst itution maintained 
by the University and also of the examinations, teaching and other work conducted or done by the 
University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like manner in respect of any matter connected with the 
administration or finances of the U niversity or Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section ( 3), give notice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or inquiry to be made to the University and the University shall have the right to 
make such representatio ns to the Visitor, as it may consider ne cessary.  
(5) After considering the representations, if any, made by the University, the Visitor may cause to be 
made such inspection or inquiry as is referred to in sub -section ( 3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquir y has been caused to be made by the Visitor, the University shall 
be entitled to appoint a representative who shall have the right to be present and be heard  at such 
inspection or inquiry.  
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in respec t of the University or any Institution 
maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with reference to the result of such inspection or inquiry 
together with such views and advice with regard to the action to be taken thereon, as the Visitor may be 
pleased  to offer, and on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor shall communicate to 
the Executive Council, the views of the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer upon the action 
to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Executive Council shal l communicate, through the Vice -Chancellor, to the Visitor such 
action, if any, as it proposes to take or has been taken upon the result of such inspection or inquiry.  
(9) Where the Executive Council does not, within a reasonable time, take action to the s atisfaction of 
the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any explanation furnished or representation made by the 
Executive Council, issue such directions as he may think fit and the Executive Council sha ll comply with 
such directions.  
(10) Without pr ejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any proceeding of the University which is not in conformity with this Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he shall  call upon the Registrar to show cause why such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a reasonable ti me, he shall consider the 
same.  
(11) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
9. Officers of  the Univ ersity .—The Following shall be t he officers of the University: — 
(1) the Chancellor;  
(2) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(4) the Deans of Schools;  
(5) the Registrar;  
(6) the Finance Officer;  
(7) the Librarian; and  
(8) such  other officers as may be declared by the Statutes to  be officers of the University.  
10. The Chancellor .—(1) The Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such manner as may  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Chancellor shall, by virtue of his of fice, be the Head of the University.  6 
 (3) The Chancellor shall, if present, preside at the convocation of the University held for conferring 
degrees.  
11. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in such 
manner and on s uch terms and conditions of service as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and academic officer of the University and 
shall exercise general supervision and control over the affairs of the University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the  authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any power conferred on any authority of the University by or under this Act and shall report to 
such authority the actio n taken by him on such matters:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of the opinion that such action ought not to have been 
taken, it may refer the matter to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be  final:  
Provided further that any person in the service of the University who is aggrieved by the action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section shall have the right to appeal against such action to the 
Executive Counc il within three months fro m the date on which decision on such action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the actio n taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any decision of any authori ty of the University is 
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the interest of the University, may ask the authority concerned to 
review its decision w ithin sixty days of such decision and if the authority refuses to review the decision 
either in whole or in part or no decision is taken by it within the said period of sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be  final.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
12. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor .—The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner and 
shall exercise  such powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Stat utes.  
13. The Deans of Schools .—Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
14. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may  be prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into agreement, sign documents and authenticate 
records on behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Librarian .—The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and shall exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other officers of the 
Univers ity shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;   7 
 (4) the Board of Studies;  
(5) the Finance Committee; and  
(6) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the  authorities of the 
University.  
19. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its members shall  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Court shall have the following  powers and functions, 
namely: — 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures for the improvement and  development of the University;  
(b) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which may be  referred to it for advice; and  
(c) to perform such other functions as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council sh all be the principal ex ecutive body of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
21. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council sha ll be the principal academic body of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the acade mic policies of the University.  
(2) The Constitution of the Academic Council, the term of office of its member and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The Board of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Board of Studies shall  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. The Finan ce Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance Committee 
shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. Other  authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other 
authorities, as may be declared by the Statutes to b e the authorities of the University, shall  be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
25. Power to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all 
or any of the fo llowing matters, namely: — 
(a) the constitution, powers and functions of the authorities, and other bodies of the University, as 
may be  constituted from time to time;  
(b) appointment and continuance in office of the members of the said authorities and bodies, 
filling up of vacancies of mem bers and all other matters relating to those authorities and other bodies 
for which it may be nec essary or desirable to provide;  
(c) the appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers and other academic staff and other employees of the University, 
their emoluments a nd other conditions of service;  
(e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in any other University or organisation 
for specific period f or undertaking a joint pr oject;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including provision for pension, insurance and 
provident fund, the manner of termination of s ervice and disciplinary action;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of t he employees of the Uni versity;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute between employees or students and the 
University;   8 
 (i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any employee or student against the 
action of any officer or authority of the Univer sity; 
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on an Institution or a Department;  
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments, C entres, Halls and Institutions;  
(l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates a nd other academic distinctions;  
(n) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(o) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities  or officers of the University;  
(p) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and students; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may b e provided for by the Statutes.  
26. Statutes how to be made .—(1) The first Statutes are those set out in th e Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make, amend or repeal any Statutes affecting the status, 
power s or constitution of any authority of the University until such authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an opinion in writing on the proposed changes and any opinion so expressed 
shall be consi dered by the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the Executive Council shall not consider to make, amend or repeal any statute 
relating to the matters provided under clauses ( j) and ( k) of section 25 except with the  prior approval of 
the Visitor.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit to the Executive Council for 
re-consideration in the light of obs ervations, if any, made by him.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has b een assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes or amend or repeal the Sta tutes referred to in sub -section ( 1) during the period of three 
years immediately afte r the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the said period of three years, make, within one year 
from the date of such expiry, such d etailed Statutes as he may consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid be fore both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections, the Visitor may direct the 
University to make provisions in the S tatutes in respect of any matter specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt, the Visitor may, 
after considering the rea sons, if any, communicated by the Executive Council for its ina bility to comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes suitably.  
27. Powers to make Ordinance .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the 
Ordinances may provide for all or any of the  following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the Universi ty and their enrolment as such;  
(b) the c ourses of study to be laid down for all degrees, diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other academic distinctions, qualifications for 
the same and the means to be taken relating to the granting and obtaining of the same;   9 
 (e) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the University and for admission to the 
examination s, degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for awards of fellowships, scholarships, s tudentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of examining bo dies, examiners and moderators;  
(h) the conditions of residence of the students of the University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made for the residence, discipline and teaching 
of women students and prescribing of speci al courses of stud ies for them;  
(j) the appointments and emoluments of employees other than those for whom provision  has been 
made in the Statutes;  
(k) the establishment of Centres of Studies, Boards of Studies, Special Centres, Specialised 
Laboratories and other Committees ; 
(l) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with other Universities, Institutions and other 
agencies including learned bodies or a ssociations in India or abroad;  
(m) the creation, composition and functions of any other body which is considered necessary for 
improving the a cademic life of the University;  
(n) such other terms and conditions of service of teachers and other academic staff as are not 
prescribed by the Statute s; 
(o) the management of Institutions establis hed by the University;  
(p) setting up of a machinery for redressal of grievances of employees; and  
(q) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes may be provided for by the Ordinances.  
(2) The first Or dinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the man ner prescribed by the Statutes.  
28. Regulation s.—The authorities of the University may make Regulations, consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for the conduct of their own business and that of the Committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances, in the man ner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be prepared under the direction of 
the Executive Council which shall include, among other matters, the steps taken by the University 
towards the fulfilment of its objects and shall be submitted to the Visitor on or before such date as may  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central G overnment, which shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid be fore both Houses of 
Parliament.  
30. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the University shall be 
prepared under the directions of the Executive Council and shal l, once at least every year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen months, be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as h e may authorise in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report  thereon shall be submitted to the 
Visitor along with the observations, if  any, of the Executive Council.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of the 
Executive Council and the views of the Executive  Council, if any, on such observation shall be submitted 
to the Visitor.   10 
 (4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report as submitted to the Visitor shall also 
be submitted to the Central Government who shall, as soon as may be, cause th e same to be laid be fore 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid before both Houses of Parliament shall be 
published in the Gazette of India.  
31. Conditions of service of em ployees .—(1) Every employee of the Univer sity shall be appointed 
under a written contract which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which shall be furni shed 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the University and any employee shall, at the 
request of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by 
the Executive Council, one member nominated by the employee and an umpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final and no suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section ( 2) shall be deemed to be a submission to 
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the meanin g of the Arbitration Act, 1940  (10 of 1940) . 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the Tribunal shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
32. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disci plinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examinati on whose name has been removed from the rolls of the University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been debarred from appearing at the examination of the Univer sity for more than 
one year, may, within ten days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive Council and the Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the  Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections 
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 31 shall, as far as may be, apply to a reference made under this su b-section.  
33. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University of Institution maintained by the 
University shall, notwithstanding anything contained in this  Act, have a right to appeal within such time 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes, to the Executive Council against the decision of any officer or 
authority of the University or of Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon, the Executive Council 
may confirm, modify or reverse  the decision appealed against.  
34. Provident and pension funds .—(1) The University shall constitute for the benefit of its 
employees such provident or pension funds or provide such insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and subject to such conditions as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare that the provision of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925), shall apply  to such fund, as if it 
were a Government provident fund.  
35. Disputes as to constitution of Uni versity authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a member of any aut hority 
or other body of the University, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose d ecision thereon shall be 
final.  
36. Constitution of Committees .—Where any authority of the University is given power by this Act 
or the Statutes to appoint Committee s, such Committees shall, save as otherwise provided, consist of the 
members of the authority concerned and of such other person, if any, as the author ity in each case may 
think fit.   11 
 37. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among the members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member whose place has become vacant and any 
person appointed, elected or co -opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member of such authority or body for 
the residue of the term for which the person whose place he fills would have been a member.  
38. Proceedings of University authorities or bodie s not invalidated by vacancies .—No act or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the 
existence of a vacancy or vacancies am ong its members.  
39. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any officer or other employee of the University for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
40. Mode of proof of University records .—A copy of any receip t, application, notice, order, 
proceeding, resolution of any authority or Committee of the University, or other documents in possession 
of the University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by the University, if certified by the 
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie  evidence of such receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, 
resolution or documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein where the original ther eof would, if produced, have been admissible in 
evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872) or in any 
other l aw for the time being in force.  
41. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giv ing effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Offici al Gazette, make such provision s, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficul ty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
42. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained  in this Act and the Statutes, — 
(a) the first Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and the said officer shall hold o ffice for a 
term of five years;  
(b) the  first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor and the said officer shall hold 
office for a term of five years;  
(c) the first Registrar and the First Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Visitor and each of 
the said officers shall hold offic e for a term of thr ee years;  
(d) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of not more than thirty members 
and eleven members, respectively, who shall be nominated by the Visitor and they shall hold of fice 
for a term of three years;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor and shall hold of fice for a term of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or authorities, the same shall be  filled by 
appointment or nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor, and the person so appointed or nominated 
shall hold office for so long as the officer or member in whose place he is appointed or nominated would 
have held that office, if such vacan cy had not occurred . 
43. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette an d to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be pub lished 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Sta tute, Ordinance or Regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 12 
 may be comprised in one session or in two or more successi ve sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordina nce or Regulation should not be made, the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to th e validity of anything previously done under 
that St atute, Ordinance or Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this  Act, to the Statutes, 
Ordinance or Regulations or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudically affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation may be applicable.   13 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 26)  
THE STATUTES  OF THE UNIVERSITY  
The Chancellor  
1.(1) The Chancellor shall  be appointed by the Visitor fro m a panel of not less than  three persons 
recommended by the Executive Council from amongst persons of  eminence in the academi c or public life 
of the country:  
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons so  recommended he may call for 
fresh recommendations from the Executive  Council.  
(2) The Chancellor shall hold office for a term of three years and shall be eligible for  re-appointment:  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of his term of office, the Chancellor shall  continue to hold 
office until his successor enters upon his office.  
The Vice -Chancellor  
2. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of not less  than three 
persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted  under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the  panel, he may call 
for a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1), shall consist of three persons, none of  whom shall be an 
employee of the University or an institution associated with the  University, or a member of the Executive 
Council or Academic Council or of any  other authority of the University. Out of the three persons, two 
shall be nominated  by the Executive Council and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor  shall 
be the convener of the Committee.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on  which  he enters 
upon his office, and he shall not be eligible for re -appointment:   
Provided that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has  expired, to continue in 
office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one  year, as may be specified by him or till his 
successor is appointed and enters upon his office, whichever is earlier.  
(5) Notwithstanding  anything contained in clause ( 4) a person appointed as Vice -Chancellor shall, if 
he attains the age of s ixty-five years during the term of his office  or any extension thereof, retire from 
office.  
(6) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the V ice-Chancellor shall be as  follows: — 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other  than house rent 
allowance at the rates fixed by the Central Government  from time to time:  
Provided that if he assumes office after retiring on superannuation from a  pensionable post, his 
salary and allowance shall be reduced by the gross  amount of his pension prior to commutation or the 
payment of pension  shall be held in abeyance until he relinquishes office;  
Provided further that if he assumes office after retiring on superannuation  from a non -pensionable 
post, his salary and allowances shall be reduced by  the gross amount equivalent of retirement benefits 
availed of by him on  superannuation;  
Provided also that where such employee had been a member of any  pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to  such scheme.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travelling allowance at such rates  as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council.   14 
 (iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of  thirty days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account  in advance in two half yearly instalments 
of fifteen days each on the 1st day of January and July every year:  
Provided that if the  Vice -Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the  office of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year the leave  shall be credited proportionately at the rate of 
two and -a-half days for each  completed month of service.  
(iv) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iii), the Vice -Chancellor  shall also be 
entitled to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each  completed year of service. This half pay 
leave may also be availed of as  commuted leave on full pay on medical certi ficate. When commuted 
leave  is availed, twice the amount of half pay leave shall be debited against half pay leave due.  
(v) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and  allowances as may be 
fixed by the Executive Council with the approval of  the Visitor from time to time.  
(7) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or  otherwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other  cause, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior -most  professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor assumes office or until the existing  
Vice -Chancellor attend s to the  duties of his office as the case may be.  
Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor  
3. (1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio Chairman of the Executive Council, the  Academic 
Council, Finance Committee and shall in the absence of the Chancellor  preside at the convocations held 
for conferring degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of  any authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote  thereat unless he is a member of such 
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the  Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed, and he shall have all the powers  necessary to ensure such observance.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and  shall give effect 
to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper  maintenance of discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers  to such persons or person as he deems fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the  meeting of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance  Committee.  
Pro-Vice-Chancellor  
4. (1) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the  recommendation 
of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by  the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either  appoint the person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice - Chancellor to recommend another person to the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recom mendation of the  Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of the Pro -Vice -Chancellor in addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of Office of the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by  the Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the  expiration of the term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  15 
 Provided that the Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be  eligible for  
re-appointment:  
Provided further that, in any case, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining  the age of Sixty -
five years.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be 
such as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time  to time.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters  as may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and  shall also exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or  delegated to him by the Vice -Chancellor.  
Registrar  
5. (1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation  of a 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment . 
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Registrar shall be  such as may 
be prescribed by the Executive Council from time  to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retir e on attaining the age of sixty years:  
Provide further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, continue in 
office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his of fice or until the expiry of a period of one 
year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the Office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reasons of  illness, absence, 
or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the  duties of t he office shall be performed 
by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may  appoint for the purpose.  
(5)(a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the  employees, other 
than teachers and academic staff, as may be specified in the Ordinances, to suspend them pending inquiry, 
to administer warnings to them  or to impose on  them the penalty of censure or the withholding of 
increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person concerned  has been given 
reasonabl e opportunity of showing cause against the action  proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registrar  imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of  the Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon conclusion of the inquiry,  make a report to the Vice -Chancellor along with 
his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executiv e Council against an order of  the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic  Council and the 
Boards of Studies, but shall not be deemed to be a member of any  of these authorities and he shall be  
ex officio Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(7) It shal l be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property  of the University 
as the Executive Council shall comm it to his charges;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council,  the Academic 
Council, the Boards of Studies and of any Committees  appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meeting of the Executiv e Council, the  Academic Council and of 
any Committees appointed by those authorities;  16 
 (d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Executive Council and the  Academic Council;  
(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in  accordance with the 
manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(f) to supply to the Visitor, copies of the agenda of the meetings of the  authorities of the 
University as soon as they are issued; and the minutes of  such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or against the  University, sign powers -
of-attorney and verify pleadings or depute his  representative for the purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the  Ordinan ces or the 
Regulations or as may be required, from time to time, by  the Executive Council or the  
Vice -Chancellor.  
The Finance Officer  
6. (1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the  recommendations of a 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he  shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer  shall be such as 
may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time:  
Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire on attaining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of sixty years, 
continue in office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is,  by reason of 
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform the duties of  his office, the duties of the office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Secretar y of the Finance Committee, but  shall not be 
deemed to be a Member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall  advise it as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform  such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the  Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the  Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Coun cil, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property a nd investments of the University including  trust and endowed 
property;  
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and non -recurring  
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are  expended on the purpose for whi ch 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the preparation of annual accounts and the budget of the  University and for 
their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the  state of 
investment;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of revenue and advise on the methods of  collection 
employed;  17 
 (f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are  maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment  and other consumable materials in all offices, 
Special Centres, Specialised  Laboratories and Institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the notice of the Vice -Chancellor unauthorised expenditure and  other financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons  at fault; and  
(h) call for from any office, Centre, Laboratory or Institution maintained by the  University any 
information or returns that he may consider necessary for the  performance of his dutie s. 
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or the person or persons duly authorised  in this behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University  shall be sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money.  
Deans of Schools of Studies  
7. (1) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the Vice -Chancellor  from among the 
Professors in the School for a period of three years and he shall  be eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that a Dean on attaining the age of sixty five years shall cease to hold  office as such:  
Provided further that if at any time there is no Dean in a School , the Vice -Chancellor,  
Pro-Vice -Chancellor or a Dean authorised by the Vice -Chancellor in  this behalf, shall exercise the powers 
of the Dean of the School.  
(2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness,  absence or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the  office shall be performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint f or the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the School and shall be responsible for the conduct  and 
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall  have such other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the  Boards of Studies 
or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not  have the right to vote thereat  unless he is a 
member thereof.  
Heads of Departments  
8. (1) In the case of Departments which have more than one Professor the Head of the  Department 
shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation  of the Vice -Chancellor from among 
the Professors.  
(2) In the case of Departments where there is no Professor  or there is only one  Professor, the 
Executive Council shall have the option to appoint, on the  recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor, either 
the Professor or a Reader as the  Head of the Department:  
Provided that it shall be open to a Professor or Reader t o decline the offer of  appointment as the Head 
of the Department.  
(3) A person appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office as such for a  period of three 
years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(4) A Head of a Department may resign his  office at any time during his tenure of  office.  
(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such duties as may be prescribed by the  Ordinances.  
Proctor  
9. (1) The Proctor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation  of the Vice -
Chancello r and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as  may be assigned to him by the 
Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Proctor shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
  18 
 Librarian  
10. (1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the  recommendation of the 
Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he  shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the 
University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties and shall have  such 
emoluments, terms and conditions of service as may be prescribed by the  Executive Council.  
The Court  
11. Ten members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
The Executive Council  
12. Five members of the Executive Council shall form a quorum for a meeting of the  Executive 
Council.  
Powers and functions of the Executive Council  
13. (1) The Executive Council shall have the power of management and administration of  the revenue 
and property  of the University and the conduct of all administrative  affairs of the University not otherwise 
provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the  Executive Council shall, 
in addition to all other powers vested i n it, have the  following powers, namely: — 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and  emoluments of such posts 
and to define the duties and conditions of  service of Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other 
academic staff and  Principals of Institutions maintained by the University:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in respect  of the number,  
qualifications and the emoluments of teachers and  academic staff otherwise than after consideration 
of the re commendations  of the Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as  may be necessary, 
and Principals of the Institutions maintained by the  University on the recommendation of the 
Selection Committee const ituted  for the purpose and to fill up temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make  appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any offi cer of the University, other than the  Chancellor and the 
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements  for the discharge of the functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline among employees in accordance with th e Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property,  business and all other 
administrative affairs of the University, and for that  purpose to appoint such agents as it may think fit;  
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure  for a year on the 
recommendations of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied  income, in such 
stocks, funds, share or securities, f rom time to time as it  may think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the  like powers of varying such investment from time to time;  
(ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable property on  behalf of the 
University;  
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means  needed for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contracts on behalf of the  University;  19 
 (xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances  of the employees 
and students of the University who may, for any reason,  feel aggrieved;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them,  and to fix their fees, 
emoluments and  travelling and other allowances, after  consulting the Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and  use of such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence  and dis cipline of 
women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor, the Deans, 
the Registrar or the Finance Officer or such other  employee or authority of the University or to a 
committee appointed by it  as it ma y deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for inviting Writer in Residence and determine the terms and  conditions of such 
invitations;  
(xix) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors,  Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such  appointments; and  
(xx) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be  conferred or impo sed 
on it by the Act, or the Statutes.  
The Academic Council  
14. Ten members of the Academic Council shall form quorum for a meeting of  the Academic 
Council.  
Powers and functions of the Academic Council  
15. Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Academic Council shall,  in addition to all 
other powers vested in it, hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the  University and to give 
directions regarding methods of instructi ons, co -ordinating  teaching among the Institutions and 
evaluation of research or  improvement in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -School co -ordination, to establish or appoint  committees or boards, for 
taking up projects on an inter -School basis;  
(c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative  or on a reference 
by a School or the Executive Council and to take  appropriate action thereon; and  
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes  and the  Ordinances regarding 
the academic functioning of the University,  discipline, residence, admissions, award of fellowships 
and studentships,  fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance.  
Schools of Studies and Departments  
16. (1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as may be specified in the  Statutes.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School  Board shall be 
nominated by the Executive Council and shall hold office for a  period of three years.  
(3) The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the  Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such  meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5)(a) Each School shall consist of such De partments as may be assigned to it by  the Ordinances:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the  Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned  such teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider  necessary.  20 
 (b) Each Department shall consist of the following  members, namely: — 
(i) teachers of the Department;  
(ii) persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary  Professors, if any, attached to the Department; and  
(v) such other persons as may be members of the Department in  accordance with the provisions of 
the Ordinances.  
Board of Studies  
17. (1) Each Department shall have a Board of Studies.  
(2) The constitutio n of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members  shall be prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the  functions of the Board 
of Studies shall be to approve subjects for research for  various degrees and other requirements of research 
degrees and to recommend to  the concerned School Board in the manner  prescribed by the Ordinances — 
(a) Courses of studies and appointment of examiners for post -graduate  courses, but excluding 
research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of post -graduate teaching  and research;  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of Studies shall, during the period of  three years 
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be performed by the  Department.  
Finance Committee  
18. (1) The Finance Committee shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(iii) three persons nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least  one shall be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(iv) three persons nominated by the Visitor.  
(2) Five members of Finance Committee shall form a quorum for a meeting of the  Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio members, shall  hold office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) The Finance Committee shall meet at least twice every year to examine the  accounts and to 
scrutinis e proposals for expenditure.  
(5) All proposals relating to creation of post, and those items which have not been  included in the 
Budget, should be examined by the Finance Committee for  consideration and comments and thereafter 
submitted to the Executive Council.  
(6) The annual accounts an d the financial estimates of the University prepared by the  Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and  comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(7) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the, total recurring  expenditure and the total 
non-recurring expenditure for the year, based on the  income and resources of the University (which, in the 
case of productive works,  may include the proceeds of loans).  21 
 Selection Committees  
19. (1) There shall be Selection Committees for making recommendations to the  Executive Council 
for appointment to the posts of Professors, Readers, Lecturer,  Registrar, Finance Officer, Librarian and 
Principals of the institutions maintained  by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specified in column 1 of  the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice -Chancellor, a  nominee of the Visitor and the persons 
specified in the corresponding entry in  column 2 of the said  Table: — 
TABLE  
NOTE 1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the 
head of the  project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department 
concerned.  1  2 
Professor  (i) The Dean of the School concerned.  
 (ii) The Head of the Department Concerned if he is a 
professor.  
 (iii) Three persons not in the service of the University,  
nominated by the Executive Council, out of panel  
of names recommended by the Academic Council  
for their special knowledge of, or interest in, the  
subject with which the Professor will be 
concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Dean of the School concerned.  
 (ii) The Head of the Department concerned.  
 (iii) Two persons not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the Executive Council, out of a panel  
of names recommended by the Academic Council  
for their special knowledge of, or interest in,  the 
subject with which the Reader or a Lecturer will  
be concerned.  
Registrar/Finance Officer  
 (i) Two members of the Executive Council nominated  
by it.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University  
nominated by the Executive Council.  
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University, 
who have special  knowledge of the subject of the 
Library Science/ Library  Administration to be 
nominated by the Executive Council.  
 (ii) One person not in the service of the University, 
nominated by the  Executive Council.  
Head of the Institutions   
maintained by the University   Three persons not in the service of the University  
of whom two shall be nominated by the Executive 
Council and one by the Academic Council for their 
special knowledge of, or interest in, a subject in 
which instruction is being provided by the 
institution.  22 
  2. The professors to be nominated shall be Professor concerned with the 
speciality for which the selection is being made and that the Vice -Chancellor 
shall consult the Head of the Department and the Dean of the School before 
nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor , or in his absence, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall pr eside the  meetings of a 
Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior  consultation with , 
and subject to the convenience of, Visitor’s nominee and the  persons nominated by the Executive Council 
under c lause ( 2): 
Provided further that the proceedings of Selection Committee shall not be valid  unless, — 
(a) where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the persons nominated by the  Executive Council 
is four in all, at least three of them attend the meeting;  and 
(b) where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the persons nominated by the  Executive Council 
is three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of a Selection Committee shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor  or in his absence 
by th e Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making  recommendations shall be laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by a  Selection 
Committee, it shall re cord its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor  for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made  in the manner indicated below: — 
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for  a duration longer than one academic session,  it shall be filled 
on the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance  with the procedure indicated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interest of work  it is necessary to fill 
the vacancy, the appointment may be made on a  purely temporary basis by a local Selection 
Committee referred to in sub -clause  (ii) for a period not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to  such vacancy shall 
be made on the recommendation of a local Selection  Committee consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of  the Department and a nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offices of the Dean and the  Head of the Department, 
the Selection Committee may contain two  nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in case sudden vacancies of teaching posts caused by  death or any other 
reason, the Dean may, in consultation with the Head of  the Department concerned make a temporary 
appoin tment for a month and  report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about such appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a  regular Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be  continued in servic e on such temporary 
employment, unless he is  subsequently selected by a local Selection Committee or a regular  Selection 
Committee, for a temporary or permanent appointment, as the  case may be.  
Special mode of appointment  
20. (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 19, the Executive Council may  invite a person 
of high academic distinction and professional attainments to accept  a post of Professor or Reader or any 
other academic post in the University, as the  case may be, on such terms and conditi ons as it deems fit, 
and on the person  agreeing to do so, appoint him to the post.  23 
 (2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working  in any other 
University or organisation for undertaking a joint project in  accordance wit h the manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
Appointment for a fixed tenure  
21. The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in accordance with the  procedure laid down 
in Statute 19 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions  as it deems fit.  
Commi ttees 
22. (1) Any authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special  Committees as it 
may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons who  are not members of such authority.  
(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject  delegated to it subject 
to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of the teachers, etc.  
23. (1) All the teachers and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of  any 
agreement to the contrary, be governed by the terms and conditions of service  and code  of conduct as are 
specified in the Statutes,  the Ordinances and the  Regulations . 
(2) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University  shall be  appointed on a written 
contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the  Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be deposited with the  Registrar.  
Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other e mployees  
24. All the employees of the University, other than the teachers and other academic  staff of the 
University, shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be  governed by the terms and conditions 
of service and code of conduct as are  specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances and the Regulations.  
Seniority list  
25. (1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statutes, any person is to hold an Office or be a  member of 
an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such  senio rity shall be determined 
according to the length of continuous service of such  person in his grade, and in accordance with such 
other principles as the Executive  Council may, from time to time, frame.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare an d maintain, in respect of each  class of persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statutes apply, a complete and  up-to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provision of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a  particular  grade or the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the  Registrar may, on his own motion and shall, 
at the request of any such person,  submit the matter to the Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
Removal of employees of the University  
26. (1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against a teacher, a member of the  academic staff 
or other employee of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the  case of the teacher or member of the 
academic staf f, and the authority competent  to appoint (hereinafter referred to as the appointing authority) 
in the case of other  employee, may, by order in writing, place such teacher, member of the academic  staff 
or other employee, as the case may be, under suspensio n and shall forthwith  report to the Executive 
Council the circumstances in which the order was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion that the  circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a  membe r of the academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or  of any other 
terms and conditions of service of the employees, the Executive  Council in respect of teachers and other  24 
 academic staff, and the appointing  authority, in respect of other employees, shall have the power to 
remove a teacher  or a member of the academic staff , or as the case may be, other employee on  ground of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as a foresaid, the Executive Cou ncil, or as the case may be, the appointing  authority, shall not 
be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic  staff or other employee except for a good 
cause and after giving three months ’ notice or on payment of three months ’ salary in lieu t hereof.  
(4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed  under clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of  showing cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him . 
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall  take effect from 
the date on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee  is under suspension 
at the time of h is removal, such removal shall take effect from  the date on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Statute, a  teacher, member 
of the academic staf f or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee,  only after giving three months ’ notice in  writing to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case  may be, or by paying thre e months ’ salary 
in lieu thereof:  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after  giving three months’ notice in  writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing  authority or by paying one month’s  salary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which  the resignation is  accepted 
by the Executive Council or the appointing  authority, as the case may be.  
Honorary degrees  
27. (1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the Academic Council and  by a 
resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of th e members  present and voting, make 
proposals to the Visitor for the conferment of honorary  degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own  motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed  by a majority of not less than  two-thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous  sanction of the Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by the University.  
Withdrawal of degrees , etc. 
28. The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not  less than two -
thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or  academic distinction conferred on, or 
any certificate or diploma granted to, any  person by the University for good and sufficient cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been  given to that person 
calling upon him to show cause within such time as may be  specified in the notice why such a resolution 
should not be passed and until his  objection, if  any, and any evidence he may produce in support of them, 
have been  considered by the Executive Council.  
Maintenance of discipline among students of the University  
29. (1) All powers relating to discipline and disciplinary action in relation to students of  the 
University shall vest in the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to  a Proctor and to 
such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  25 
 (3) Without prejudice to the generality of his pow ers relating to the maintenance of  discipline and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the  maintenance of discipline, the Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of his powers, by  order, direct that any studen t or students be expelled, or re sticated, for 
a specified  period, or be not admitted to a course or courses of study in a n Institution or a  Department of 
the University for stated period, or be punished with fine for an  amount to be specified in the order, or be 
debarred from taking an e xamination or  examinations conducted by the University, Institution or 
Department or a School  for one or more years, or that the results of the student or students concerned in  
the examination or examinations in which he or they have appeared be cancelled.  
(4) The Head of Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of teaching  Departments in the 
University shall have the authority to exercise all such  disciplinary powers over the students in their 
respective Institutions, Schools and  teaching Depart ments in the University as may be necessary for the 
proper  conduct of such Institutions, Schools and teaching Departments in the University.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor, and other persons  specified in clause ( 4), 
detailed rul es of discipline and proper conduct shall be  made by the University. The principals of 
Institutions, Deans of Schools of  Studies and Heads of teaching Departments in the University may also 
make the  supplementary rules as they deem necessary for the afores aid purposes.  
Convocations  
30. Convocations of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes  shall be held in 
such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
Acting Chairman of meetings  
31. Where no provision is made for a President or Chairman to preside over a meeting  of any 
authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the  President or Chairman so 
provided for is absent, the members present shall elect  one from among themselves to preside at such 
meeting.  
Resignation  
32. Any member, other than an ex officio member, of the Court, the Executive  Council, the Academic 
Council or any other authority of the University or any  Committee of such authority may resign by letter 
addressed to the Registrar and  the resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is received by the 
Registrar.  
Disqualifications  
33. (1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member of any  of the  
authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is an un discharged insolvent;  
(iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral  turpitude and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less  than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the  
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the  Visitor and his decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in  any civil court again st such decision.  
Residence condition for membership and office  
34. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who is not ordinarily  resident in 
India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the University or a  member of any authority of the 
University.  
Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies  
35. Notwithstanding anything contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post  in the University 
or is a member of any authority or body of the University in his  capacity as a member of a particular 26 
 authority or body or as the holder of a  particular appointment shall hold such office or membership only 
for so long as he  continues to be a member of that particular authority or body or the holder of that  
particular appoi ntment, as the case may be.  
Ordinances how made  
36. (1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 27 may be amended,  repealed or 
added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified  below.  
(2) No Ordinances in respect of t he matters enumerated in section 27, other than the  one enumerated 
in clause ( m) of sub -section ( 1) thereof, shall be made by the  Executive Council unless a draft of such 
Ordinance has been proposed by the  Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance  proposed by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal  or return the draft to the Academic  
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or  in part , together with any amendment whic h the 
Executive Council may suggest.  
(4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance  proposed by the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may consider the  question afresh and in case the original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less  than two -thirds of the members present and voting and more than 
half the total  number of members of the Academic Council, the draft may be sent back to the  Executive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor whos e decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect  immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor  within two 
weeks from the date of its adoption. The Visitor  shall have the power  to direct the University within four 
weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to  suspend the operation for any such Ordinance and he shall, as 
soon as possible,  inform the Executive Council about his objection to the proposed Ordinance. The 
Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either withdraw the  order suspending the 
Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance , and his decision shall  be final.  
Regulations  
37. (1) The  authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the Act,  the Statutes 
and the Ordinances for  the following matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the  number of members 
required to form a quo rum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the  Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or  committees appointed by 
them and not provided for  by the Act, the  Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving  of notice to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the  business to be considered at meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the  proceeding of meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may  specify of any 
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such  Regulation.  
Delegation of powers  
38. Subject to  the provisions of the Act and the Statutes, any officer or authority of the  University 
may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or  person under his or its respective 
control and subject to the condition that overall  responsibility for the exercise of the powers so delegated 
shall continue to vest in  the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
  
 
--------------------------The National Environment Appellate Authority Act, 1997--------------------------
1 
 THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENT  APPELLATE AUTHORITY ACT, 1997  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF AUTHORITY  
3. Establishment of Authority . 
4. Composition of Authority . 
5. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or Member . 
6. Vice -Chairperson to act as Chairperson or to discharge his functions in  certain circumstances . 
7. Term of office . 
8. Resignation and removal . 
9. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson,                        
Vice -Chairperson and Members . 
10. Vacancy in Authority not to invalidate acts or proceedings . 
CHAPTER III  
JURISDICTION AND POWERS OF AUTHORITY  
11. Appeals to Authority . 
12. Procedure and powers of Authority . 
13. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson . 
14. Staff of Authority . 
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Bar of jurisdiction . 
16. Proceedings before the Authority to be judicial proceedings . 
17. Members and staff of Authority to be public servants . 
18. Protection o f action taken in good faith . 
19. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority . 
20. Offences by companies . 
21. Power to remove difficulties . 
22. Power to make rules.  
23. Repeal and saving . 
 
  2 
 THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAPPELLATE AUTHORITY ACT, 1997  
ACT NO. 22 OF 1997  
[26th March , 1997 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of a National Environment Appellate Authority  to hear 
appeals with respect to restriction of areas in which any industries, operations or  processes or 
class of industries, operations or processes shall not be carried out or shall be  carried out 
subject to certain safeguards under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -eighth Year of th e Republic of I ndia as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1.  Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the National Environment 
Appellate  Authority Act, 1997.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 30th day of  January, 1997.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “Act” means the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986  (29 of 1986) ; 
(b) “Authority ” means the National Environment Appellate Authority  established under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
(c) “Chairp erson” means the Chairperson of the Authority;  
(d) “Member” means a Member of the Authority;  
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “Vice -Chairperson ” means the Vice -Chairperson of the Authority.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF AUTHORITY  
3. Establishment of Authority. —(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official  
Gazette,  establish a body to be known as the National Environment Appellate  Authority to  exercise the 
powers conferred upon, and to perform the functions  assigned to,  it under this Act.  
(2) The head office of the Authority shall be at Delhi.  
4. Composition of Authority. —The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson, a Vice -Chairperson 
and such other  Members not exceeding three, as the Central Gover nment may deem fit.  
5.Quali fications for appointment as Cha irperson, Vice -Chairperson or Member. —(1) A person 
shall not be qualified for appointment as a Chairperson  unless he  has been— 
(a) a Judge of the Supreme Court; or  
(b) the Chief Justice of a High Court.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Vice -Chairperson unless he  has— 
(a) for at least two years held the post of a Secretary to  the Government of  India or any other post 
under the Central or State  Governm ent carrying a scale of  pay which is not less than that of a 
Secretary to the  Government of India; and  
(b) expertise or experience in administrative, legal,  managerial or technical  aspects of problems 
relating to environment.  3 
 (3) A person shall not be qual ified for appointment as a Member  unless he has  professional 
knowledge or practical experience in the areas  pertaining to conservation,  environmental management, 
law or planning and development.  
(4) The Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson and the Members sha ll be appointed by  the President.  
6. Vice -Chairperson to act as Chai rperson or to discharge his functions in  certain 
circumstance s.—(1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of  the Chairperson  by 
reason of his death, res ignation or otherwise, the Vice -Chairperson shall act as the  Chairperson until the 
date on which a new Chairperson appointed in  accordance with the  provisions of this Act to fill such 
vacancy enters upon his office.  
(2) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge his functions owing  to absence,  illness or any other 
cause, the Vice -Chairperson or, as the case maybe, such one of the  Member as the Central Government 
may, by notification, authorise in  this behalf, shall  discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the 
date on which  the Chairperson resumes  his duties.  
7. Term of office .—The Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson or a Member shall hold office  as such for 
a term of three years from the date on which he enters upon his  office, but shall be eligible  for                 
re-appointment for another term of three years:  
Provided that no Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or Member shall hold  office as  such after he has 
attained,— 
(a) in the case of the Chairperson, the age of seventy years;  and 
(b) in the case of the Vice -Chairperson or a Member, the age of  sixty -five years.  
8. Resig nation and removal .—(1) The Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson or a Member may, by 
notice  in writing under his hand addressed to the President, resign his  office:  
Provided that the Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson or a Member  shall, unless he  is permitted by the 
President to relinquish his office sooner,  continue to hold office until  the expiry of three months from the 
date of receipt of such notice  or until a person duly  appointed as his succes sor enters upon his office or 
until the  expiry of his term of office,  whichever is the earliest.  
(2) The Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson or a Member shall not be  removed from  his office except 
by an order made by the President on the ground of  proved misbehavior or incapacity after an inquiry 
made by a Judge of the Supreme Court  in which such  Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson or a Member 
had been informed of  the charges against him  and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in 
respect of  those charges.  
(3) The President may suspend from office the Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson  or a Member in 
respect of whom a reference has been made to the  Supreme Court under  sub-section ( 2) until the 
President has passed orders on receipt of  the report of t he Supreme Court on such reference.  
(4) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for  the investigation  of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson or a Member  referred to in                 
sub-section ( 2). 
9. Salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice -
Chai rperson and Members .—The salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and  
conditions of  service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefit s)of, the Chairperson, the  
Vice -Chairperson and the Members shall be such as may be prescribed  by the Central  Government.  
10. Vacancy in Authority not to invalidate acts or proceedings. —No act or proceedings of the 
Authority shall be questioned or shall  be invalid  merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy or 
defect in the  establishment of the  Authority.  
  4 
 CHAPTER  III 
JURISDICTION AND POWERS OF AUTHORITY  
11. Appeals to Authority .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order granting environmental  clearance 
in the areas in which any industries, operations or processes or class of  industries, operations and  
processes shall not be carried out or shall be carried out subject  to certain safeguards may,  within thirty 
days from the date of such order, prefer an appea l to the Authority in such  form as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Authority may entertain any appeal after the  expiry of the said  period of thirty days 
but not after ninety days from the date  aforesaid if it is satisfied that  the appellant was preven ted by 
sufficient cause from filing the  appeal in time.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), “person” means— 
(a) any person who is likely to be affected by the grant of  environmental clearance;  
(b) any  person who owns or has control over the project with  respect to which  an application has 
been submitted for environmental clearance;  
(c) any association of persons (whether incorporated or not)likely to be affected  by such order 
and functioning in the fie ld of environment;  
(d) the Central Government, where the environmental clearance  is granted by  the State 
Government and the State Government, where the  environmental clearance  is granted by the Central 
Government; or  
(e) any local authority, any part of wh ose local limits is  within the neighbourhood  of the area 
wherein the project is proposed to be located.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal preferred under sub -section ( 1), the  Authority shall, after  giving the 
appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such  orders, as it thinks fit.  
(4) The Authority shall dispose of the appeal within ninety days  from the date of filing  the appeal:  
Provided that the Authority may for reasons to be recorded in  writing, dispose of the  appeal within a 
further period of thirty days . 
12. Procedure and powers of Authority. —(1) The Authority shall not be bound by the procedure 
laid down in  the Code of  Civil Procedure, 19 08 (5 of 1908)  but shall be guided by the principles of  
natural justice and subject  to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules made by the  Central 
Government, the  Authority shall have power to regulate its own procedure including  the fixing of places  
and times of its inquiry and deciding whether to sit in public or  in private.  
(2) The Authority shall have, for  the purposes of discharging its  functions under this  Act, the same 
powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code  of Civil Procedure,1908  (5 of 1908) , while trying a 
suit, in respect of the following matters,  namely:— 
(a) summoning  and enforcing the attendance of any person and  examining  him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the  Indian Evidence  Act, 1872                     
(1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or copy  of such record or  document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or  documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing  a representation for default or deciding it, ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation  for default or any  order passed by it 
ex parte ; and  5 
 (i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,  prescribed by the  Central Go vernment.  
13. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson. —The Chairperson shall exercise such 
financial and administrative  powers as  may be vested in him under the rules:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall have authority to delegate such  of his financial  and administrative 
powers as he may think fit to the Vice -Chairperson or any other officer  subject to the condition that the 
Vice -Chairperson or such other  officer shall, while  exercising such delegated powers, continue to act 
under the  direction , control and supervision  of the Chairperson.  
14. Staff of Authority .—(1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and  categories of the  
officers and other employees required to assist the Authority in  the discharge of its  functions and provide 
the Authority with such officers and other  employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The officers and other employees of the Authority shall  discharge their functions  under the general 
superintendence of the Chairperson.  
(3) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the  officers and other  employees shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Bar of ju risdiction. —With effect from the date of establishment of the Authority, no  civil court 
or other authority shall have jurisd iction to entertain any appeal in  respect of any matter with  which the 
Authority is so empowered by or under this Act.  
16. Proceedings before the Authority to be judicial proceedings. —All proceedings before the 
Authority shall be deemed to be judicial  proceedings  within the meaning of sections 193, 219 and 228 of 
the Indian Penal  Code  (45 of 1860) . 
17. Members and staff of Authority to be public servants .—The Chairperson, the                        
Vice -Chairperson and the Members and the  officers and  other employees of the Authority shall be 
deemed to be public  servants within the meaning  of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
18. Protection of action taken in good f aith.—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against  the Central  Government or against the Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson or a  Member of the 
Authority  or any other person authorised by the Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson or a Member for  
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in  pursuan ce of this Act or any  rule or order 
made thereunder.  
19. Penalty for failure to comply with orders of Authority .—Whoever fails to comply with any 
order made by the Authority, he  shall be  punish able with imprisonment for a ter m which may extend to 
seven  years, or with fine  which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.  
20. Offences by companies .—(1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a  
company, every  person who, at the time the offence was committed, was directly in  charge of, and was  
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the  company, as well as the  company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be  liable to be proceeded  against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render  any such person  liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that  the offence was committed  without his knowledge or 
that he has exercised all due diligence to  prevent the  commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstand ing anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an  offence under  this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the  offence has been  committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to  any neglect on the part  of, any directo r, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the  company, such director,  manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be  guilty 
of that offence and shall beliable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
  6 
 Explanation .—For the purposes  of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or  other association of  individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the  firm.  
21.  Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the Provisions of  
this Act, the  Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,  make such  provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as  appear to it to  be necessary or expedient for removing 
the diffi culty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of the  period of three  years from the date 
on which this Act receives the assent of the  President.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be  after it is made, be  laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
22. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for  
carrying out  the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power,  such rules  may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely:— 
(a) the procedure under sub -section ( 4) of section 8 for the  investigation of  misbehaviour or 
incapacity of the Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson or a Member;  
(b) the  salaries and allowances payable to and the other terms  and conditions  of service of the 
Chairperson, the Vice -Chairperson and the  Members under section 9;  
(c) the form which an appeal shall contain under sub -section( 1) of section 11;  
(d) financial and adm inistrative powers of the Chairperson  under section 13;  
(e) the salaries and allowances and conditions of service of  the officers and  other employees of 
the Authority;  
(f) any other matter which is required to be, or may be,  prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made  under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made,  before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a  total period of thirty days  which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive  sessions, and if,  before the ex piry of the session immediately 
following the session  or the successive sessions  aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses  agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter  have effect only 
in such  modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,  that any such  modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously  done under that rule.  
23. Repeal and saving .—(1) The National Environment Appellate Authority Ordinance,               
1997 (Ord. 12 of 1997)  is hereby  repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken  under the said  Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the  corresponding  provisions of this  Act. 
--------------------------The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997--------------------------
1 
 THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1997  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Authority.  
4. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and other members.  
5. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and other members.  
6. Powers of Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson.  
7. Removal and suspension of member from of fice in certain circumstances.  
8. Meetings.  
9. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.  
10. Officers and other employees of Authority.  
 
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
11. Functions of Authority.  
12. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc.  
13. Power of Authority to issue directions.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
14. Establishment of Appellate Tribu nal. 
14A. Application for settlement of disputes and appeals to Appellate Tribunal.  
14B. Composition of Appellate Tribunal.  
14C. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members.  
14D. Term of office.  
14E. Terms and conditions of service.  
14F. Vacancies.  
14G. Removal and resignation.  
14GA . Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperso n and Member.  
14H. Staff of Appellate Tribunal.  
14-I. Distribution of business amongst Benches.  
14J. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases.  
14K. Decision to be by majority.  
14L. Members, etc., to be public servants.  
14M. Transfer of pending cases.  
14N. Transfer of appeals.  
15. Civil  court not to have jurisdiction . 
16. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal . 
17. Right to legal representation.  
18. Appeal to Supreme  Court.  2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal  to be executable as a decree.  
20. Penalty for wil ful fai lure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal . 
 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
21. Grants by Central Government.  
22. Fund.  
23. Accounts and audit.  
24. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.  
 
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
26. Members, officers and employees of Authority to be public servants.  
27. Bar of jurisdiction.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
29. Penalty for contravention of directions of Authority.  
30. Offences by companies.  
31. Offences by Government D epartm ents. 
32. Exemption from tax on wealth and income.  
33. Delegation.  
34. Cognizance of offences.  
35. Power to make rules.  
36. Power to make regulations.  
37. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
38. Application of certain laws.  
39. Power to remove difficulties.  
40. Repeal and sav ing.  
  3 
 THE TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA ACT, 1997  
ACT NO. 24 OF 1997  
[28th March , 1997 .] 
An Act to provide for the establishment of the 1[Telecom Regulatory Authority of India and the 
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal to regulate the telecommunication 
services, adjudicate disputes, dispose of appeals and to protect the interests of service 
providers and consumers of the telecom sector, to promote and ensure orderly growth of the 
telecom sector] and for matters connected th erewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent and  commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Telecom Regulatory 
Authority of India Act, 1997.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 25th day of January, 1997.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date with effect from w hich the Authority is established under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
2[(aa) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribun al 
established under section 14;]  
(b) “Authority ” means  the Telecom Regulatory Auth ority of India established under                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 3;  
(c) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of  the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3;  
(d) “Fund ” means the Fund constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 22;  
(e) “licensee ” means any person licensed under sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Indian 
Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885) for providing specified public telecommunication services;  
2[(ea) “licensor ” means the Central Government or the telegra ph authority who grants a licenc e 
under section 4 of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  (13 of 1885);]  
(f) “member ” means a member of the Authority appointed under sub-section ( 3) of section 3 and 
includes the Chairperson and the Vice -Chairperson;  
(g) “notification ” means a notificatio n published in the Official Gazette;  
(h) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(i) “regulations ” means regulations made  by the Authority under this Act;  
(j) “service provider ” means the 3[Gove rnment as a service provider] and includes  a licensee;  
(k) “telecommunication service ” means service of any description (including electronic mail, 
voice mail, data services, audio tex services, video tex services, radio paging and cellular mobile 
telephone services) which is made available to use rs by means of any  transmission  or  reception  of   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 2, for “Telecom Regulatory Authority of India to regulate the telecommunication services,”          
(w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Ins. by s.  3, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
3. Subs. by s.  3, ibid., for “Government” (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  4 
 signs, signals, writing, images and sounds or intelligence of any nature, by wire,  radio, visual or other 
electro magnetic means but shall no t include broadcasting ser vices:  
1[Provided that the Central Government may notify other service to be telecommunication service 
including broadcasting services.]  
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Telegraph Act, 
1885 (13 of 1885) or the Indian Wireless Telegraphy Ac t, 1933 (17 of 1933), shall have the meanings 
respectively assigned to them in  those Acts.  
(3) Any reference in this Act to a law which is not in force in the State of Jammu and Kashmir shall 
in relation to that State be construed as a  reference to the cor responding law, if any, in that State.  
CHAPTER II  
TELECOM REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF INDIA  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Authority .—(1) With effect  from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, an 
Authority to be called the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this A ct, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
2[(3) The Authority shall consist of a Chairpers on, and not more than two whole -time mem bers and 
not more than two part -time members, to be appointed by the Central Government. ] 
(4) The head office of the Authority shall be at New Delhi.  
3[4. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and other members .—The Chairperson and 
other members of the Authority shall be appointed by the C entral Government from amongst persons who 
have special knowledge of, and professional experience in , telecommunication, industry, finance, 
accountancy, law,  management or consumer affairs:  
Provided th at a person who is, or has been , in t he service of Government shall not be appointed as a 
member unless such person has held the post of Secretary or Additional Secretary, or the post of 
Additional Secretary and Secretary to the Government of India or any equivalent post in the Central 
Govern ment or the State Government for a period of not less than three years. ] 
5. Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and other members .—(1) Before 
appointing any person as the Chairperson or member, the Central Government shall satisfy i tself that the 
person does not have any such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
such member.  
4[(2) The Chairperson and other members shall hold office for a  term not exceeding three years , as the 
Central Government may notify in this behalf, from the date on which they enter upon their offices or 
until they attain the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier.  
(3) On the commencement of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment ) Act, 2 000       
(2 of 2000) , a person appointed as Chairperson of the Authority and every other person appointed as 
member and holding office as such immediately before such commencement shall vacate their respective 
offices and such Chairperson and such other members  shall be entitled to claim compensation not 
exceeding three month s pay and allowances for the premature termination of the term of their office s or 
of any contract of service. ] 
(4) The employee of the G overnment on his 5[selection as the Chairperson or whole -time member ] 
shall have to retire from service before 6[joining as the Chairperson or a whole -time member , as the case 
may be].  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 3 (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Subs. by s.  4, ibid., for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
3. Subs. by s.  5, ibid., for section 4  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
4. Subs. by s.  6, ibid., for sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3)  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
5. Subs. by s.  6, ibid., for “selection as member”  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
6. Subs. by s.  6, ibid., for “joining as member”  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  5 
 (5) The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairpers on and 1[whole -time members ] shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(6) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of the Chairperson or of a member shall not 
be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.  
2[(6A) The  part-time members shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed. ] 
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) 3***, a member may — 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Central Government notice of not less than 
three mon ths; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 7.  
4[(8) The Chairperson and the whole -time members shall not, for a period of two years from the date 
on which they cease to hold office as such, except with the previous approval of the Central Government, 
accept — 
(a) any employment either under the Central Government or under any State Government; or  
(b) any appointment in any company in the business of teleco mmunication services .] 
(9) A vacancy caused to the office of the Chairperson or any other member shall be filled up within a 
period of three months from the date on which such vacancy occurs.  
5*   *   *   *   * 
6. Powers of Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson .—(1) The Chairperson shall have powers of 
general superintendence and direction s in the conduct of the affairs of the Authority and he shall, in 
addition to presiding over the meetings of the Authority, exercise and discharge such powers and 
functions of the Authority and shall discharge such other powers  and functions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint one of the members to be a Vice -Chairperson of the 
Authority who shall exercise and discharge such powers and functions of the Chairperson as may be 
prescribed or as may be delegat ed to him by the Authority.  
7. Removal and suspension of member from office in certain circumstances .—(1) The Central 
Government may remove from office any member, who ,— 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member; or  
(d) has acqui red such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a member; or 
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
6[(2) No such member shall be removed from his office under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of                 
sub-section ( 1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter .] 
8. Meetings .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such times and places, and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such meetings)  as 
may be provided by regulations.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 6, for “other members”  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
3. The words, brackets and figure “or sub -section ( 3)” omitted by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
4. Subs. by Act 20 of 2014, s. 2, for sub-section ( 8) (w.e.f. 28-5-2014). 
5. The Explanation omitted by s.  2, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 8-5-2014). 
6. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 7, for sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  6 
 (2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority,          
Vice -Chairperson and in his absence, any other member chosen by the members present from amongst 
themselves at the meeting shall presided at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
vote of the members present  and voting, an d in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or in his 
absence, t he person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.  
(4) The Authority may make regulations for the transaction of business at i ts meetings.  
9. Vacancies, etc ., not to invalidate proceedings of  Authority. —No act or proceeding  of the 
Authority shall be  invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a member of the Authority; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
10. Officers and other employees of Authority .—(1) The Authority may appoint officers and such 
other employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of it s functions under this Act.  
(2) The salary and allowances payable to and the other conditions of service of the officers and other 
employees of the Authority appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be 1[prescribed] : 
2[Provided that any regulation, in respect of the salary and allowance s payable to and other conditions 
of service of the officers and other employees of the Authority, made before the commencement of the 
Telecom Regulator y Authority of India (Amendment) Act,  2000  (2 of 2000) , shall cease to have effect 
immediately on the notification of rules made under clause ( ca) of sub -section ( 2) of section 35. ] 
CHAPTER III  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF THE AUTHORITY  
11. Functions of Authority .—3[(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Indian Telegraph Act,  
1885  (13 of 1885 ), the functions of the Authority shall be to — 
(a) make recommendations, either suo motu  or on a request from the licensor, on the following 
matters, namely: — 
(i) need and timing for introduc tion of new service provider;  
(ii) terms and conditions of licen ce to a service provider;  
(iii) revocation of licen ce for non -compliance of terms and conditions of licenc e; 
(iv) measures to facilitate competition and promote efficiency in the operation of 
telecommunication services so as to facilitate growth in such services ; 
(v) technological improvements in the services provided by the service providers ; 
(vi) type of equipment to be used by the service providers after inspection of equipment used 
in the n etwork ; 
(vii) measures for the development of telecommunication technology and any other matter 
relatable to telecommunication industry in general;  
(viii) efficient management of available spectrum;  
(b) discharge t he following functions, namely: — 
(i) ensure compliance of t erms and conditions of licenc e; 
(ii) notwithstanding anything contained in the te rms and conditions of the licenc e granted 
before the commencement of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India (Amendment)                  
Act, 2000  (2 of 2000) , fix the terms and conditions of inter -connectivity between the service 
providers;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 8, for “determined by regulations”  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
3. Subs. by s.  9, ibid., for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  7 
 (iii) ensure technical compatibility and effective inter -connection between different service 
providers ; 
(iv) regulate arrangement amongst service providers of shar ing their revenue derived from 
providing telecommunication services;  
(v) lay-down the standards of quality of service to be provided by the service providers and 
ensure the quality of service and conduct the periodical survey of such service provided by th e 
service providers so as to protect interest of the consume rs of telecommunication service ; 
(vi) lay -down and ensure the time period for providing local and long distance circuits of 
telecommunication between different service providers;  
(vii) maintain re gister of inter -connect agreements and of all such other matters as may be 
provided in the regulations;  
(viii) keep register maintained under clause ( vii) open for inspection to any member of public 
on payment of such fee and compliance of such other requi rement as may be provided in the 
regulations;  
(ix) ensure effective compliance of universal  service obligations;  
(c) levy fees and other charges at such rates and in respect of such services as m ay be determined 
by regulations;  
(d) perform  such other functions including such administrative and financial functions as may be 
entrusted to it by the Central Government or as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this 
Act: 
Provided that the recommendations of the Authority specified in clause ( a) of this sub -section 
shall not be binding upon the Central Government:  
Provided further that the Central Government shall seek the recommendations of the Authority in 
respect of matters specified in sub -clauses ( i) and ( ii) of clause ( a) of this sub-section in respect of 
new licence to be issued to a service provider and the Authority shall forward its recommendations 
within a period of sixty days from the date on which that Government sought the recommendations:  
Provided also that the Authority m ay request the Central Government to furnish such information 
or documents as may be necessary for the purpose of making recommendations under sub -clauses ( i) 
and ( ii) of clause ( a) of this sub -section and that Government shall supply such information with in a 
period of seven days from receipt of such request:  
Provided also that the Central Government may issue a licence to a service provider if no 
recommendations are received from the Authority within the period s pecified in the second proviso  or 
within su ch period as may be mutually agreed upon between the Central Government and the 
Authority : 
Provided also that if the Central Government , having considered that recommendation of the 
Authority , comes to a prima  facie  conclusion that such recommendation cann ot be accepted or needs 
modifications, it  shall refer the recommendation  back to the Authority for its reconsideration, and the 
Authority may , within fifteen days from the date of receipt of such reference, forward to the Central 
Government its recommendat ion after consi dering the reference made by  that Government. After 
receipt of further recommendation  if any, the Central Government shall take a final decision. ] 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885), the 
Authority may, from time to time, by order, notify in the Official Gazette the rates at which the 
telecommunication services within India and outside India shall be provided under this Act including 
the rates at which messages shall be transmitte d to any c ountry outside India:  
Provided that the Authority may notify different rates for different persons or class of persons for 
similar telecommunication services and where different rates are fixed as aforesaid the Authority shall 
record the reasons therefor.  8 
 (3) While discharging its functions 1[under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2)], the Authority shall not 
act against the interest of the sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations 
with foreign States, public order, de cency or morality.  
(4) The Authority shall ensure transparency while exercising its powers  and discharging its functions.  
12. Powers of Authority to call for information, conduct investigations, etc .—(1) Where the 
Authority considers it expedient so to do,  it may, by order in writing, — 
(a) call upon any service provider at any time to furnish in writing such information or 
explanation relating to its affairs as the A uthority may require; or  
(b) appoint  one or more persons to make an inquiry in relation to the affairs of any service 
provider; and  
(c) direct any of its officers or employees to inspect the books of account or other do cuments of 
any service provider.  
(2) Where any inquiry in relation to the  affairs of a service provider has been undertaken under     
sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) every officer of the Government Department, if such service provider is a department of the 
Government;  
(b) every director, manager, secretary or other officer, if such se rvice provider is a company; or  
(c) every partner, manager, secretary or other officer, if such service provider is a firm; or  
(d) every other person or body of persons who has had dealings in the course of business with any 
of the persons mentioned in claus es (b) and ( c), 
shall be bound to produce before the Authority making the inquiry, all such books of account or other 
documents in his custody or power relating to, or h aving a bearing on the subject -matter of such inquiry 
and also to furnish to the Author ity with any such statement or information relating thereto, as the case 
may be, required of him, within such time as may be specified.  
(3) Every service provider shall maintain such books of account or other documents as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) The Authori ty shall have the power to issue such directions to service providers as it may consider 
necessary for proper functioning by service providers.  
13. Power of Authority to issue directions .—The Authority may, for the discharge of its functions 
under sub-section ( 1) of section 11, issue such directions from time to time to the service provider s, as it 
may consider necessary:  
2[Provided that no direction under sub -section ( 4) of section 12 or under this section shall be issued 
except on the matter s specified in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 11. ] 
3[CHAPTER IV  
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
14. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal. —The Central Government shall, by notification, establish 
an Appellate Tribunal to be known as the Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal to — 
(a) adjudicate any dispute — 
(i) between a licensor and a licensee;  
(ii) between two or more service providers;  
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 9, for “under sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
3. Subs. by s.  11, ibid.,  for Chapter IV  (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  9 
 (iii) between a service provider and a group of consumers:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply in respe ct of matters relating to — 
(A) the monopolistic trade practice, restrictive trade practice and unfair trade practice which 
are subject to  the jurisdiction of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission 
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices 
Act, 1969   (54 of 1969 ); 
(B) the complaint of an individual consumer maintainable before a Consumer  Disputes  
Redressal Forum or a Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission or the National Consumer 
Redressal Commission established under section 9 of the Consumer Protection Act, 1986                
(68 of 1986) ; 
(C) the dispute between telegraph authority and any other person referred to in                    
sub-section ( 1) of s ection 7 B of the Indian T elegraph Act, 1885  (13 of 1885) ; 
(b) hear and dispose of appeal against any direction, decision or order of the Authority 
under this Act.  
1[(c) exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on —  
 (i) the Appellate Tribunal under the Information Technology Act, 2000  (21 of 2000) ; 
and 
(ii) the Appellate Tribunal under the Airports Economic Regulatory  Authority of India 
Act, 2008  (27 of 2008) .] 
14A.  Application for settlement of disputes and appeals to Appel late Tribunal. —(1) The Central 
Government or a State Government or a loc al authority or any person may m ake an application to the 
Appellate Tribunal for adjudication of any dispute referred to in clause ( a) of section 14.  
(2) The Central Government or  a State Government or a local a uthority or any person aggrieved by 
any direction, decision or order made by the Authority may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal.  
(3) Every appeal under sub-section ( 2) shall be preferred within a period of thirty days from the date 
on which a copy of the direction or order or decision made by the Authority is received by the Central 
Government or the  State Government or the local a uthority or the aggrieved person and it shall be in such 
form, verified in such manner and  be accompanied by  such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain any appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty  days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) or an appeal under sub -section ( 2), the Appellate 
Tribunal may, after giving the parties to the dispute or the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such 
orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
(5) The Appel late Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the dispute or 
the appeal and to the Authority, as the case may be.  
(6) The application made under sub -section ( 1) or the appeal preferred under sub -section ( 2) shall be 
dealt with  by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by  it to dispose of the 
application or appeal finally within ninety days from the date of receipt of application or appeal , as the 
case may be : 
Provided that where any such application or appe al could not be disposed of within the said period of 
ninety days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the application 
or appeal within that period.  
(7) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining th e legality or propriety or correctness 
of any dispute made in any application under sub -section ( 1) or of any direction or order or decision of 
the Authority referred to in the appeal preferred under sub -section ( 2), on its own motion or otherwise, 
call for the records relevant t o disposing of such application  or appeal and make such orders as it thinks 
fit. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s.168 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017 ). 10 
 14B. Composition of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall consist of a 
Chairperson and not more than two Members to be appointed, by n otification, by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The selection of Chairperson and Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be made by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Chief Justice of India.  
(3) Subject to the provision s of this Act ,— 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Appellate  Tribunal may be exercised by the Benches thereof;  
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson of the Appe llate Tribunal with one or two 
Members of such Tribunal as the Chairperson may deem fit;  
(c) the Benches of the Ap pellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi and at such other 
places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson of the Appellate 
Tribunal, notify;  
(d) the Central Government shall notify the areas in relation to which each B ench of the Appellate 
Tribunal may exercise its jurisdiction.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal 
may transfer a Member of such Tribunal from one Bench to another Bench.  
(5) If at any stage of th e hearing of any case or matter  it appears to the Chairperson or a Member of 
the Appellate Tribunal that the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench 
consisting of two Members, the case or matter may be transferred by th e Chairperson to such Bench as 
the Chairperson may deem fit.  
14C.  Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members .—A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal unless he — 
(a) in the case  of Chairperson, is , or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the Chief Justice 
of a High Court;  
(b) in the case of a Member,  has held the post of Secretary to the Government of India or any 
equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Govern ment for a period of not less than two 
years or a person who is well versed in the field of technology, telecommunication, industry, 
commerce or administration.  
14D.  Term of office. —The Chairperson and every other Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall hol d 
office as such for a term not exceeding three years from the date on which he enters upon his office:  
Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such after he has attained ,— 
(a) in the case of Chairperson, the age of seventy years;  
(b) in the case of any other Member, the age of sixty -five years.  
14E.  Term s and conditions of service. —The salary and allowance s payable to and the other terms 
and conditions of service of the Chairperson and other M embers of the Appellate Tribunal shall  be such 
as may be prescribed : 
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.  
14F. Vacancies. —If, for reason other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of the 
Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the Central Government shall appoint another person 
in accordance with the provisions o f this Act to fill the vacancy and t he proceedings may be continued 
before the Appel late Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is fill ed. 
14G.  Removal and resignation. —(1) The Central Government may remove from office, the 
Chairperson or any Member of the Appellate Tribunal, who — 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent;  or 
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government , involves 
moral turpitude; or  11 
 (c) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or a Member; or  
(d) has  acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
the Chairperson or a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office prejudicial to the public 
interest.  
(2) Notwithstanding a nything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Chairperson or a Member of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall not be removed from his office on the ground specified in clause ( d) or clause (e) 
of that sub -section unless the Supreme Court on a reference being made to i t in this behalf by the Central 
Government, has, on an enquiry, held by it in accordance with such procedure as it may specify in this 
behalf, reported that the Chairperson or a Member ought on such ground or grounds to be removed.  
(3) The Central Governme nt may suspend from office, the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate 
Tribunal in respect of whom a re ference has been made to the Su preme Court under sub -section ( 2), until 
the Central Government has passed an order on receipt of the report of the Supr eme Court on such 
reference.  
1[14GA.  Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Member. — 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and the other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and 
other Members of the Appellate Tribunal appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI 
of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of section 184  of that Act:  
 Provided that the Chairperson and Member appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of 
Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder as if the pr ovisions of section 184 of the Finance Act, 2017 had not 
come into force.]  
14H.  Staff of Appellate Tribunal. —(1) The Central Government shall provide the Appellate 
Tribunal with such officers and employees as it may deem fit.  
(2) The officers and employees  of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge their functions under the 
general superintendence  of its Chairperson.  
(3) The salaries and allowances and oth er conditions of service of the  officers and employees of the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may be  prescribed.  
14-I. Distribution of business amongst Benches. —Where Benches are constituted, the Chairperson 
of the Appellate Tribunal may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution 
of the business of the Appellate Tribunal amongst the Benches and also provide for the matters which 
may be dealt with by each Bench.  
14J. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases. —On the application of any of the parties and after 
notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desi re to be heard, or on his own motion 
without such notice, the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal may transfer any case pending before one 
Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench.  
14K.  Decision to be by majority. —If the Members of a Bench consisting of t wo Members differ in 
opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal who shall hear the point or points himself and such point or points 
shall be decided acc ording to the opinion of the majority who have heard the case, including those who 
first heard it.  
14L.  Members, etc. , to be public servants. —The Chairperson, Members and other officers and 
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be public s ervants within the meaning of    
section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
14M.  Transfer of pending cases. —All applications, pending for adjudication of disputes before the 
Authority immediately before the date of establishment of the Appellate Tribunal under this Act, shall 
stand transferred on that date to such Tribunal:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s.168  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 12 
 Provided that all disputes being adjudica ted under the provisions of Chapter IV as it stood 
immediately before the commencement of the Telecom Regulatory A uthority of India (Amendment)           
Act, 2000  (2 of 2000), shall continue to be adjudicated by the Authority in accordance with the provis ions 
contained in that Chapter, till the establishment of the Appellate Tribunal under this Act : 
Provided further that all cases re ferred to in the first proviso  shall be transferred by the Authority to 
the Appellate Tribunal immediately on its establishme nt under section 14.  
14N.  Transfer of appeals. —(1) All appeals pending before the High C ourt immediately before the 
commencement of the Telecom Regulatory Authority  of India  (Amendment) Act, 2000  (2 of 2000) , shall 
stand transferred to the Appellate Tribun al on its establishment under section 14.  
(2) Where any appeal stands transferred from the High Court to the Appellate Tribunal under         
sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) the High Court shall, as soon as may be after such transfer, forward the records of such a ppeal 
to the Appellate Tribunal;  and 
(b) the Appellate Tribunal may, on receipt of such records, proceed to deal with such appeal, so 
far as   may be  from the   stage which was reached before such transfer or from any earlier stage or   
de novo  as the Appellate Tribunal may deem fit.  
15. Civil court not to have jurisdiction. —No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Appellate Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to 
determi ne and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken 
or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
16. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound 
by the procedure laid down by t he Code of Civil Procedure , 1908 (5 of 1908),  but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have powers to regulate its ow n procedure.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while 
trying a suit, in respect of the fol lowing matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 12 4 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872                  
(1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or a copy of such record or document, from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing  its decisions;  
(g) dismissing an application for default or deciding it, ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default or any order passed by it,   
ex parte ; and 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every p roceeding before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose s of section 196 , of the Indian Penal Code         
(45 of 1860) and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to  be a civil court for the purpose s of section 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure , 1973  (2 of 197 4). 
17. Right to legal representation. —The applicant or appellant may either appear in person or 
authorise one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries or cost  accountants or legal 
practitio ners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the Appellate Tribunal.  
  13 
 Explanat ion.—for the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “chartered accountant ” means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949 ) and who has 
obtained a certificate  of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) “company secretary ” means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980  (56 of 1980)  and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) “cost accountant ” means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959 ) and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) “legal practitioner ” means an advocate, vakil  or an attorney of any High Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
18. Appeal to Supreme Court. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , or in any other law, an appeal shall lie against any order, not being an 
interlocutory order, of the Appellate Tribunal to the Supreme Court on one or more of the ground s 
specified in sec tion 100 of that Code.  
(2) No appeal shall lie against any decision or order made by the Appellate Tribunal with the consent 
of the parties.  
(3) Every appeal under this section shall be preferred within a period of ninety days from the da te of 
the decision or order appealed against : 
Provided that the Supreme Court may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of ninety 
days, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from preferring the appeal in  
time.  
19. Orders passed by Appellate Tribunal to be  executable as a decree .—(1) An order passed by 
the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Appellate Tribunal as a decree of civil 
court, and for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal  shall have all the powers of a civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree made by that court.  
20. Penalty for wil ful failure to comply with orders of Appellate Tribunal. —If any person 
wilfully fails to comply with the order of the Appellate Tribunal, he shall be punishable with fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of a second or subsequent off ence with fine which may extend  
to two lakh rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with additional fine which may extend to 
two lakh rupees for every day during which such default continues. ] 
CHAP TER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
21. Grants by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as are required 
to pay salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and the members and the administrative 
expenses including the salaries, allowances and pension payable to or in respect of officers and other 
employees  of the Authority.  
22. Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the Telecom Regulat ory Authority of 
India General F und and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all grants, fees and charges received by the Authority under this Act; and  
(b) all sums received by t he Authority from  such other sources  as may be  decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
  14 
 (2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and members and the administrative 
expenses including the salaries, allowances and pension payable to or in res pect of officers and other 
employees of the Authority; and  
(b) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act. 
23. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such auditor 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts , it is hereby declared that the de cisions of the Authority 
taken in the discharge of its functions under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) and sub -section ( 2) of section 11 
and section 13, being matters appealable to the Appellate Tribunal, shall not be subject to audit under this 
section. ] 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has, in 
connection with the audit of the G overnment accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices  of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the  Authority as certified by the C omptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central G overnme nt and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
24. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government .—(1) The Authority shall furnish to the 
Central Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be pre scribed or as the Central 
Government may direct , such returns and statements and such particulars in regard to any proposed or 
existing programme for the promotion and development of the telecommunication services, as the Central 
Government may from time t o time, require.  
(2) The Authority shall prepare once every year in such form and at such time as may be prescribed, 
an annual report giving a summary of its activities during the previous year and copies of the report shall 
be forwarded to the Central Gov ernment.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
25. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) The Central Government may, from to 
time to time, issue to the Authority such directions as it may think necessary in the interest of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, public 
order, decency or mo rality.  
(2) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the 
performance of its functions, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central 
Government may give in writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this  sub-section.  
(3) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one o f policy or not sha ll be final.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 12 (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  15 
 26. Members, officers and employees of Authority to be public servants .—All members, officers 
and other employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of 
any of the provisions of this Act to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
27. Bar of jurisd iction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any matter which the 
Authority is empowered by or under this Act to determine.  
28. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Authority or any officer of Central Government or any member, 
officer or other employees of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended t o be 
done under this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
29. Penalty for contravention of direction s of Authority .—If a person violates directions of the 
Authority, such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees and in case of 
second or subsequent offence with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and in the case of 
continuing contravention with additional fine which may extend to two lakh rupees for every day during 
which the default continues.  
30. Offences by  companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the com pany, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence a  nd shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act if he pr oves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that he has exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by  a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or othe r officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body  corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals;  
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the f irm. 
31. Offences by Government Departments. —(1) Where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by any Department of Government, the Head of the Department shall be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly unless he proves that 
the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all due dilig ence to prevent the 
commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has bee n 
committed by a Department of G overnment and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consen t or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, other than the Head 
of the Department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
32. Exemption from tax on wealth and income .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Wealth -tax Act, 1957 (27 of 1957), the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), or any other enactment for the 
time being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or  gains, the Authority shall not be liable to 
pay wealth -tax, income -tax or any other tax in respect of their wealth, in come, profits or gains derived.  
33. Delegation .—The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member, 
office r of the Authority or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the 
order, such of its powers and functions under this Act (except the power to settle dispute under       
Chapter IV and to make regulation under section 36) as it may deem necessary.  16 
 34. Cognizance of offences. —(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder, save on a complaint made by the Authority.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or a Chief Judicial Magistrate of first 
class shall try any offence punishable under this Act.  
35. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make ru les for 
carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters , namely: — 
(a) the salary and allowances payable to and t he other conditions of service of the Chairperson 
and members under sub -section ( 5) of section 5;  
1[(aa) the allowances payable to the part -time members under sub-section  (6A) of section 5 ;] 
(b) the powers and functions of the Chairperson under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(c) the procedure for conducting an inquiry made under sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
 1[(ca) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of officers and other employees 
of the Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 10; ] 
(d) the category of books of account or other documents which are required to be maintained 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 12;  
1[(da) the form, the manner of its verification and the fee under sub -section ( 3) of section 14A;  
(db) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate Tribunal under section 14E;  
(dc) the salary and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and employees of 
the Appellate Tribunal unde r sub -section ( 3) of section 14H;  
(dd) any other power of a civil court required to be prescribed under clause ( i) of sub-section  (2) 
of section 16; ] 
(e) the period within which an application is to be made under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(f) the manner in which the accounts of the Authority shall be maintained under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 23;  
(g) the time within which and the form and manner in which returns and report are to be made to 
the Central Government under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 24;  
(h) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, by rules.  
36. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Authority may, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this Act and the rule s made thereunder to carry out the purpose s of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the  times and places of meetings of the Authority and the procedure to be followed at such 
meetings under sub -section ( 1) of section 8, including quorum necessary for the transaction of 
business;  
(b) the transaction of business at the meetings of the Authorit y under sub -section ( 4) of section 8;  
2*   *  *   *   * 
(d) matters in respect of which register is to be maintained by the Authority 3[under                 
sub-clause ( vii) of clause ( b)] of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 13 (w.e.f. 24 -1-2000).  
2. Cl. (c) omitted by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 2 4-1-2000). 
3. Subs. by s.  14, ibid., for “under clause ( l)” (w.e.f. 2 4-1-2000). 17 
 (e) levy  of fee and lay down such other requirements on fulfilment of which a copy of register 
may be obtained 1[under sub-clause ( viii) of clause ( b)] of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
(f) levy of fees and other charges 2[under clause ( c)] of sub -section ( 1) of section 11;  
37. Rules and regulations to  be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty  days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation  or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shal l be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.  
38. Application of certain laws .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to the provisions of 
the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885) and t he Indian Wireless Telegraphy Act, 1933 (17 of 1933) 
and, in particular, nothing in this Act shall affect any jurisdiction, powers and functions required to be 
exercised or performed by the Telegraph Authority in relation to any area falling within the ju risdiction of 
such Authority.  
39. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the  provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessa ry for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shal l be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
40. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Ordinance 1997                   
(Ord . 11 of 1997)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the correspondi ng provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2000, s. 14, for “under clause ( m)” (w.e.f. 2 4-1-2000). 
2. Subs. by s.  14, ibid., for “under clause ( p)” (w.e.f. 2 4-1-2000). 
--------------------------The Vice-Presidents Pension Act, 1997--------------------------
1 
 THE VICE -PRESIDENT 'S PENSION ACT, 1997  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Pension to retiring Vice -Presidents . 
3. Medical facilities to the family of deceased Vice -President . 
 3A. Free accommodation to spouse of Vice -President . 
4. Pension to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India . 
5. Power to make rules . 
6. Power to remove difficulties . 
  2 
  
THE VIC E-PRESIDENT'S PENSION ACT, 1997  
ACT NO. 30 OF 1997  
[28th Ma y, 1997.]  
An Act to provide for the payment of pension and other faciliti es to retiring Vice -Presidents.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -eighth Year of the Republic of India as follows: – 
1. Short title. –This Act may be called the Vice -President’ s Pension Act, 1997.  
2. Pension to retiring Vice -Presidents. –(1) There shall be paid to every person who ceases to hold 
office  as Vice -President, either by the e xpiration of his term of office  or by resignation of his office, a 
pension 1[at the rate of fifty per cent. of the salary of the Vice -President ] per month, fo r the remainder of 
his life:  
Provided that such person shall not be entitled to receive any pension during the period he holds the 
office of the Prime Minister, a Minister or any other office or becomes a Member of Parliament and is in 
receipt of salary an d allowances which are defrayed out  of the Consolidated Fund of In dia or the 
Consolidated Fund of a State.  
2[(1A) The spouse of a person who dies – 
(a) while holding the office of Vice -President , or 
(b) after  ceasing to hold office as Vice -President either by the expiration of his term of office or 
by resignation of his office,  
shall be paid a family pensio n at the rate of fifty per cent.  of pension as is admissible to a retiring        
Vice -President, for the  remainder of her life.]  
(2) Subject to any rules that may  be made in this behalf, every such person shall, for the remainder of 
his li fe, be entitled – 
3[(a) to the use without payment of rent of such furnished residence (including its maintenance), 
as the  Central Government may determine from time to time;]  
(b) to the use of similar telephone facilities at his residence, as a member of Parliament is entitled 
to under the provisions of the Salary, Allowances and Pension of Members of Parliament Act, 
1954(30  of 1954);  
4[(c) to secretarial staff consisting of a Private Secretary, an Additional Private Secretary, a 
Personal Assistant and two Peons and office expenses not exceeding 5[ninety thousand rupees] per 
annum; ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 29 of 2008 , s. 2, for “ of twenty thousand rupees ” (w.e.f. 1 -1-2006 ). 
2. Ins. by Act 23 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f. 5 -7-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 45 of 1999, s. 2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1999).  
4. Subs. by Act 29 of 2008, s. 2, for  clause ( c) (w.e.f. 30 -12-2008).  
5. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 2 04, for “ sixty thousand rupees” (w.e.f.  1-4-2018).  
 
 
 3 
 (d) to the same facilities for him self as r espects medical attendance and treatment and on the same 
conditions as a retired President is entitled to under the provisions of the President’ s Emoluments and 
Pension Act, 1951(30 of 1951);  
(e) to the same facilities for his spouse and minor children as respects medical attendance and 
treatment and on the same conditions as the spouse of a retired President is entitled to under the 
provisions of the President ’s Emoluments and Pension Act, 1951(30 of 1951);and  
1[(f) to travel anywhere in India, accompanied by spouse or  a companion or a relative, by the 
highest class by air, rail or steamer;]  
2[(3) Where any such person is re -elected to the office of Vice -President, he or his spouse shall not be 
eligible to any benefit u nder this section for the period during which such person again holds such office.  
(4) Where any person being a Vice -President gets elected to the office of the President of India, he or 
his spouse shall not be eligible to any benefit under this section.]  
3. Medical facilities to the family of deceased Vice -President. –Subject to any rules that may be 
made in this behalf, the spouse of a person who dies while holding the office of Vice -President shall, for 
the remainder of life, be entitled to medical attendance and treatment, free of charge . 
3[3A. Free accommodation to spouse of Vice -President .–Subject to any rules that may be made in 
this behalf, the spouse of a person who dies – 
(a) while holding the office of Vice -President, or  
(b) after ceasing to h old office as Vice -President either by the expiration or his term of office or 
by resignation of his office,  
shall be entitled to the use of 4[furnished residence (including its maintenance)] without payment of 
licence fee, for the remainder of her life.]  
4. Pension to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India .–Any sum payable under this Act 
shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India . 
5. Power to make rules. –(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act . 
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be co mprised in one session  or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree th at the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule . 
5[6. Power to remove difficulties. –(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
this Act as amended by the Vice -President ’s Pension (Amendment) Act, 2008  (29 of 2008) , the Central 
Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions for the purpose of 
removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiration of two years from the date on which 
this Act comes into force.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section (1) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 45 of 1999, s. 2, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 30 -12-1999).  
2. Ins. by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 30 -12-1999).  
3. Ins. by Act 23 of 2002, s. 3 (w.e.f. 5-7-2002 ). 
4. Sub s. by Act 29 of 2008, s. 3, for “unfurnished residence” (w.e.f.  30-12-2008 ). 
5. Ins. by s. 4, ibid.(w.e.f.  30-12-2008). 
