--------------------------The Lotteries (Regulation) Act, 1998--------------------------
 
1 
 THE LOTTERIES (REGULATION) ACT, 1998  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Prohibition of lotteries . 
4. Conditions subject to which lotteries may be organised, etc . 
5. Prohibition of sale of ticket  in a State . 
6. Prohibition of organisation, etc., of lottery . 
7. Penalty . 
8. Offences to be cognizable and non -bailable . 
9. Offences by companies . 
10. Power to give directions . 
11. Power of Central Government to make rules . 
12. Power of State Government to make rules . 
13. Repeal and  saving . 
   
2 
 THE LOTTERIES (REGULATION) ACT, 1998  
ACT NO. 17 OF 1998  
[7th July , 1998.]  
An Act to regulate the lotteries and to provide for matters connected therewith and incidental 
thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Lo tteries (Regulation) 
Act, 1998.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force o n the 2nd day of October, 1997.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugn ant in the subject or context, — 
(a) “bumper draw of a lottery ” means a special draw of lottery conducted on or during any 
festival or other special occasion wherein the prize money offered is greater than the prize money 
offered in the case of ot her ordinary draw of lotteries;  
(b) “lottery” means a scheme, in whateve r form and by whatever name called, for distribution of 
prizes by lot or chance to those persons participating in the chances of a prize by purchasing tickets;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act.  
3. Prohibition of lotteries .—Save as otherwise provided in section 4, n o State Government shall 
organis e, conduct or promote any lottery.  
4. Conditions subject to which l otteries may be organis ed, etc .—A State Government may 
organis e, conduct or promote a lottery, subject to the  following conditions, namely: — 
(a) prizes shall not be offered on any pre -announced number or on the basis of a single digit;  
(b) the State Government shall print the lottery tickets bearing the imprint and log o of the State in 
such manner that the authenticity of  the lottery ticket is ensured;  
(c) the State Government shall sell the tickets either itself or through distributors or selling 
agents;  
(d) the proceeds of the sale of lottery tickets shall be credited into the public account of the State;  
(e) the State Government itself shall conduct the draws of all the lotteries;  
(f) the prize money unclaimed within such time as may be prescribed by the State Government or 
not otherwise distributed, shall become t he property of that Government;  
(g) the place of draw shall be loca ted within the State concerned;  
(h) no lottery shall hav e more than one draw in a week;  
(i) the draws of all kinds of lotteries shall be conducted between such period of the day as may be 
prescribed by the State Government;  
(j) the number of bumper draws of a lottery shall not be mo re than six in a calendar year;  
(k) such other conditions as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
5. Prohibitio n of sale of ticket in a State .—A State Govern ment may, within the State, prohibit the 
sale of tickets of a lottery organis ed, conducted or  promoted by every other State.  
6. Prohibition of organis ation, etc., of lottery .—The Central Government may, by order published 
in the Official Gaz ette, prohibit a lottery organis ed, conducted or promoted in contravention of the 
provisions of section 4 or where tickets of such lottery are sold in contravention of the provisions of 
section 5.    
3 
 7. Pen alty.—(1) Where a lottery is organis ed, conducted or promoted after the date on which this Act 
receives the assent of the President, in contravention of the provisions of this Act, by any Department of  
the State Government, the Head of the Department shal l be punishable with rigo rous imprisonment for a 
term which may  extend to two y ears or with fine or with both:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall render such Head of the Department liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the contravention was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the co mmission of such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention under this Act has 
been committed by a Department of Government and it is proved that the contravention has b een 
committed with the consent or conn ivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any officer, 
other than the Head of the Department, such officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that 
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
(3) If any person acts as an agent or promoter or trader in any lottery organis ed, conducted or 
promoted in contravention of the provisions of this Act or sells, distributes or purchases the ticket of such 
lottery, h e shall be punishable with rigorous im prisonment for a term which may extend to two years or 
with fine or with both.  
8. Offences to be cognizable a nd non -bailable .—The offence under this Act shall be cognizable and 
non-bailable.  
9. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who at the time the offence was committed was incharge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed w ithout his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attrib utable to, any neglect on the p art of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be  guilty 
of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpos es of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
10. Power to give directions .—The Central Government may give directions to the State 
Government as to carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any  rule or 
order made thereunder.  
11. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every rule made by the Central Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule, or both Houses agree that the rule should  not be made, the rule shall the reafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of  no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under 
that rule.   
4 
 12. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notif ication in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters , namely:— 
(a) time to be fixed for claiming prize money  under clause ( f) of section 4;  
(b) period to be fixed for draws of all lotteries und er clause ( i) of section 4; and  
(c) any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Governm ent under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists o f one House, before that House.  
13. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Lotteri es (Regulation) Ordinance, 1998 (Ord. 6 of 1998), is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
--------------------------The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research Act, 1998--------------------------
 
1 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCATION  
AND RESEARCH ACT, 1998  
____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research as an institution of 
national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Establishment of Institute.  
4A. Centres of Institute.  
5. Vesting of properties.  
6. Effect of incorporation  of Institute.  
7. Functions of Institute.  
8. Powers of Board.  
9. Institute to be open to all races, creeds and classes.  
10. Teaching at Institute.  
11. Visitor.  
12. Authorities of Institute.  
13. Senate.  
14. Functions of Se nate.  
15. Functions, powers and duties of Chairperson.  
16. Director.  
17. Dean.  
18. Registrar.  
19. Powers and dut ies of other authorities and officers.  
20. Grants by Central Government.  
21. Fund of Institute.  
22. Setting up of endowment fund.  
23. Accounts and audit.  
24. Pension and provident fund.  
25. Appointments.  
26. Statutes.  
27. Statutes how made.  
28. Ordinances .  
29. Ordinances how made.  
30. Tribunal of A rbitration.  
 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies.  
32. Grant of degrees, etc., by Institute.   
2 
  
SECTIONS  
33. Sponsored schemes.  
34. Power to remove difficulties.  
35. Transitional provisions.  
36. Statutes and Ordinances to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before Parliament.  
37. Repeal and saving.  
 
   
3 
 THE NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF PHARMACEUTICAL EDUCATION  
AND RESEARCH ACT,  1998  
ACT NO. 13 OF 1998  
[26th June , 1998]  
An Act to declare the institution known as the National  Institute of Pharmaceutical Education 
and Research to be an institution of national importance and to provide for its incorporation 
and matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the National Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Ed ucation and Research Act, 1998.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for di fferent provisions of this Act.  
 2. Declaration of National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research as an 
institution of national importance .—Whereas the objects of the institution known as the National 
Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Sector -67, S.A.S. Nagar (Mohali), District Ropar, 
Punjab are such as to make the institution one of national importance, i t is hereby declared that the 
institution known as the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research is an inst itution of 
national importance.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires ,— 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date of establishment of the National Institute of Pharmaceutical  
Education and Research under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(b) “Board ” means the Board of Governors of the Institute constituted under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 4;  
(c) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Institute nominated under clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 3) of section ( 4); 
(d) “Dean ” means the Dean of the Institute appointed under section 17;  
(e) “Director ” means the Director of the Institute appointed under sec tion 16;  
(f) “Fund ” means the fund of the Institute to be maintained under section 21;  
2[(g) “Institute ” means a National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research established 
under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2A) of section 4;]  
 (h) “Senate ” means th e Senate of the Institute referr ed to in section 13;  
(i) “Society ” means the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research Society, 
Sector -67, S.A.S. Nagar (Mohali), District Ropar, Punjab registered under the Societies Registration 
Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) ; 
(j) “Statutes ” and “Ordinances ” mean the Statutes and the Ordinances of the  Institute made under 
this Act.  
  
                                                           
1. 8th July, 1998, vide notification No. S.O.  1412(E), dated 7th July, 1998, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, se c. 3(ii). 
2. Subs. by A ct 19  of 2007, s. 2 , for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 29 -1-2007 ). 
  
  
4 
 CHAPTER II  
THE INSTITUTE  
4. Establishment of Institute .—(1) With  effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and 
Research shall be constituted as a body c orporate by the name aforesaid.  
(2) The Institute shall have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property and to contract, and shall, by that name, 
sue and be sued.  
1[(2A) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish similar 
Institutes in different parts of the country.]   
(3) The Institute shall consist of the Board of Governors having the following persons, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent academician, scientist or technologist or professional, 
to be nominated by the Visitor;  
(b) the Directo r of the Institute, ex officio ; 
(c) the Joint Secretary, incharge of Pharmaceutical Industries in the concerned Min istry or 
Department of the G overnment of India, ex officio ; 
2[(d) the Secretary, Technical Education, Government of the State within which the Inst itute is 
situated, ex officio ;] 
 (e) the Financial Adviser of the Ministry or Department of the Government of India dealing with 
the pharmaceutic al industries, ex officio ; 
(f) the Drug Controller General of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare of the 
Government of India, ex officio ; 
(g) the Member Secretary, All -India Council for T echnical Education, ex officio ; 
(h) the Director of any one of the national laboratories of the Council of Scientific and Industrial 
Research to be nominated by the Director General of Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, 
New Delhi;  
(i) the Director of either the All -India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi or the  
Post-Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, to be nominated by rotation 
by the Ministry of Health and Family Wel fare of the Government of India;  
(j) the Presid ent, Indian Drugs Manufacturers’ Association, ex offici o; 
1[(ja) a representative of the Pharmacy Council of I ndia;]  
(k) the President, Organisation of Pharmaceutical Producers of India, ex officio ; 
(l) three eminent pharmaceutical experts, one of whom shall be an educationist, a research 
scientist and a biotechnologist, to be nomin ated by the Central Government;  
(m) three eminent public persons or social workers one of whom shall be either from the 
Scheduled Castes or the Scheduled Tribes to be nominated by the Visitor out of a panel prep ared by 
the Central Government;  
(n) two pharmaceutical industrialists to be nominated by the Visitor out of a panel prep ared by the 
Central Government;  
(o) three Members of Parliament, two from Lok Sabha to be nominated by the Speaker of Lok 
Sabha and one from Rajya Sabha to be nominated by the Chairman of Rajya Sabha.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 19 of 2007, s. 3 ( w.e.f. 29 -1-2007 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for clause ( d) (w.e.f.  29-1-2007).   
5 
 (4) The term of office of the Chairperson and Governors other than ex officio  Governors s hall be three 
years and they shall be entitled for such allowances as may be determ ined by the Central Government : 
1[Provided that the term of office of a member nominated under clause ( o) of sub -section ( 3) shall 
come to an end as soon as he becomes a Minister or Minister of State or Deputy Minister, or the Speaker 
or the Deputy Speaker of the House of the People, or the Deputy Chairman of the Council of States, or 
ceases to be a member of the Hous e from which he was nominated.]  
(5) The term of office o f Governor nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for the remainder 
of the term of the Governor in who se place he has been nominated.  
(6) The Board shall meet at least three times in a year at such place and time and observe such rules 
of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its meetings as may be determined by the B oard.  
2[4A. Centres of Institute .—An Institute, with the prior approval of the Central Government, may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, establish one o r more centres in different locations within its 
jurisdiction.]   
5. Vesting of properties .—On and from the appointed day, subject to the other provisions of this 
Act, all properties which had vested in the Society, immediately before the commencement of th is Act, 
shall, on and from su ch commencement, vest in the Institute.  
6. Effect  of incorporation of Institute .—On and from the appointed day, — 
(a) any reference to the Society in any contract or other instrument shall be deemed a s a reference 
to the Institute;  
(b) all the rights and liabilities of the Society shall be transferred to, and be the rights and 
liabilities of, the Institute; and  
(c) every person employed by the Society immediately before the appointed day shall hold office 
or service in the  Institute by the same tenure, at the same remuneration and upon the same terms and 
conditions and with the same rights and privileges as to pension, leave, gratuity, provident fund and 
other matters as he would have held the same if this Act had not been passed, and shall continue to be 
so unless and until his employment is terminated or until such tenure, remuneration and terms and 
condition ar e duly altered by the Statutes:  
Provided that if the alteration so made is not acceptable to such employee, his e mployment may 
be terminated by the Institute in accordance with the terms of the contract with the employee or, if no 
provision is made therein in this behalf, on payment to him by the Institute of compensat ion 
equivalent to three months’ remuneration in t he case of p ermanent employee and one month’ s 
remuneration  in the case of other employee.  
7. Functions of Institute .—The funct ions of the Institute shall be — 
(i) to nurture and promote quality and excellence in pharmac eutical education and research;  
(ii) to concentrate on courses leading to master's degree, doctoral and post -doctoral courses and 
resear ch in pharmaceutical education;  
(iii) to hold examinations and grant degrees;  
(iv) to confer honorar y awards or other distinctions;  
(v) to cooperate with edu cational or other institutions having objects wholly or partly similar to 
those of the Institute by exchange of faculty members and scholars and generally in such manner as 
may be condu cive to their common objective;  
(vi) to conduct courses for teachers, p harmaceutical technologists, community and hospital 
pharm acists and other professionals;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2002, s. 2 (w.e.f.  27-5-2002).  
2. Ins. by Act 19 of 2007, s. 4 (w.e.f. 29 -1-2007).   
6 
 (vii) to collect and maintain world literature on pharmaceutical and related sciences and 
technology so as to develop an information centre of its own kind for other institutions within the 
count ry and in the developing world;  
(viii) to create a central faculty of pharmaceutical instrumentation and analysis for use by the 
researchers within and outs ide the Institute;  
(ix) to have a centre to experiment and innovate and  to train teachers and other workers in the art 
or scie nce of pharmaceutical teaching;  
(x) to develop a world level centre for creation of new knowledge and transmission of existing 
information in pharmaceutical areas, with focus on national, educational, professio nal and industrial 
commitments;  
(xi) to develop a multi -disciplinary approach in carrying out research and training of 
pharmaceutical manpower so that the larger interests of the profession, academia and pharmaceutical 
industry are better served a nd a pha rmaceutical work culture is evol ved which is in tune with the 
changing world trends and patterns of pharmac eutical education and research;  
(xii) to organise national or international symposia, seminars and conferences in selected areas of 
pharmaceu tical education, from time to time;  
(xiii) to arrange courses catering to the special nee ds of the developing countries;  
(xiv) to act as a nucleus for interaction between academic and industry by encouraging exchange 
of scientist and other technical staff between the Institute and the industry and by undertaking 
sponsored and funded research as well as consultancy  projects by the Institute; and  
(xv) to pay due attention to studies on the distribution and usage of drugs by the rural masses, 
taking i nto accou nt the socio -economic spectrum in the country.  
8. Powers of Board .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Board shall be responsible for the 
general superintendence, direction and control of the affairs of the Institute and shall exercise all the 
powers not otherwise provided for by this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, and shall have the power 
to review the acts of the Senate.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of su b-section ( 1), the Board shall — 
(a) take  decisions on questions of policy relating to the administratio n and working of the 
Institute;  
(b) fix, demand and receive fees and other charges;  
(c) supervise and control the residence and regulate the discipline of students of the Institute and 
to make arrangements for promoting their health, general welfare a nd cultural and corporate life;  
(d) institute academic and other posts and to make appointments thereto (except in the case of the 
Director) ; 
(e) frame Statutes and Ordinances and to alt er, modify o r rescind the same;  
(f) institute and award fellowship, scholarship, prizes and medals;  
(g) consider and pass resolutions on the annual report, the annual accounts and the budget 
estimates of the Institute for the next financial year as it thinks fit toget her with a statemen t of its 
development plans; and  
(h) do all such things as may be necessary, incidental or conducive to the attainment of all or any 
of the aforesaid powers.  
(3) The Board shall have the power to appoint such committees as it considers ne cessary for the 
exercise of its powers and the performanc e of its duties under this Act.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2) of section 4, the Board shall not dispose of 
in any manner any immovable property without the prior approval of the Central Government.   
7 
 9. Institute to be open to  all races, creeds and classes .—(1) The Institute shall be open to persons 
of either sex and of whatever race, creed, caste or class, and no test or condition shall be imposed as to 
religious belief or profession in admitting or appointing members, students, teachers or workers or in a ny 
other connection whatsoever.  
(2) No bequest, donation or transfer of any property shall be accepted by the Institute which in the 
opinion of the Board involves conditions or obligations opposed to the spirit and object of this sect ion.  
10. Teaching at Institute .—All teaching at the Institute shall be conducted by or in the name of the 
Institute in accordance with the Statutes and the Ordinances made in this beha lf. 
11. Visitor .—(1) The President of India shall b e the Visitor of the Institute.  
(2) The Visitor may appoint one or more persons to review the work and progress of the Institute and 
to hold inquiries into the affairs thereof and to report thereon in such  manner as the Visitor may direct.  
(3) Upon receipt of any such report, the Visitor may take such action and issue such directions as he 
considers necessary in respect of any of the matters dealt with in the report and the Institute shall be 
bound to compl y with such directions.  
12. Authorities of Institute .—The following shall be the other author ities of the Institute, namely: — 
(a) a Senate;  
(b) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the Institute.  
13. Senate .—The Senate of the Institute shall consist of the following persons, nam ely:— 
(a) the Director, ex officio , who shall be  the Chairperson of the Senate;  
(b) the Dean, ex officio ; 
(c) five  professors of the Institute, to be nominated by the Chairperson in consultation with the 
Director, by rotation;  
(d) three persons, not being employees of the Institute, to be nominated by the Chairperson in 
consultation with the Director, from among educa tionists of repute, one each from the fields of 
science, engineering and huma nities and one of them shall be eit her from the Scheduled Castes or  
from the Scheduled Tribes; and  
(e) such other members of the staff as ma y be laid down in the Statutes.  
14. Fun ctions of Senate .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the 
Senate of the Institute shall have the control and general regulation, and be responsible for the 
maintenance of standards of instruction, education and examinati on in the Institute and shall exercise such 
other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred or imposed upon it by the Statutes.  
15. Functions, po wers and duties of Chairperson .—(1) The Chairperson shall ordinarily preside at 
the meetings of the Board and at the  Convocations of the Institute.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to ensure that the decisions take n by the Board are 
implemented.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be 
assigned to h im by this Act or the Statutes.  
16. Director .—(1) The Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the Board with the  prior 
approval of the Visitor.  
(2) The Director shall be the principal academic and executive officer of the Institute and  shall be 
responsible for the proper administration and academic performance of the Institute and for imparting of 
instruction and mai ntenance of discipline therein.  
(3) The Director shall submit annual rep orts and accounts to the Board.  
(4) The Director s hall exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be assigned to 
him by this Act or the Statutes or the Ordinances.   
8 
 17. Dean .—(1) The Dean of the Institute shall be appointed on such terms and conditions as may be 
laid down by the Statut es and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to 
him by this Act o r the Statutes or the Director.  
(2) The Dea n shall report to the Director.  
18. Registrar .—(1) The Registrar of the Institute shall be appointed on such terms and conditions as 
may be laid down by the Statutes and shall be the custodian of records, the common seal, the funds of the 
Institute and su ch other property of the Institu te as the Bo ard shall commit to his charge.  
(2) The Registrar shall act as the Secre tary of the Board, the Senate and such committees as may  be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(3) The Registrar shall be responsible to the Director for the pro per discharge of his functions.  
(4) The Registrar shall exercise such other powers and perform such ot her duties as may be assigned 
to him by this Act o r the Statutes or the Director.  
19. Powers and duties of  other authorities and officers .—The powers and duties of authorities and 
officers, other than those hereinbefore mentioned, shall  be determined by th e Statutes.  
20. Grants by Central Government .—For the purpose of enabling the Institute to discharge its 
functions efficiently under this Act, the Central Government may, after due appropriation made by 
Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the Institut e in each financial year such sums of money and in 
such manner as it may think fit.  
21. Fund of Institute .—(1) The Institute shall maintain a F und to which shall be credited — 
(a) all moneys prov ided by the Central Government;  
(b) all fees and other charges;  
(c) all moneys received by the Institute by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefacti ons, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(d) all moneys received by the Institute in any other m anner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Institute may, with the approval of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the expenses of the Institute including e xpenses 
incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharg e of its duties under this Act.  
22. Setting up of endowment fund .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 21, the Central 
Governme nt may direct the Institute to — 
(a) set up an endowment fund and any ot her fund for specified purpose;  
(b) transfer money from its Fund to en dowment fund or any other fund.  
23. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Institute shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts,  including the balance -sheet, in such form as may be 
specified, in accordance with such general directions as may be issued by the Central Government in 
consultation with the Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Institute shall  be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Institute to the 
Comptrolle r and Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of Indi a and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Institute shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with such aud it as the Comptroller and Audito r-General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts, and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspec t the offices of the 
Institute.  
9 
 (4) The accounts of the Institute as cert ified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Ce ntral Government and that Govern ment shall cause the same to be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
24. Pension and provident fund .—(1) The Institute shall constitute, for the benefit of its employees, 
including the Director, in such manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the 
Statutes, such pension, insu rance and pro vident funds as it may deem fit.  
(2) Where any such provident fund has been so constituted, the Central Government may declare that 
the provisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925 (19 of 1925) shall apply to such fund as if it we re a 
Governmen t provident fund.  
25. Appointments .—All appointments of the staff of the Institute, except that of the Director, shall 
be made in accordance with the proce dure laid down in the Statutes — 
(a) by the Board, if the appointment is made on the academic staff in  the post of Assistant 
Professor or above or if the appointment is made on the non -academic staff in any cadre, the 
maximum of the pay -scale for which is the same or higher than t hat of Assistant Professor; and  
(b) by t he Director, in any other case.  
26. S tatutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide for all or any of the 
following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the format ion of departments of teaching;  
(b) the institution of fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(c) the classification, the method of appointment and the determination of the terms and 
conditions of service of officers, teachers an d other staff of the Institute;  
(d) the reservation of posts for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other categor ies of 
persons as may be determined by the Central  Government, from time to time;  
(e) the constitution of pension, insurance and provident funds for the benefit of the officers, 
teachers an d other staff of the Institute;  
(f) the constitution, powers and du ties of th e authorities of the Institute;  
(g) the establishment and ma intenance of halls and hostels;  
(h) the manner of filling vacanc ies among members of the Board;  
(i) the authentication of the ord ers and decisions of the Board;  
(j) the meetings of the S enate, the quorum at such meetings and the procedure to be followed in 
the conduct of their business; and  
(k) any other matter which by this Act is to be, or may be, prescribed by the Statutes.  
27. Statutes how made .—(1) The first Statutes of the Institute  shall be framed by the Board with the 
previous approval of the Visitor and a copy of the same shall be laid as soon as may be b efore each House 
of Parliament.  
(2) The Board may, from time to time, make new or additional Statutes or may amend or repeal the  
Statutes in the manner here after in this section provided.  
(3) A new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require the 
previous approval of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent or remit it to th e Board for 
consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has b een assented to by the Visitor.   
10 
 28. Ordinances .—Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the Ordinances  of the 
Institute may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of  the students to the Institute;  
(b) the reservation for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes and other categories of person;  
(c) the courses of study to be laid down fo r all degrees of the Institute;  
(d) the conditions under which students shall be admitted to the degree courses and to the 
examinations of the Institute and  shall be eligible for degrees;  
(e) the conditions of award of the fellowships, scholarships, exhibitions, medals and prizes;  
(f) the conditions and mode of appointment and duties of examining bo dies, examiners and 
moderators;  
(g) the conduct of examinations;  
(h) the maintenance of discipline a mong the students of the Institute;  
(i) the fees to be charged for courses of study in the Institute and for admission to the 
examinatio ns of degrees of the Institute;  
(j) the conditions of residence of students of the Institute and the levying of the fees  for residence 
in the halls and ho stels and of other charges; and  
(k) any other matter which by this Act or the Statutes is to be, or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
29. Ordinances how made .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, Ordinanc es shall be 
made by the Senate.  
(2) All Ordinances made by the Senate shall have effect from such date as it may direct, but every 
Ordinance so made shall be submitted, as soon as may be, to the Board and shall be considered by the 
Board at its next succeed ing meeting.  
(3) The Board shall have power by resolution to modify or cancel any such Ordinances and such 
Ordinances shall from the date of such resolution stand modified accordingly or  cancelled, as the case 
may be.  
30. Tribunal of Arbitration .—(1) Any dispute arising out of a contract between the Institute and any 
of its employees shall, at the request of the employee concerned or at the instance of the Institute, be 
referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration consisting of one member appointed by the Institu te, one member 
nominated by the employee, and an u mpire appointed by the Visitor.  
(2) The decision of the Tribunal of Arbitration shall be final and shall not be questioned in any court.  
(3) No suit or proceeding shall lie in any court in respect of any ma tter which is required by sub -
section ( 1) to be referred to the Tribunal of Arbitration.  
(4) The Tribunal of Arbitration shall have power  to regulate its own procedure.  
(5) Nothing in any law for the time being in force relating to arbitration shall apply to arbitrations 
under this section.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. Acts and proceedings not to be invalidated by vacancies .—No act of the Institute or Board or 
Senate or any other body set up under this Act or the Statutes, shall be invalid merely by reason of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or defect i n, the constitution thereof, or  
(b) any defect in the election, nomination or appointment of person acting as a member thereof, or  
(c) any irregularity in its procedure not af fecting the merits of the case.   
11 
 32. Gra nt of degrees, etc., by Institute .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the University 
Grants Commission Act, 1956 (3 of 1956) or in any other law for the time being in force, the Institute 
shall have power to grant  degrees and other academic dist inctions and titles under this Act.  
33. Sponsored schemes .—Whenever the Institute receives funds from any Government, the 
University Grants Commission or any other agency sponsoring a scheme to be executed by the Institute, 
notwith standing anything in thi s Act,— 
(a) the amount received shall be kept by the Institute separately from the Fund of the Institute and 
utilised only  for the purpose of the scheme;  
(b) the staff required to execute the same shall be recruited in accordance with the terms and 
conditi ons stipulated by the sponsoring organisation:  
Provided that any money remaining unutilised under clause ( a) shall be transferred to the endowment 
fund create d under section 22 of this Act.  
34. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
or give such directions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appears to it to be necessary or 
expedie nt for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of tw o years from the appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore e ach 
House of Parliament.  
35. Transitional provision s.—Notwithstanding a nything contained in this Act, — 
(a) the Board of Governors of the Society functioning as such immediately before the 
commencement of this Act shall continue to so function until a new Board is constituted for the 
Institute under this Act, but on the const itution of a new Board under thi s Act, the members of the 
Board holding office before such constitut ion shall cease to hold office;  
(b) until the first Statutes and the Ordinances are m ade under this Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances of the National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Sector -67, S.A.S. 
Nagar (Mohali), District Ropar, Punjab as in force, immediately before the commencement of this 
Act, shall continue to  apply to the Institute in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act.  
36. Statutes and Ordinances to be published in the Official Gazette an d to be laid before 
Parliament .—(1) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be pub lished in the Official 
Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute or Ordinance made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in  one session or in two or more succes sive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the Statute or Ordinance or both Houses agr ee that the Statute or Ordinance sho uld not be 
made, the Statute or Ordinance shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, 
as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to  
the validity of anything previousl y done u nder that Statute or Ordinance.  
(3) The power to make the Statutes or the Ordinances shall include the power to give retrospective 
effect from a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this Act to the Statutes or the Ordinances 
or any of them but no retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute or Ordinance so as to prejudicially 
affect the interests of any person to whom such Statute or Ordinance may be applicable.  
37. Repeal and saving .—(1) The National Institute of Pharmaceutical Education and Research 
Ordinance, 1998  (Ord . 9 of 1998)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under this Act.  
