--------------------------The Central Industrial Security Force (Amendment and Validation) Act, 1999--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION)  
ACT, 1999  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Amendment of long title . 
3. Amendment of section 2 . 
4. Amendment of section 3 . 
5. Amendment of section 8 . 
6. Amendment of section 9 . 
7. Amendment of section 10 . 
8. Insertion of new section 14A . 
9. Amendment of section 22 . 
10. Validation of the disposal of certain revision petitions . 
 
  2 
 THE CENTRAL INDUSTRIAL SECURITY FORCE (AMENDMENT AND VALIDATION)  
ACT, 1999  
ACT NO. 40 OF 1999  
[29th December , 1999.]  
An Act further to amend the Central Industrial Security Force Act, 1968, and to validate certain 
revision petitions disposed of under the rules made under the said Act.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: – 
1. Short title. –This Act may be called the Central Industrial Security Force (Amend ment and 
Validation) Act, 1999.  
2. Amendment of long title. –In the Central Industrial Secur ity Force Act, 1968 (50 of 1968 ) 
(hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), for the long title, the following long title shall be substituted, 
namely: – 
“An Act to provide for the constitution and regulation of an armed force of the Union for the 
better protection and security of industrial undert akings owned by the Central Government, certain 
other industrial undertakings , employees of all such undertak ings and to provide technical 
consultancy services to industrial establishments in the private sector and for  matters connected 
therewith. ”. 
3. Ame ndment of section  2.–In section 2 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), after clause ( c), the 
following cla use shall be inserted, namely: – 
„(ca) “industrial establishment ” means an industrial undertaking or a company as defined under 
section 3 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) or a firm registered under section 59 of the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932 (9 of 1932) which is engaged in any industry, or in any trade, busi ness or 
service;‟ .  
4. Amendment of section 3. –In section 3 of the principal Act, in sub -section ( 1), the words “and to 
perform such other duties as may be entrusted to it by the Central Government ” shall be inserted at the 
end. 
5. Amendment of section 8 .–In section 8 of the principal Act, – 
(i) in clause ( i), after the word “remove ”, the words  “, order for compulsory retirement of  ”, shall 
be inserted;  
(ii) in clause ( ii), after sub -clause ( c), the following sub -clauses shall be inserted, namely: –– 
“(d) withholding of increment of pay wit h or without cumulative effect;  
(e) withholding of promotion;  
(f) censure. ”.  
  3 
 6. Amendment of section 9. –In section 9  of the principal Act, – 
(i) in sub -section ( 1), for the words, brackets and figure “subject t o the provisions of sub -section 
(3)”, the words, brackets, figures and letters “subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2A), sub -
section ( 2B) and sub -section ( 3)” shall be substitute d; 
(ii) after sub -section ( 2), the following sub -sections shall be inserted, namely: – 
“(2A) Any enrolled member of the Force aggrieved by an order passed in appeal under sub -
section ( 1) may, within a period of six months from the date on which the order is communicated 
to him, prefer a revision petition against the order to such authority as may be prescribed and in 
disposing of the revision petition, the said authority shall follow such procedure as may be 
prescribed.  
(2B) The authority, as may be prescribed for the purpose of this sub -section, on a revision 
petition pref erred by an aggrieved enrolled member of the Force or suo moto , may call for, within 
a prescribed period, the records of any proceeding under sectio n 8 or sub -section ( 2) or              
sub-section ( 2A) and such authority may, after making inquiry in the prescribed manner, and 
subject to the provisions of this Act, pass such or der thereon as it thinks fit.” ; 
(iii) in sub -section ( 3), for the words, figures and brackets “under section 8 or under sub -section 
(2)”, the words, figures, brackets and letters “under section 8, sub -section ( 2), sub -section ( 2A) or 
sub-section (2B)” shall be substituted.  
7. Amendment of section 10. –In section 10 of the principal Act, after clause ( e), the following 
clauses shall be inserted, namely: – 
“(f) to provide technical con sultancy services relating to security of any private sector 
industrial es tablishments under section 14A;  
(g) to protect and safeguard the organisations owned or funded by the Government and the 
employees of such organisations as may be entrusted to  him by the Central Government;  
(h) any other duty which may be entrusted to him by the Central Government from time to 
time. ”.  
8. Insertion of new section 14A. –After section 14 of the principal Act, the following sec tion 
shall be inserted, namely: – 
“14A.  Technical Consultancy Servic e to industrial establishments. –(1) Subject to any 
general directions which may be issued by the Central Government, it shall be lawful for the 
Director -General, on a request received from  the Managing Director of an ind ustrial  
establishment in the private sector or any other person authorised by him in this behalf, to direct 
the members of the Force to provide technical consultancy services relating to security, to such 
industrial establishments in such manner and on payment of  such fee as may be prescribed.  
(2) The fee received under sub -section ( 1) shall be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, the expression “Managing Director ”, in 
relation to an industrial establishment, means the person (whether called general manager, 
manager, chief executive officer or a partner of a firm or by any other name ) who exercises 
control over the affairs of the establishment. ”.  4 
 9. Amendment of section 22. –In section 22 of the prin cipal Act, in sub -section ( 2),– 
(i) after clause ( ggg), the following clauses shall be inserted, n amely: – 
“(gggg ) prescribing authority under sub -section ( 2A) of section 9 and the procedure to be 
followed by such authority in disp osing of the revision petition;  
(ggggg ) prescribing authority under sub -section ( 2B) of section 9, the period within which 
such authority may call for the records and the manner in which such authority may make 
inquiry; ”;  
(ii) in clause ( h), the word “and” occurring at the end shall be omitted;  
(iii) after clause ( h), the following cla use shall be inserted, namely: – 
“(hh) the manner in which and the fee on payment of which the technical consultancy 
services shall be provided under sub -section ( 1) of section  14A; and ”. 
10. Validation of the disposal of certain revision petitions. –Notwithstanding any judgment, decree 
or order of any court to the contrary, rule 49 of the Central Industrial Security Force Rules, 1969 
published with the notification of the Govern ment of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs number S.O. 
4632, dated the 12th November, 1969 shall be deemed to be, and to have always been, made under the 
principal Act as amended by this Act as if the principal Act as so amended had been in force at all  
materia l times before the commencement of this Act and accordingly the disposal of any revision petition 
under the said rule 49 before the commencement of this Act or any order made or purporting to have been 
made or any action or thing taken or done in o r under such petition shall not be deemed to be invalid or 
ever to have become invalid merely on the ground that the Central Government had no power under the 
principal Act to make the said rule 49.  
--------------------------The Delhi Development Authority (Validation of Disciplinary Powers) Act, 1998--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (VALIDATION OF DISCIPLINARY  
POWERS)  ACT,  1998  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Validation of disciplinary powers exercised or action taken by Vice -Chairman or other officer . 
 
  2 
 THE DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY (VALIDATION OF DISCIPLINARYPOWERS)  
ACT,  1998  
ACT NO. 6 OF 1999  
[8th January , 1999.]  
An Act to provide for validation of disciplinary powers exercised by  the Vice -Chairman and 
officers of the Delhi Development Authority.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -ninth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: –– 
1. Short title .–This Act may be called the Delhi Development Authority (Validation of Disciplina ry 
Powers) Act, 1998.  
2. Definitions .–In thi s Act,– 
(a) “Authority ” means the Delhi Development Authority established under section 3 of the Delhi 
Deve lopment Act, 1957 (61 of 1957);  
(b) “Vice -Chairman ” means the Vice -Chairman of the Authority.  
3. Validation of disciplinary powers exercised or action taken by Vice -Chairman or other 
officers.–Notwithstanding any judgment, decree or order of any Court or Tribunal or other Authority to 
the contrary, where any discipl inary powers or action which th e Cen tral Government or the Authority 
may exercise or take under the Delhi Development Authority (Salaries, Allowances and Conditions of 
Service) Regulations, 1961 had been exercised or taken by the Vice -Chairman or other officers of the 
Authority during the pe riod on and from the 22n d day of November, 1979 to the 1 st day of March, 1994, 
such disciplinary powers or action shall be deemed to have been validly and effectively exercised or taken 
by the Vice -Chairman or such ot her officer as if the Vice -Chair man or such other officer had been 
specified, with the previous approval of the Central Government in the said Delhi Development Authority 
(Salaries, Allowances and Conditions of Service) Regulations in that behalf and acco rdingly, no suit or 
other procee ding sha ll be instituted, maintained or continued in any Court or Tribunal or before other 
authority on the ground that the Vice -Chairman or such other officer was not competent to exercise such 
disciplinary power or take such action.  
--------------------------The Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999--------------------------
1 
 THE FOREIGN EXCHA NGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  
_________  
ARRA NGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
 
SECTION S 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION AND MAN AGEMENT OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE  
3. Dealing in foreign exchange, etc.  
4. Holding of foreign exchange, etc.  
5. Current account transactions.  
6. Capital account transactions.  
7. Export of goods and services.  
8. Realisation  and repatriation of foreign exchange.  
9. Exemption from realisation and repatriation in certain cases.  
 
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORISED PERSON  
10. Authorised person.  
11. Reserve Bank’s powers to issue directions to authorised person.  
12. Power of Reserve Bank to inspect authoris ed person.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
CONTRAVENTION AND PENALTIES  
13. Penalties.  
14. Enforcement  of the orders of Adjudicating Authority.  
14A. Power of recover arrears of penalty.  
15. Power to compound contravention.  
 
CHAPTER V  
ADJUDICATION AND APPEAL  
16. Appointment of Adjudicating Authority.  
17. Appeal to Special Director (Appeals).  
18. Appellate Tribunal.  
19. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.  
20. [Omitted .] 
21. Qualifications , for appointment of Special Director (Appeal s). 
22. [Omitted .] 
23. Terms and Conditions of service  Special Director (Appeals).  
24. [Omitted. ] 2 
 SECTIONS  
25. [Omitted .] 
26. [Omitted .] 
27. Staff of Special Director (Appeals).  
28. Procedure and powers of Appellate T ribunal and Special Director ( Appeals).  
29. [Omitted .] 
30. [Omitted .] 
31. [Omitted .] 
32. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner or chartered accountant and of 
Government , to appoint presenting officers.  
33. Officers and Employees etc., to be public servant.  
34. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.  
35. Appeal to High Court.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT  
36. Directorate of Enforcement.  
37. Power of search,  seizure, etc.  
 37A. Special provisions relating to assets held outside India in contravention of section 4.  
38. Empowering other officers.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
39. Presumption as to documents in certain cases.  
40. Suspension of operation of this Act.  
41. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
42. Contravention by companies.  
43. Death or insolvency in certain cases.  
44. Bar of legal proceedings.  
45. Removal of difficulties.  
46. Power to make rules.  
47. Power to make regulations.  
48. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
49. Repeal and saving.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  3 
 THE FOREIGN EXCHANGE MANAGEMENT ACT, 1999  
 ACT NO. 42 OF 1999  
[29th December , 1999.]  
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to foreign exchange with the objective of 
facilitating external trade and payments and for promoting the orderly development and 
maintenance of foreign exchange market in India . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent,  application and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Foreign 
Exchange Management Act, 1999.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall also apply to all branches, offices and agencies outside India owned or controlled by a 
person resident in India and also to any contravention there under committed outside India by any p erson 
to whom this Act applies.  
(4) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appoi nted for different provisions of this Act and any reference in 
any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming into 
force of that provision.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requi res,— 
(a) “Adjudicating Authority ” means an officer authorised  under sub -section ( 1) of section 16;  
2[(b) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Trib unal referred to in section 18;]  
 (c) “authoris ed person ” means an authorised  dealer, money changer, off -shore banking unit or 
any other person for the time being authorised  under sub -section ( 1) of section 10 to deal in foreign 
exchange or foreign securities;  
3[(cc) “Authorised Officer” means an officer of the Directorate of Enfo rcement authorised by the 
Central Government under section 37A;]  
(d) “Bench ” means a B ench of the Appellate Tribunal;  
(e) “capital account transaction ” means a transaction which alters the assets or liabilities, including 
contingent liabilities, outside India of persons resident in India or assets or liabilities in India of 
persons resident outside India, and includes transactions referred to i n sub -section (3) of section 6;  
(f) “Chairperson ” means the Chairpe rson of the Appellate Tribunal;  
(g) “chartered accountant ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Chartered A ccount ants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949);  
3[(gg) “Competent Authority” means the Authority appointed by the Central Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 37A;]  
(h) “currency ” includes all currency notes, postal notes, postal orders, money orders, cheques, 
drafts, travellers cheques, letters of credit, bills of exchange and promissory notes, credit cards or such 
other similar instruments, as may b e notified by the Reserve Bank;  
                                                           
1. 1st June, 2000, vide notification No . G.S.R. 371(E), dated 1st May, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,    
sec. 3(i). 
        2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 165 , for clause ( b) (w.e.f.  26-5-2017) . 
3. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 138 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2015).  4 
 (i) “currency notes ” means and includes cash in the form of coins and bank notes;  
(j) “current account transaction ” means a transaction other than a capital account transaction and 
without prejudice to the generality of the forego ing such transaction includes, — 
(i) payments due in connection with foreign trade, other current business, services, and        
short -term bankin g and credit facilities in t he ordinary course of business,  
(ii) payments due as interest on loans and as net income from investments,  
(iii) remittances for living  expenses of parents, spouse and children residing abroad, and  
(iv) expenses in connection with foreign travel, education and medical care of parents, spouse 
and children;  
(k) “Director of Enforcement ” means the Director of Enforcement appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 36;  
(l) “export ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means — 
(i) the taking out of India to a place outside India any goods,  
(ii) provision of services from India to any person outside India;  
(m) “foreign currency ” means any curre ncy other than Indian currency;  
(n) “foreign exchange ” means foreign currency and includes, — 
(i) deposits, credits and balances payable in any foreign currency,  
(ii) drafts, travel lers cheques, letters of credit or bills of exchange, expressed or drawn in Indian 
currency but payable in any foreign currency,  
(iii) drafts, travel lers cheques, letters of credit or bills of exchange drawn by banks, institutions 
or persons outside India, but payable in Indian currency;  
(o) “foreign security ” means any security, in the form of shares, stocks, bonds, debentures or any 
other instrument denominated or expressed in foreign currency and includes securities expressed in 
foreign currency, but where redemption or any form of return such as interest or  dividends  is payable in 
Indian currency;  
(p) “import ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means bringing into India 
any goods or services;  
(q) “Indian currency ” means currency which is expressed or drawn in Indian rupees but does no t 
include special bank notes and special one rupee notes issued under section 28A of the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(r) “legal practitioner ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Ad vocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961);  
(s) “Member ” means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal and includes the Chairperson thereof;  
(t) “notify ” means to notify in the Official Gazette and the expression “notification ” shall be 
construed accordingly;  
(u) “person ” includes — 
(i) an individual,  
(ii) a Hindu undivided family,  
(iii) a company,  
(iv) a firm,  
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not,  
(vi) every  artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding sub -clauses, and  
(vii) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by such person;  5 
 (v) “person resident in India ” means — 
(i) a person residing in India for more than one hundred and eighty -two days during the 
course of the preceding finan cial year but does not include — 
(A) a person who has gone out of India or who stay s outside India, in either case — 
(a) for or on taking up employment outside India, or  
(b) for carrying on outside India a business or vocation outside India, or  
(c) for any other purpose, in such circumstances as would indicate his intention to 
stay outside India for an uncertain period;  
(B) a person who has come to or stays in India, in either case, otherwise than — 
(a) for or on taking up employment in India, or  
(b) for carrying on in India a business or vocation in India,  or  
(c) for any other purpose, in such circumstances as would indicate his intention to 
stay in India for an uncertain peri od;  
(ii) any person or body corporate registered or incorporated in India,  
(iii) an office, branch or agency in India owned or controlled by a person resident outside 
India,  
(iv) an office, branch or agency outside India owned or controlled by a person resident in 
India;  
(w) “person resident outside India ” means a person who is not resident in India;  
(x) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(y) “repatriate to India ” means bringing into India th e realis ed foreign exchange and — 
(i) the selling of such foreign exchange to an authorised  person in India in exchange for 
rupees, or  
(ii) the holding of realised  amount in an account with an authorised  person in India to the 
extent notified by the Reserve Bank,  
and includes use of the realised  amount for discharge of a debt or liability denominated in foreign 
exchange and the expression “repatriation ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(z) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 
of the  Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(za) “security ” means shares, stocks, bonds and debentures, Government securities as defined in the 
Public  Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944), savings certificates to which the Government Savings Certificates 
Act, 1959 (46 of 1959) applies, deposit receipts in respect of deposits of securities and units of the Unit 
Trust of India established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963                       
(52 of 1963) or of any mutual fund and includes certificates of title to securities, but does not include  
bills of exchange or promissory  notes other than Government promissory notes or a ny other instruments 
which may be notified by the Reserve Bank as security for the purposes of this Act;  
(zb) “service ” means service of any description which is made available to potential users and 
includes the provision of facilities in connection with  banking, financing, insurance, medical assistance, 
legal assistance, chit fund, real estate, transport, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, 
boarding or lodging or both, entertainment, amusement or the purveying of news or other information, 
but does not include the rendering of any service free of charge or under a contract of personal service ;  
(zc) “Special Director (Appeals) ” means an officer appointed under 1[section 1 7];  
(zd) “specify ” means to specify by regulations made under this Act and the expression “specified ” 
shall be construed accordingly;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.165 , for “section 18”  (w.e.f.  26-5-2017) . 6 
 (ze) “transfer ” includes sale, purchase, exchange, mortgage, pledge, gift, loan or any other form of 
transfer of right, title, possession or lien.  
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION AND MANAGEMENT OF FOREIGN EXCHANGE  
3. Dealing in foreign exchange, etc. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act, rules or regulations 
made there under, or with the general or special permission of the  Reserve Bank, no person shall — 
(a) deal in or transfer any foreign exchange or foreign security to any person not being an 
author ised person;  
(b) make any payment to or for the credit of any person resident outside India in any manner;  
(c) receive otherwise through an authorised  person, any payment by order or on behalf of any 
person reside nt outside India in any manner.  
Explanati on.—For the purpose of this clause, where any person in, or resident in, India receives 
any payment by order or on behalf of any person resident outside India through any other person 
(including an authorised  person) without a corresponding inward remittan ce from any place outside 
India, then, such person shall be deemed to have received such payment otherwise than through an 
authorised  person;  
(d) enter into any financial transaction in India as consideration for or in association with 
acquisition or crea tion or transfer of a right to acquire, any asset outside India by any person.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this clause, “financial transaction ” means making any payment 
to, or for the credit of any person, or receiving any payment for, by order or on behalf of any person, 
or drawing, issuing or negotiating any bill of exchange or promissory note, or transferring any 
security or acknowledging any debt.  
4. Holding of foreign exchange, etc. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no person resident in 
India shall acquire, hold, own, possess or transfer any foreign exchange, foreign security or any 
immovable property situated outside India.  
5. Curre nt account transactions. —Any person may sell or draw foreign exchange to or from an 
authorised  person if such sale or draw al is a current account transaction:  
Provided that the Central Government may, in public interest and in consultation with the Reserve 
Bank, impose such reasonable restrictions for current account transactions as may be prescribed.  
6. Capital account transactions. —(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), any  person may 
sell or draw foreign  exchange to or from an authorised  person for a capital account transaction.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, in consultation with t he Central Government, specify — 
1[(a) any class or classes of ca pital account transactions  which are permissible; ]  
 (b) the limit up to which foreign exchange shall be admissible for such tran sactions:  
2[(c) any conditions which may be placed on such transactions;]  
3[Provided that the Reserve Bank shall not impose any restriction on the drawal of foreign 
exchange for payments due on account of amortization of loans or not depreciation of direct 
investment s in the ordinary course of business .] 
                                                           
1. Clause ( a) shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by Act 20 of 2015, s. 139, to read as under:   
“(a) any class or classes of capital account transactions , involving debt instruments, which are permissible;" . 
2. Clause ( c) shall stand inserted (date to be notified) by s. 139 , ibid.   
3. The proviso shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by s. 139, ibid., to read as under:  
“Provided that the Reserve Bank or the Central Government shall not impose any restrictions on the drawal of foreign 
exchange for payment due on account of amortisation of loans or for depreciation of direct investments in t he ordinary 
course of business.”.  7 
 1[(2A) The Central Government may, in consultation wi th the Reserve Bank, prescribe — 
(a) any class or classes of capital account transactions, not involving debt instruments, which are 
permissible;  
(b) the limit up to which foreign exchange shall be admissible for such transactions; and  
(c) any  conditions which may be placed on such transactions.]  
2[(3) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the Reserve Bank may, 
by regulations prohibit, restr ict or regulate the following: — 
(a) transfer  or issue of any foreign security by a person resident in India;  
(b) transfer or issue of any security by a person resident outside India;  
(c) transfer or issue of any security or foreign security by any branch, office or agency in India of 
a person reside nt outside India;  
(d) any borrowing or lending in foreign exchange in whatever form or by whatever name called;  
(e) any borrowing or lending in rupees in whatever form or by whatever name called between a 
person resident in India and a person resident outs ide India;  
(f) deposits between persons resident in India and persons resident outside India;  
(g) export, import or holding of currency or currency notes;  
(h) transfer of immovable property outside India, other than a lease not exceeding five years, by a 
person resident in India;  
(i) acquisition or transfer of immovable property in India, other than a lease not exceeding five 
years, by a person resident outside India;  
(j) giving of a guarantee or surety in respect of any debt, obligatio n or other liability incurred — 
(i) by a person resident in India and owed to a person resident outside India; or  
(ii) by a  person resident outside India.]  
(4) A person resident in India may hold, own, transfer or invest in foreign currency, foreign security 
or any immovable pr operty situated outside India if such currency, security or property was acquired, held 
or owned by such person when he was resident outside India or inherited from a person who was resident 
outside India.  
(5) A person resident outside India may hold, own,  transfer or invest in Indian currency, security or 
any immovable property situated in India if such currency, security or property was acquired, held or 
owned by such person when he was resident in India or inherited from a pe rson who was resident in 
India. 
(6) Without prejudice to the provisions of this section, the Reserve Bank may, by regulation, prohibit, 
restrict, or regulate establishment in India of a branch, office or other place of business by a person 
resident outside India, for carrying on any a ctivity relating to such branch, off ice or other place of 
business.  
3[(7) For the purposes of this section, the term “debt instruments ” shall mean, such instruments as 
may be determined by the Central Government in consultation with the Reserve Bank.]  
7. Export of goods and services. —(1) Every exporter of goods shall — 
(a) furnish to the Reserve Bank or to such other authority a declaration in such form and in such 
manner as may be specified, containing true and correct material particulars, including the amount 
representing the full export value or, if the full export val ue of the goods is not ascertainable at the 
                                                           
1. Sub -section ( 2A) shall stand inserted (date to be notified) by Act 20 of 2015, s. 139.  
2. Sub -section ( 3) shall stand omitted (date to be notified) by s. 139, ibid. 
3. Sub -section ( 7) shall stand inserted (date to be notified) by s. 139, ibid. 8 
 time of export, the value which the exporter, having regard to the prevailing market conditions, 
expects to receive on the sale of the goods in a market outside India;  
(b) furnish to the Reserve Bank such other information as may be required by the Reserve Bank 
for the purpose of ensuring the realisation  of the export proceeds by such exporter.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of ensuring that the full export value of the goods or such 
reduced value of the goods as the Reserve Bank determines, having regard to the prevailing market 
conditions, is received without any delay, direct any exporter to comply with suc h requirements as it 
deems fit.  
(3) Every exporter of services shall furnish to the Reserve Ba nk or to such other authorities a 
declaration in such form and in such manner as may be specified, containing the true and correct material 
particulars in relatio n to payment for such services.  
8. Realisation  and re patriation of foreign exchange. —Save as otherwise provided in this Act, 
where any amount of foreign exchange is due or has accrued to any person resident in India, such person 
shall tak e all reasonable steps to realis e and repatriate to India such foreign exchange within such period 
and in such manner as may be specified by the Reserve Bank.  
9. Exemption from realisation  and repatriation in certain cases. —The provisions of sections 4 
and 8 shall not a pply to the following, namely: — 
(a) possession of foreign currency or foreign coins by any perso n up to such limit as the Reserve 
Bank may specify;  
(b) foreign currency account held or operated by such person or class of persons and the limit up 
to which the Reserve Bank may specify;  
(c) foreign exchange acquired or received before the 8th day of J uly, 1947 or any income arising 
or accruing thereon which is held outside India by any person in pursuance of a general or special 
permission granted by the Reserve Bank;  
(d) foreign exchange held by a person resident in India up to such limit as the Rese rve Bank may 
specify, if such foreign exchange was acquired by way of gift or inheritance from a person referred to 
in clause ( c), inc luding any income arising there from;  
(e) foreign exchange acquired from employment, business, trade, vocation, services, honorarium, 
gifts, inheritance or any other legitimate means up to such limit as the Reserve Bank may specify; and  
(f) such other receipts in foreign exchange as the Reserve Bank may specify.  
CHAPTER III  
AUTHORISED PERSON  
10. Authorised person. —(1) The Reserve Bank may, on an application mad e to it in this behalf, 
authoris e any person to be known as authorised  person to deal in foreign exchange or in foreign 
securities, as an authorised  dealer, money changer or off -shore banking unit or in an y other mann er as it 
deems fit.  
(2) An authorisation  under this section shall be in writing and shall be subject to the conditions laid 
down therein.  
(3) An authorisation  granted under sub -section ( 1) may be revoked by the Reserve Bank at any time if 
the Reserve Bank is satisfied that — 
(a) it is in public interest so to do; or  
(b) the authorised  person has failed to comply with the condition subject to which the 
authorisation  was granted or has contravened any of the provisions of the Act or any rule, regulation, 
notification, direction or order made thereunder :  
Provided that no such authorisation  shall be revoked on any ground referred to in clause ( b) unless the 
authorised  person has been given a reasonable opportunity of making  a representation in the matter.  9 
 (4) An authorised  person shall, in all his dealings in foreign exchange or foreign security, comply 
with such general or special directions or orders as the Reserve Bank may, from time to time, think fit to 
give, and, except with the previous permission of the Reserve Bank, an authorised  person shall not engage 
in any transaction involving any foreign exchange or foreign security which is not in conformity with the 
terms of his authorisation  under this section.  
(5) An authorised  person shall, before undertaki ng any transaction in foreign exchange on behalf of 
any person, require that person to make such declaration and to give such information as will reasonably 
satisfy him that the transaction will not involve , and is not designed for the purpose of any contr avention 
or evasion of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order made 
thereunder , and where the said person refuses to comply with any such requirement or make s only 
unsatisfactory compliance therewith, the authorised  person shall refuse in writing to undertake the 
transaction and shall, if he has reason to believe that any such contravention or evasion as aforesaid is 
contemplated by the person, report the matter to the Reserve Bank.  
(6) Any person, other than an authorised  person, who has acquired or purchased foreign exchange for 
any purpose mentioned in the declaration made by him to authorised  person under sub -section ( 5) does 
not use it for such purpose or does not surrender it to authorised  person within the specified period or uses 
the foreign exchange so acquired or purchased for any other purpose for which purchase or acquisition o f 
foreign exchange is not permissible under the provisions of the Act or the rules or regulations or  direction 
or order made thereunder  shall be deemed to have committed contravention of the provisions of the Act 
for the purpose of this s ection.  
11. Reserve Bank’ s powers to issue directions to authorised person. —(1) The R eserve Bank may, 
for the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of this Act and of any rules, regulations, 
notifications or directions made thereunder , give to the authorised persons any direction in regard to 
making of payment or the doing or desist from doing any act relating to foreig n exchange or foreign 
security.  
(2) The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of ensuring the compliance with the provisions of this Act 
or of any rule, regulation, notification, direction or order made thereunder , direct any authorised person to 
furnish such information, i n such manner, as it deems fit.  
(3) Where any authorised person contravenes any direction given by the Reserve Bank under this Act 
or fails to file any return as directed by the Reserve Bank, the R eserve Bank may, after giving reasonable 
opportunity of being heard, impose on the authorised  person a penalty which may extend to ten thousand 
rupees and in the case of continuing contravention with an additional penalty which may extend to two 
thousand r upees for every day during which such contravention continues.  
12. Power of Reserve Bank to inspect authorised person .—(1) The Reserve Bank may, at any 
time, cause an inspection to be made, by any officer of the Reserve Bank specially authorised in writin g 
by the Reserve Bank in this behalf, of the business of any  authorised person as may appear to it to be 
necessary o r expedient for the purpose of — 
(a) verifying the correctness of any statement, information or particulars furnished to the Reserve 
Bank;  
(b) obtaining any information or particulars which such authorised person has failed to furnish on 
being called upon to do so;  
(c) securing compliance with the provisions of this Act or of any rules, regulations, directions or 
orders made thereunder .  
 (2) It shall be the duty of every authorised person, and where such person is a company or a firm, 
every director, partner or other officer of such company or firm, as the case may be, to produce to any 
officer making an inspection under sub -section ( 1), such  books, accounts and other documents in his 
custody or power and to furnish any statement or information relating to the affairs of such person, 
company or firm as the said officer may require within such time and in such manner as the said officer 
may direct.  
  10 
 CHAPTER IV  
CONTRAVENTION AND PENALTIES  
13. Penalties. —(1) If any person contravenes any provision of this Act, or contravenes any rule, 
regulation, notification, direction or order issued in exercise of the powers under this Act, or contravenes 
any condition subject to which an authorisation  is issued by the Re serve Bank, he shall, upon 
adjudication, be liable to a penalty up to thrice the sum involved in such contravention where such 
amount is quantifiable, or up to two lakh rupees where the amount is not quantifiable, and where such 
contravention is a continui ng one, further penalty which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day 
after the first day during which the contravention continues.  
1[(1A) If any person is found to have acquired any foreign exchange, foreign security or immovable 
property, situated outside India, of the aggregate value exceeding the threshold prescribed under the 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 37A, he shall be liable to a penalty up to three times the sum 
involved in such contravention and confiscation of the value eq uivalent, situated in India, the Foreign 
exchange, foreign security or immovable property.  
(1B) If the Adjudicating Authority, in a proceeding under sub -section ( 1A) deems fits, he may, after 
recording the reasons in writing, recommend for the initiation o f prosecution and if the Director of 
Enforcement is satisfied, he may, after recording the reasons in writing, may direct prosecution by filing a 
Criminal Complaint against the guilty person by an officer not below the rank of Assistant Director.  
(1C) If a ny person is found to have acquired any foreign exchange, foreign security or immovable 
property, situated outside India, of the aggregate value exceeding the threshold prescribed under the 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 37A, he shall be, in additio n to the penalty imposed under                   
sub-section ( 1A), punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine.  
(1D) No court shall take cognizance of an offence under sub -section ( 1C) of section 13 except as on 
complaint in writing by an officer not below the rank of Assistant Director referred to in                               
sub-section ( 1B).] 
(2) Any Adjudicating Authority adjudging any contravention under sub -section ( 1), may, if he thinks 
fit in addition to any penalty which he may impose for such contravention direct that any currency, 
security or any other money or property in respect of which the contravention has taken place shall be 
confiscated to the Central Government and further direct that the foreig n exchange holdings, if any, of the 
persons committing the contraventions or any part thereof, shall b e brought back into India or shal l be 
retained outside India in accordance with the directions made in this behalf.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “property ” in respect of which contravention has 
taken place, shall include — 
(a) deposits in a bank, where the said property is converted into such deposits;  
(b) Indian currency, where the said property is converted into  that currency; and  
(c) any other property which has resulted out of the conversion of that property.  
14. Enforcement of the orders of Adjudicating Authority. —(1) Subject to the provisions of                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 19, if any person fails to make full payment of the penalty imposed on him 
under section 13 within a period of ninety days from the date on which the notice for payment of such 
penalty is served on him, he shall be liable to civil imprisonment  under this section.  
(2) No order for the arrest and detention in civil prison of a defaulter shall be made unless the 
Adjudicating  Authority has issued and served a notice upon the defaulter calling upon him to appear 
before him on the date specified in the notice and to show cause why he should not be committed to the 
civil prison, and unless the Adjudicating Authority, for re asons in writing, is satisfied — 
(a) that the defaulter, with the object or effect of obstructing the recovery of penalty, has afte r the 
issue of notice by the Adjudicating Authority, dishonestly transferred, concealed, or remov ed any part 
of his property, or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 140 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2015).  11 
 (b) that the defaulter has, or has had since the issuing of notice by the Adjudicating Authority, the 
means to pay the arrears or some substantial part thereof and refuses or neglects or has refused or 
neglected to pay the same.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a warrant for the arrest of the defaulter 
may be issued by the Adjudicating Authority if the A djudicating Authority is satisfied, by affidavit or 
otherwise, that with the object or effect of delaying the execution of the certificate the defaulter is likely 
to abscond or leave the local limits of the jurisdiction  of the Adjudicating Authority.  
(4) Where appearance is not made pursuant to a notice issued and served under sub -section ( 1), the 
Adjudicating Authority may issue a warrant for the arrest of the defaulter.  
(5) A warrant of arrest issued by the Adjudicating Authority under sub -section ( 3) or sub -section ( 4) 
may also be executed by any other Adjudicating Authority within whose jurisdiction the defaulter may for 
the time being be found.  
(6) Every person arrested in pursuance of a warrant of arrest under this section shall be brought 
before th e Adjudicating Authority issuing the warrant as soon as practicable and in any event within 
twenty -four hours of his arrest (exclusive of the time re quired for the journey):  
Provide d that, if the defaulter pays the amount entered in the warrant of arrest a s due and the costs of 
the arrest to the officer arresting him, such off icer shall at once release him.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, where the defaulter is a Hindu undivided family, 
the karta thereof shall  be deemed to be the defaulter.  
(7) When a defaulter appears before the Adjudicating Authority pursuant to a notice to show cause or 
is brought before the Adjudicating Authority under this section, the Adjudicating Authority shall give the 
defaulter an opp ortunity showing cause why he should not be committed to the civil prison.  
(8) Pending the conclusion of the inquiry, the Adjudicating Authority may, in his discretion, order the 
defaulter to be detained in the custody of such officer as the Adjudicating Authority may think fit or 
release him on his furnishing the security to t he satisfaction of the Adjudicating Authority for his 
appearance as and when required.  
(9) Upon the conclusion of  the inquiry, the Adjudicating A uthority may make an order for the 
detention of the defaulter in the civil prison and shall in that event cause him to be arrested if he is not 
already under arrest:  
Provide d that in order to give a defaulter an opportunity of satisfying the arrears, the Adjudicating 
Authority may, before m aking the order of detention, leave the defaulter in the custody of the officer 
arresting him or of any other officer for a specified period not exceeding fifteen days, or release him on 
his furnishing security to the satisfaction of the Adjudicating Autho rity for his appearance at the 
expiration of the specified period if the arrears are not satisfied.  
(10) When the Adjudicating Authority does not make an order of detention under sub -section ( 9), he 
shall, if the defaulter is under arrest, direct his rele ase.  
(11) Every person detained in the civil prison in execution of the c ertificate may be so detained, — 
(a) where the certificate is for a demand of an amount exceeding rupees one crore, up to three 
years, and  
(b) in any other case, up to six months:  
Provided that he shall be released from such detention on the amount mentioned in the warrant for his 
detention being paid to the officer -in-charge of the civil prison.  
(12) A defaulter released from detention under this section shall not, merely by reason  of his release, 
be discharged from his liability for the arrears, but he shall not be liable to be arrested under the 
certificate in execution of which he was detained in the civil prison.  
(13) A detention order may be executed at any place in India in th e manner provided for the execution 
of warrant of arrest under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
 12 
 1[14A.  Power of recover arrears of penalty .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the 
Adjudicating Authority may, by order in writing, authorise an officer of Enforcement not below the rank 
of Assistant Director to recover any arrears of penalty from any person who fails to make full payment of 
penalty imposed on him under section 13 within the period of ninety days from the date on which  the 
notice for payment of  such penalty is served on him.  
(2) The officer referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise all the like powers which are conferred on 
the income -tax authority in relation to recovery of tax under the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of  1961) and 
the procedure laid down under the Second Schedule to the said Act shall mutatis mutandis  apply in 
relation to recovery of arre ars of penalty under this Act.]  
15. Power to compound contravention. —(1) Any contravention under section 13 may, on an 
application made by the person committing such contravention, be compounded within one hundred and 
eighty days from the date of receipt of application by the Director of Enforcement or such other officers 
of the Directorate of Enforcement and officers of the Reserve Bank as may be authorised  in this behalf by 
the Central Government in such manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where a contravention has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), no proceeding or further 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be initiated or continued, as the case may be, against the  person  
committing such contravention under that section, in respect of the contravention so compounded.  
CHAPTER V  
ADJUDICATION AND APPEAL  
16. Appointm ent of Adjudicating Authority. —(1) For the purpose of adjudication under              
section 13, the Central Government may, by an order published in the Official Gazette, appoint as many 
officers of the Central Government as it may think fit, as the Adju dicating Authorities for holding an 
inquiry in the manner prescribed after giving the person alleged to have committed contravention under 
section 13, against whom a complaint has been made under sub -section ( 3) (hereinafter in this section 
referred to as the said person) a reasonable opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing any 
penalty:  
Provided that where the Adjudicating Authority is of opinion that the said person is likely to abscond 
or is likely to evade in any manner, the payment of pen alty, if levied, it may direct the said person to 
furnish a bond  or guarantee for such amount and  subject to such  conditions as it may deem fit.  
(2) The Central Government shall, while appointing the Adjudicating Authorities under                         
sub-section ( 1), also specify in the order published in the Official Gazette, their respective jurisdictions.  
(3) No Adjudicating Authority shall hold an enquiry under sub -section ( 1) except upon a complaint in 
writing made by any officer authorised by a ge neral or special order by the Central Government.  
(4) The said person may appear either in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner or a 
chartered accountant of his choice for presenting his case before the Adjudicating Authority.  
(5) Every Adjudicating Authority shall have the same powers of a civil court which are conferred on 
the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of section 28 and — 
(a) all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of 
Criminal Pr ocedure, 1973 (2  of 1974) . 
(6) Every Adjudicating Authority shall deal with the complaint under sub -section ( 2) as expeditiously 
as possible and endeavour shall be made to dispose of the complaint finally within one year from the date 
of receipt of the com plaint:  
Provided that where the complaint cannot be disposed of within the said period, the Adjudicating 
Authority shall record periodically the reasons in writing for not disposing of the co mplaint within the 
said period.  
17. Appeal to Special Director ( Appeals). —(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, 
appoint one or more Special Directors (Appeals) to hear appeals against the orders of the Adjudicating 
                                                           
1. Section 14A shall stand i nserted  (date to be notified)  by Act 28 of 2016, s. 229.  13 
 Authorities under this section and shall also specify in the said notification the matter and places in 
relation to which the Special Director (Appe als) may exercise jurisdiction.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by an order made by the Adjudicating Authority , being an Assistant 
Director of  Enforcement or a Deputy Director of Enforcement, may prefer an  appeal to the Special 
Director (Appeals).  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within forty -five days from the date on which the 
copy of the order made by the Adjudicating Authority is received by the aggrieved person and it shall be 
in such form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by  such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Special Director (Appeals) may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said 
period of forty -five days, if he is satisfied that there was sufficient  cause for not filing it within that 
period.  
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Special Director (Appeals) may after giving the 
parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such order thereon as he thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting as ide the order appealed against.  
(5) The Special Director (Appeals) shall send a copy of every order made by him to the parties to 
appeal and to the co ncerned Adjudicating Authority.  
(6) The Special Director (Appeals) shall have the s ame powers of a civil court which are conferred on 
the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) of section 28 and — 
(a) all proceedings before him shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 o f 1860) ;  
(b) shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
1[18. Appellate Tribunal. —The Appellate Tribunal constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 12 of 
the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976  (13 of 1976) , shall, 
on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be the 
Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.]  
19. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal —(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), the Central Government 
or any person aggrieved by an order made by an Adjudicating Authority, other than those referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) of section 17, or the Special Director (Appeals), may prefer an app eal to the Appellate 
Tribunal : 
Provided that any person appealing against the order of the Adjudicating Authori ty or the Special 
Director (Appeals) levying any penalty, shall while filing the appeal, deposit the amount of such penalty 
with such authority as may be notified by the Central Government:  
Provided further that where in any particular case, the Appellate  Tribunal is of the opinion that the 
deposit of such penalty would cause undue hardship to such person, the Appellate Tribunal may dispense 
with such deposit subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose so as to safegu ard the realisation 
of pena lty. 
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the date 
on which a copy of the order made by the Adjudicating Authority or the Special Director (Appeals) is 
received by the aggrieved person or by the Cent ral Government and it shall be in such form, verified in 
such manner and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
forty -five days if it is satisfie d that there was sufficient cause for not filing  it within that period.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties 
to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thin ks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal and 
to the concerned Adjudicating Authority or the Special Director  (Appeals), a s the case may be.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 165 , for section 18  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 14 
 (5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within one 
hundred and eighty days from th e date of receipt of the appeal:  
Provided that where any appeal could not be disposed of within the said period of one hundred and 
eighty days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing off the appeal 
within the said peri od.  
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality, propriety or correctness of 
any order made by the Adjudicating Authority under section 16 in relation to any proceeding, on its own 
motion or otherwise, call  for the records of such proceedings and make such order in the case as it thinks 
fit. 
20. [Composition of Appellate Tribunal.] Omitted by the finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 165   
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
 1[21. Qualification s, for appointment of Special Director (Appeals). —A person shall not be 
qualified for appointment as a Special Director (Appeals) unless he —  
(a) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that Service; or  
(b) has  been a member of the Indian Revenue Service and has held a post equivalent to a Joint 
Secreta ry to the Government of India.]  
 22. [Term of office.] Omitted  by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 165 ( w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
2[23. Terms and Condition of service of Special Director of (Appeal s).—The salary and 
allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the Special Director (Appeals) 
shall be such as may be prescribed.]  
24. [Vacancies .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017),  s. 165 (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
25. [Resignation and removal .] Omitted  by  s. 165, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
26. [Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances .] Omitted by  s. 165, ibid.                
(w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
3[27. Staff of Special Director (Appeal). —(1) The Central Government shall provide the office of 
the Special Director (Appeals) with such officers and employees as it may deem fit.  
(2) The officers and employees of the office of the Special Director (Appeals) shall discharge the ir 
functions under the general superintendence of the Special Director (Appeals).  
(3) The salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the officers and 
employees of the office of the Special Director (Appeals) shall be such as may b e prescribed.]  
28. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal and Special Director (Appeals). —(1) The 
Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall 
have powers  to regulate its own procedure.  
(2) The A ppellate Tribunal and the Special Dir ector (Appeals) shall have, for the purposes of 
discharging its functions under this Act, the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) , while trying a suit, in respect of the following matt ers, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 7 of 2017,  s. 165 , for section 21 (w.e.f . 26-5-2017) . 
2. Subs. by s. 165, ibid., for section 23  (w.e.f.  26-5-2017) . 
3. Subs. by s. 165, ibid., for section 27  (w.e.f.  26-5-2017) . 15 
 (d) subject to the provisions of section s 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act,                              
1872  (1 of 1872) , requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or document 
from any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;   
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing a representation of default or deciding it ex parte ;  
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order passed by it 
ex parte ; and  
(i) any  other matter which may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(3) An order made by the Appellate Tri bunal or the Special Director (A ppeals) under this Act s hall be 
executable by the Appellate Tribunal or the Special Director (Appeals) as a decree of civil court and, for 
this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall have a ll the powers of a civil 
court. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), the Appellate Tribunal or the Special 
Director (Appeals) may  transmit any order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such 
civil court shall execute the order as if it we re a decree made by that court.  
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director (Appeals) shall be deemed 
to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian                                        
Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  and the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes 
of sections 345 and 34 6 of the Code of Crimin al Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
29. [Distribution of business amongst Benches .] Omitted by the Finance Act , 2017 (7 of 2017),       
s. 165 (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
30. [Power of Chairperson to transfer cases .] Omitted  by s. 165 , ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
31. [Decision to be by majority .] Omitted by  s. 165, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
32. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner or chartered accountant and of 
Government, to appoint presenting officers .—(1) A person preferring an appeal to the 1[Special 
Director (Appeals)]  under this Act may either appear in person or take the assistance of a legal 
practitioner or a chartered accountant of his choice to present his case before the  2[Special Director 
(Appeals)] . 
(2) The Central Government may authorise on e or more legal practitioners or  chartered accountants 
or any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every perso n so authorised may present the case 
with respect to any appeal before the  2[Special Director (Appeals)] . 
3[33. Officers and employees etc. , to be public servant.  — The Adjudicating Authority, Competent 
Authority and the Special Director (Appeals) and other officers and employees of the Special Director 
(Appeals) shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of secti on 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code , 1860  (45 of 1860) .] 
34. Civil  court not to have jurisdiction. —No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which an Adjudicating Authority or the Appellate Tribunal or the 
Special Director (Appeals) is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction  shall be 
granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any 
power conferred by or under this Act.  
35. Appeal to High Court. —Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the 
decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of law arising out of such order:  
                                                           
1. Subs by Act 7 of 2017, s. 165 , for “Appellate Tribunal or the Special Director (Appeals”  (w.e.f . 26-5-2017) . 
2. Subs. by s. 165, ibid., for “Appellate Tribunal or the Special Director (Appeals), as the case may be ” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017,  s. 165 , for section 33  (w.e.f.  26-5-2017) . 
 16 
 Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appe llant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further p eriod not exceeding 
sixty days.  
Explanation. —In this section “High Court ” means — 
(a) the  High Court within the jurisdiction of which the aggrieved party ordinarily resides or 
carries on business or personally works for gain; and  
(b) where the Central Government is the aggrieved party, the High Court within the jurisdiction 
of which the respo ndent, or in a case where there are more than one respondent, any of the 
respondents, ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain.  
CHAPTER VI  
DIRECT ORATE OF ENFORCEMENT  
36. Directorate of Enforcement. —(1) The Central Government shall establish a Directorate of 
Enforcement with a Director and such other officers or class of officers as it thinks fit, who shall be called 
officers of Enforcement , for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may authorise the 
Director of Enforcement or an Additional Director of Enforcement or a Special Director of Enforcement 
or a Deputy Director of Enforcement to appoint officers of Enforcement below the rank of an Ass istant 
Director  of Enforcement.  
(3) Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Central Government may impose, an officer of 
Enforcement may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on him under this 
Act. 
37. Power of s earch, seizure, etc. —(1) The Director of Enforcement and other officers of 
Enforcement, not below the rank of an Assistant Director , shall take up for investigation the contraven tion 
referred to in section 13.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Cen tral Government may also, by 
notification, authorise any officer or class of officers in the Central Government, State Government or the 
Reserve Bank, not below the rank of an Under Secretary to the Government of India to investigate any 
contravention refe rred to in section 13.  
(3) The officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise the like powers which are conferred on 
income -tax authorities under the Income -tax Act, 19 61 (43 o f 1961)  and shall exercise such powers, 
subject to such limita tions lai d down under that Act.  
1[37A.  Special provisions relating to assets held outside India in contravention of                             
section 4. —(1) Upon receipt of any information or otherwise, if the Authorised Officer prescribed by the 
Central Government has reason to believe that any foreign exchange, foreign security, or any immovable 
property, situated outside India, is suspected to have been held in contravention of section 4, he may after 
recording the reasons in writing, by an order, seize  value equivalent, situated within India, of such foreign 
exchange, foreign security or immovable property:  
Provided that no such seizure shall be made in case where the aggregate value of such foreign 
exchange, foreign security or any immovable property, situated outside India, is less than the value as 
may be prescribed.  
(2) The order of seizure along with relevant material shall be placed before the Competent Authority, 
appointed by the Central Government, who shall be an officer not below the rank of Jo int Secretary to the 
Government of India by the Authorised Officer within a period of thirty days from the date of such 
seizure.  
(3) The Competent Authority shall dispose of the petition within a period of one hundred eighty days 
from the date of seizure b y either confirming or by setting aside such order, after giving an opportunity of 
being heard to the representatives of the Directorate of Enforcement and the aggrieved person.  
                                                           
1.  Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 142 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2015).  17 
 Explanation .—While computing the period of one hundred eighty days, the period  of stay granted by 
court shall be excluded and a further period of at least thirty days shall be granted from the date of 
communication of vacation of such stay order.  
(4) The order of the Competent Authority confirming seizure of equivalent asset shall c ontinue till the 
disposal of adjudication proceedings and thereafter, the Adjudicating Authority shall pass appropriate 
directions in the adjudication order with regard to further action as regards the seizure made under                
sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that if, at any stage of the proceedings under this Act, the aggrieved person discloses the 
fact of such foreign exchange, foreign security or immovable property and brings back the same into 
India, then the Competent Authority or the Adjudicating Au thority, as the case may be, on receipt of an 
application in this regard from the aggrieved person, and after affording an opportunity of being heard to 
the aggrieved person and representatives of the Directorate of Enforcement, shall pass an appropriate 
order as it deems fit, including setting aside of the seizure made under sub -section ( 1). 
(5) Any person aggrieved by any order passed by the Competent Authority may prefer an appeal to 
the Appellate Tribunal.  
(6) Nothing contained in section 15 shall apply  to this section.]  
38. Empowering other officers. —(1) The Central Government may, by order and subject to such 
conditions and limitations as it thinks fit to impose, authorise  any officer of customs or any central excise 
officer or any police officer or any other officer of the Central Government or a State Government to 
exercise such of the powers and discharge such of the duties of the Director of Enforcement or any other 
officer of Enforcement under this Act as may be stated in the order.  
(2) The officers referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall exercise the like powers which are conferred on 
the income -tax authorities under the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , subject to such conditions and 
limitations as the  Central Government may impose.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
39. Presumption as to documents in certain cases. —Where any document — 
(i) is produced or furnished by any person or has been seized from the custody or control of any 
person, in either case, under this Act or under any other law; or  
(ii) has been received from any place outside India (duly authenticated by such authority or 
perso n and in such manner as may be prescribed) in the course of investigation of any contravention 
under this Act alleged to have been committed by any person,  
and such document is tendered in any proceeding under this Act in evidence against him, or against him 
and any other person who is proceeded against jointly with him, the court or the Adjudicating Authority, 
as the case may be, shall — 
(a) presume, unless the contrary is proved, that the signature and every other part of such 
document which purports to b e in the handwriting of any particular person or which the court may 
reasonably assume to have been signed by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular pe rson, is in 
that person’ s handwriting, and in the case o f a document executed or attested, that it was executed or 
attested by the person by whom it purports to hav e been so executed or attested;  
(b) admit the document in evidence notwithstanding that it is not duly stamped, if such document 
is otherwise admissible in evidence;  
(c) in a case falling  under clause ( i), also presume, unless the contrary is proved, the truth of  the 
contents of such document.  
40. Suspe nsion of operation of this Act. —(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that 
circumstances have arisen rendering it necessary that any permission granted or restriction imposed by 
this Act should cease to be granted or imposed, or if it considers necessary or expedient so to do in publi c 18 
 interest, the Central Government may , by notification, suspend or relax to such extent either indefinitely 
or for such period as may be notified, the operation of all or any  of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Where the operation of any provision of this Act has under sub -section ( 1) been suspended or 
relaxed indefinitely, such suspension or relaxation may, at any time while this Act remains in force, be 
removed by the Cent ral Government by notification.  
(3) Every notification issued under this section sha ll be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be 
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the sessi on 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification shoul d not be issued, the 
notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; 
so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that notifica tion. 
41. Power of Central  Government to give direc tions. —For the purposes of this Act, the Central 
Government may, from time to time, give to the Reserve Bank such general or special directions as it 
thinks fit, and the Reserve Bank shall, in the discharge of its functions under this Act, c omply with any 
such directions.  
42. Contravention by companies. —(1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder  is a company, every person who, 
at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for 
the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
contravention and  shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to punishment 
if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercis ed due diligence  to 
prevent such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall  also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(i) “company ” means any  body corporate and includes a firm or ot her association of indivi duals;  
and  
(ii) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
43. Death or insolvency in certain cases. —Any right, obligation, liability, proceeding or appeal 
arising in relation to the provisions of section 13 shall not abate by reason  of death or insolvency of the 
person liable under that section and upon such death or insolvency such rights and obligations shall 
devolve on the legal representative of such person or the official receiver or the officia l assignee, as the 
case may be:  
Provided that a legal representative of the deceased shall be liable only to the extent of the inheri tance 
or estate of the deceased.  
44. Bar of legal proceedings. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or the  Reserve Bank or any officer of that Government or of the Reserve Bank or 
any other person exercising any power or discharging any functions or performing any duties under this 
Act, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or a ny rule, regulation, 
notification, direc tion or order made thereunder . 
45. Removal of difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act for 
the purp ose of removing the difficulty:  19 
 Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
46. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules m ay provide for, — 
(a) the imposition of reasonable restrictions on current account transactions under section 5;  
1[(aa) the instruments which are determined to be debt instruments under sub -section ( 7) of             
section 6;  
(ab) the permissible classes of capital account transactions in accordance with                                
sub-section ( 2A) of section 6, the limits of admissibility of foreign exchange, and the prohibition, 
restriction or regulation of such transactions; ] 
(b) the manner in which the contravention may be compounded under sub -section ( 1) of                 
section 15;  
(c) the manner of holding an inquiry by the Adjudicating Authority under sub -section ( 1) of   
section 16;  
(d) the form of appeal and fee for filing such appeal under sections 17 and 19;  
(e) the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the 
2[Special Director (Appeals)]  under section 23;  
(f) the salaries and allowances and oth er conditions of service of the officers and employees of the 
3[office of  the Special Director (Appeals)]  under sub -section (3) of section 27;  
(g) the additional matters in respect of which the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director 
(Appeals) may exercise the powers of a civil court under clause ( i) of sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
4[(gg) the aggregate value of foreign exchange referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 37A;]  
(h) the authority or person and the manner in which any document may be authenticated under 
clause ( ii) of section 39; and  
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
47. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Reserve Bank may, by notification, make regulations to 
carry out the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder . 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, suc h regulations may provide for, — 
5[(a) the permissible classes of capital account transactions, the limits of admissibility of foreign 
exchange for such transactions, and the prohibition, restriction or regulation of certain capital account 
transactions under section 6; ]  
(b) the manner and the f orm in which t he declaration is to be furnished under clause ( a) of        
sub-section ( 1) of section 7;  
 
                                                           
1. Clause s (aa) and ( ab) shall stand i nserted (date to be notified) by Act 20 of 2015, s. 143.  
        2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 165 , for “Chairperson and other Member of the Appellate Tribunal and the Special Director 
(Appeals) (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
        3. Subs. by s. 165 , ibid., for “A ppellate Tribunal and the office of the Special Director (Appeals)”   (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
4. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 143 (w.e.f. 9 -9-2015). 
5. Clause ( a) shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by s. 144, ibid., to read as under:  
“(a) the permissible classes of capital account transactions involving debt instruments determined under sub -section ( 7) 
of section 6, the limits of admissibility of foreign exchange for such transactions, and the prohibition, rest riction or 
regulation of such capital account transactions under section 6; ”. 20 
 (c) the period within which and the manner of repatriation of foreign exchange under section 8;  
(d) the limit up to which any person may possess foreign currency or foreign coins under            
clause ( a) of section 9;  
(e) the class of persons and the limit up to which foreign currency account may be held or 
operated under clause ( b) of section 9;  
(f) the  limit up to which foreign exchange acquired may be exempted under clause ( d) of              
section 9;  
(g) the limit up to which foreign exchange acquired may be retained under clause ( e) of section  9;  
1[(ga) export, import or holding of currency or currency notes;]  
(h) any other matter which is required to be, or may be , specified.  
2[(3) All regulations made by the Reserve Bank before the date on which the provisions of this section 
are notified under section 6 and section 47 of this Act on capital account transactions, the regulation 
making power in respect of which now vests with the Central Government, shall continue to be valid, 
until amended or rescinded by the Central Government.]  
48. Rules and regulatio ns to be laid before Parliament .—Every ru le and regulation made under this 
Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in 
session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation, or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, th e rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule  or regulation.  
49. Repeal and saving. —(1) The Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973  (46 of 1973)  is hereby 
repealed and the Appellate Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 52 of the said Act 
(hereinafter referred to as the repea led Act) shall  stand dissolved.  
(2) On the dissolution of the said Appellate Board, the person appointed as Chairman of the Appellate 
Board and every other person appointed as Member and holding office as such immediately before such 
date shall vacate their respective o ffices and no such Chairman or other person shall be entitled to claim 
any compensation for the premature termination of the term of his office  or of any contract of service.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law f or the time being in for ce, no court shall take 
cognizance of an offence under the repealed Act and no adjudicating officer shall take notice of any 
contravention under section 51 of the repealed Act after the expiry of a period of two years from the date 
of the commencement of t his Act.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) all offences committed under the repealed Act shall 
continue to be governed by the provisions of the repealed Act as if that Act had not been repealed.  
(5) Notwithstanding such repeal, — 
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done or taken including any rule, 
notification, inspection, order or notice made or issued or any appointment, confirmation or 
declaration made or any license, permission, authoriz ation  or exemp tion granted or any document or 
instrument executed or any direction given under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so far as it is not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under the 
corresponding provisions of this Act;  
(b) any appeal preferred to the Appellate Board under sub -section ( 2) of section  52 of the 
repealed Act but not disposed of  before the commencement of this Act shall stand transferred to and 
shall disposed of by the Appellate Tribunal constitute d under this Act;  
                                                           
1. Clause ( ga) shall stand inserted (date to be notified) by Act 20 of 2015, s. 144 . 
2. Sub -section ( 3) shall stand inserted (date to be notified) by s. 144. ibid. 21 
 (c) every appeal fro m any decision or order of the A ppellate Board under sub -section ( 3) or        
sub-section ( 4) of section 52 of the repealed Act shall, if  not filed before the commencement of this 
Act, be filled before the High Court within a period of sixty days of such commencement:  
Provided that the High Court may entertain such appeal after the expiry of the said period of sixty 
days if it is satisfied  that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal with in 
the said period.  
(6) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), the mention of particular matters in                            
sub-section s (2), (4) and ( 5) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of 
the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897)  with regard to the effect of repeal.  
--------------------------The Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection) Act, 1999--------------------------
1 
 THE GEOGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS OF GOODS (REGISTRATION AND PROTECTION) 
ACT, 1999  
______________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short ti tle, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions and interpretation.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION  
3. Registrar of Geographical Indications.  
4. Power of Registrar to withdraw or transfer cases, etc.  
5. Geographical Indications Registry and offices thereof.  
6. Register of Geographical Indications.  
7. Part A and Part B of the register.  
8. Registration to be in respect of particular goods and area.  
9. Prohibition of registration of certain geographical indications.  
10. Registration of homonymous geographical indications.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION  
11. Application for registration.  
12. Withdrawal of acceptance.  
13. Advertisement of application.  
14. Opposition to registration.  
15. Correction and amendment.  
16. Registration.  
17. Application for registration as authorised user.  
18. Duration, renewal, removal and restoration of registration.  
19. Effect of  removal from register for failure to pay fee for renewal.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION  
20. No action for infringement of unregistered  geographical  indication.  
21. Rights conferred by registration.  
22. Infringement or registered geographical indications.  
23. Registration to be prima facie  evidence of validity.  
24. Prohibition of assignment or transmission, etc.  
 
  2 
 CHAPTER V  
SPECIAL, PROVISIONS RELATING TO TRADE MARK AND PRIOR USERS  
SECTIONS  
25. Prohibition of registra tion of geographical indication  as trade mark.  
26. Protection to certain trade marks.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER  
27. Power to cancel  or vary registration and to rectify the register.  
28. Correction of register.  
29. Alteration of registered geographical indications.  
30. Adapt ation of entries in register to amend or substitute classification of goods.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE  BOARD  
31. Appeals to the Appellate Board.  
32. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc.  
33. Procedure of the Appellate Board.  
34. Procedure for application for rectification, etc.,  before Appellate Board.  
35. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings.  
36. Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Appellate Board.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
37. Meaning of applying geographical indications.  
38. Falsifying and falsely applying geographical indications.  
39. Penalty for applying false geographical  indications . 
40. Penalty for selling goods to which false geographical indication is applied.  
41. Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction.  
42. Penalty for falsely representing a geographical  indication as registered.  
43. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connected with the G eographical 
Indications Registry . 
44. Penalty for falsification of entries in the register.  
45. No offence in certain cases.  
46. Forfeiture of goods.  
47. Exemption of c ertain persons employed in ordinary course of business.  
48. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused.  
49. Offences by companies.  
50. Cognizance of certain offences and the powers of police officer for search and seizure.  
51. Costs of defence of  prosecution.  
52. Limitation of prosecution.  
53. Information as to commission of offence.  
54. Punishment for abetement in India of acts done out of India.  
 
  3 
 CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
55. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
56. Certain persons to be public servants . 
57. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the geographical indication is questioned 
etc. 
58. Application for rectification of register to be made to Appellate Board in certain cases.  
59. Implied warranty on sale of indicated goods.  
60. Powers  of Registrar.  
61. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar.  
62. Evidence before Registrar.  
63. Death of party to a proceeding.  
64. Extension of time.  
65. Abandonment.  
66. Suit for infringement, etc., to be instituted before district court.  
67. Relief in suit for infringement or for passing off.  
68. Authorised user to be implead ed in certain proceeding s. 
69. Evidence of entries in register, etc., and things done by the Registrar.  
70. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register, etc.  
71. Power to require goods to show indicati on of origin.  
72. Certificate of validity.  
73. Groundless threats of legal proceedings.  
74. Address for service.  
75. Trade usages, etc., to be taken into consideration.  
76. Agents.  
77. Indexes.  
78. Documents open to public inspection.  
79. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament.  
80. Fees and surcharge.  
81. Savings in respect of certain matters in Chapter VIII.  
82. Declaration as to title of geographical indication not registrable under the Registration Act, 1908.  
83. Government to be bound.  
84. Special provisions relating to applications for registration from citizens of convention countries.  
85. Provision as to reciprocity.  
86. Powers of Central Government to remove difficulties.  
87. Power to make rules.  
 
 
 
 
 
  4 
 THE GE OGRAPHICAL INDICATIONS OF GOODS  
(REGISTRATION AND PROTECTION)  
ACT, 1999  
ACT NO. 48 OF 1999  
[30th Decembe r, 1999.]  
An Act to provide for the registration and better protection of geographical indications relating to 
goods.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAP TER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Geographical 
Indications of Goods (Registra tion and Protection) Act, 1999.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government ma y, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the comin g into for ce of that provision.  
2. Definitions and interpretation .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Appellate Board ” means the Appellate Board established under section 8 3 of the Trade 
Marks Act, 1999  (47 of 1999) ; 
(b) “authorised user ” means the authorised user of a geographical indicati on registered under 
section 17;  
(c) “deceptively similar ” A geographical indication shall be deemed to be deceptively similar to 
another geographical indication if it so nearly resembles that other geogr aphical indication as to be 
likely  to deceive or cause confusion;  
(d) “district court ” has the meaning assigned to it in the Code of Civil Procedure,                           
1908 (5 of 1908);  
(e) “geographical indication ”, in relation to goods, means an indication which identifies such 
goods as agricultural goods, natural goods or manufactured goods as originating, or manufactured in 
the territory of a country, or a region or locality in that territory, where a given quality, reputation or 
other character istic of such goods is essentially attributable to its geographical origin and in case 
where such goods are manufactured goods one of the activities of either the production or of 
processing or preparation of the goods concerned takes place in such territo ry, region o r locality, as 
the case may be.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, any name which is not the name of a country, 
region or locality of that country shall also be considered as the geographical indication if it relates to 
a specific geographical area and is used upon or in rel ation to particular goods originating from that 
country, region o r locality, as the case may be;  
(f) “goods ” means any agricultural, natural or manufactured goods or any goods of handicraft or 
of industry and inc ludes food stuff;  
(g) “indication ” includes any name, geographical or figurative representation or any combination 
of them conveying or suggesting the geographical origin of goods to  which it applies;  
(h) “name ” inclu des any abbreviation of a name;  
                                                 
1. 15th September, 2003, vide notification No.  S.O. 1051(E), dated 15th September, 2003, s ee Gazette of India , Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3 (ii). 5 
 (i) “package ” includes any case, box, container, covering, folder, receptacle, vessel, casket, bottle, 
wrapper, label, band, ticket, reel, frame, capsu le, cap, lid, stopper and cork;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “producer ”, in relation to goods, means any person who, — 
(i) if such goods are agricultural goods, produces the goods and includes the person who 
processes or packages such goods;  
(ii) if such goods are nat ural goods, exploits the goods;  
(iii) if such goods are handicraft or industrial goods, makes or manufactures the goods,  
and includes any person who trades or deals in such production, exploitation, making or manufacturing, as 
the case may be , of the goods;  
(l) “register ” means the Register  of Geographical Indica tions referred to in section 6;  
(m) “registered ” (with its grammatical variations) m eans registered under this Act;  
(n) “registered proprietor ”, in relation to a geographical indication, means any association of 
persons or of produce rs or any organisation for the time being entered in the register as proprietor of 
the geographical indication;  
(o) “Registrar ” means the Registrar of Geographical Indica tions referred to in section 3;  
(p) “tribunal ” means the Registrar or, as the case may  be, the Appellate Board before which the 
proceeding concerned is pending.  
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Trade Marks Act, 1999 
(47 of 1999) shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act.  
(3) In this Act, unless the context ot herwise requires, any reference — 
(a) to the use of a geographical indication shall be construed as a reference to the use of a printed 
or other visual representation of the geographical indication;  
(b) to the use of a g eographical indication in relation to goods shall be construed as a reference to 
the use of the geographical indication upon, or in any physical or in any other rela tion whatsoever, to 
such goods;  
(c) to a registered geographical indication shall be constr ued as including a reference to a 
geographical indication registered in the register;  
(d) to the Registrar shall be construed as including a reference to any officer when discharging the 
functions of the Registrar in pursuance of sub -section ( 2) of sectio n 3; 
(e) to the Geographical Indications Registry shall be construed as including a reference to any 
office of the Geographical Indications Registry.  
CHAPTER II  
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION  
3. Registrar of Geographical Indications .—(1) The  Controller -General of Patents, Designs and 
Trade Marks appointed under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, shall be the 
Registr ar of Geographical Indications.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such officers with such designations as it thinks fit for the 
purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and direction of the Registrar, such functions of the 
Registrar under this Act, as he may from time to time  authorise them to discharge.  
4. Power of Registrar to withdraw or tran sfer cases, etc. —Without prejudice to the generality of 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 3, the Registrar may, by order in writing and for reason s  to be 
recorded therein, withdraw any matter pending before an officer appointed under the said sub -section ( 2) 
and deal with such matter himself eith er de novo  or from the stage it was so withdrawn or transfer the 6 
 same to another officer so appointed who may, subject to special d irections  in the order of transfer, 
proceed with the matter either de novo  or from the stage it was so transferred.  
5. Geographical Indications Registry and office s ther eof.—(1) For the purpose of this Act, ther e 
shall be established a Registry which shall  be known as the Geographical  Indications  Registry.  
(2) The head office of the Geographical Indications Registry shall be at such place as the Central 
Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, specify, and for the purpose of facilitating the  
registrations of geographical indications, there may be established at such places as the Central 
Governm ent may think fit branch office s of the Geographical Indications Registry . 
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette , define the territorial limits 
within which an office of the Geographical Indications Registry may exercise its functions.  
(4) There shall be a seal of the Geographical Indications Registry.  
6. Register of Geographical Indications .—For the purposes of this A ct, a record called the Register  
of geographical indications shall be kept at the head office of the Geographical Indications Registry , 
wherein shall be entered all registered geographical indications with the names, addresses and 
descriptions of the propr ietors, the names , addresses and descriptions  of authorised users and such other 
matters relating to registered geographical indications as may be prescribed and such registers may be 
maintained wholly or partly on computer.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything c ontained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Registrar to keep 
the records wholly or partly in computer floppies or diskettes or in any other electronic form, subject to 
such s afeguards as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where s uch register  is maintained  wholly or partly in computer floppies or diskettes or in any 
other electronic form under sub -section ( 2), any reference in this Act to any entry in the register shall be 
construed as the reference to the entry as maintained on computer floppies or diskett es or in any other 
electronic form, as the case may be.  
(4) No notice of any trust, express or implied or constructive, shall be entered in the register and no 
such notice shall be receivable by the Registrar.  
(5) Subject to the superintendence and directi on of the Central Government, the register shall be kept 
under the control and management of the Registrar.  
(6) There shall be kept at each branch office of the Geographical Indications Registry a copy of the 
register and such other documents mentioned in section 78 as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, direct.  
7. Part A and Part B of the register .—(1) The register referred to in section 6 shall be divided 
into two Parts called respectively Part A and Part B.  
(2) The particulars relating  to the registration of the geo graphical indications shall be incorporated and 
form P art A of the register in the prescribed manner.  
(3) The particulars relating to the registration of the authorised users shall be incorporated and form  
part of Part B of the register in the prescribed manner.  
8. Registration to be in respec t of particular goods and area. —(1) A geographical indication may 
be registered in respect of any or all of the goods, comprised in such class of goods as may be class ified 
by the Registrar and in respect of a defi nite territory of a country, or  a region or locality in that territory, 
as the case may be.  
(2) The Registrar shall classify the goods under sub -section ( 1), as far as may be, in accordance with 
the International classification of goods for the purposes of registrati on of geographical indications.  
(3) The Registrar may publish in the prescribed manner an alphabetical index of classification of 
goods referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods fall or the definite area as referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) in respect of which the geographical indication is to be registered or where any goods 7 
 are not specified in the alphabetical index of goods published  under sub -section ( 3) shall be determined by 
the Registrar whose decision in the matter shall be final.  
9. Prohibition of registration of certain geographical indications .—A geographical indication — 
(a) the use of which would be likely to  deceive or caus e confusion; or  
(b) the use of which would be contrary to any law for the time being in force; or  
(c) which comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter; or  
(d) which comprises or contains any matter likely to hurt the religious susceptibilities of  any class 
or section of the citizens of India; or  
(e) which would otherwise be disentitled to protection in a court; or  
(f) which are determined to be generic names or indications of goods and are, therefore, not or 
ceased to be protected in their count ry of origin, or which have fallen into  disuse in that country; or  
(g) which, although literally true as to the territory, region or locality in which the goods 
originate, but falsely represent to the persons that the goods originate in another territory, region or 
locality, as the case may be,  
shall not be registere d as a  geographical indication.  
Explanation  1.—For the purposes of this section, “generic names or indications” , in relation to goods, 
means the name of a goods which, although relates to the place or the region where the goods was 
originally produced or manufac tured, has lost its original meaning and has become the common name of 
such goods and serves as a designation for or indication of the kind, nature, type or other property or 
characteristic of the goods.  
Explanation 2. —In determining whether the name has b ecome generic, account shall be taken of all 
factors including the existing situation in the region or place in which the name originates and the area of 
consumption of the goods.  
10. Registration of homonymous geographical indications .—Subject to the pro visions of section 7, 
a homonymous geographical indication may be registered under this Act, if the Registrar is satisfied, after 
considering the practical conditions under which the homonymous indication in question shall be 
differentiated from other homo nymous indications and the need to ensure equitable treatment of the 
producers of the goods concerned, that the consumers of such goods  shall not be confused or misled in 
consequence of such  registration.  
CHAPTER III  
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRA TION  
11. Application for registration .—(1) Any association of persons or producers or any organisation 
or authority established by or under any law for the time being in force representing the interest of the 
producers of the concerned goods, who are desirous of registering a geographical indication in relation to 
such goods shall apply in writing to the Registrar in such form and in such manner and accompanied by 
such fees as may be prescribed for the registration of the ge ographical indication.  
(2) The application under sub -section ( 1) shall contain — 
(a) a statement as to how the geographical indication serves to designate the goods as originating 
from the concerned territory of the country or region or locality in the country, as the case may be, in 
respect of specific quality, reputation or other chara cteristics of which are due exclusively or 
essentially to the geographical environment, with its inherent natural and human factors, and the 
production, processing or preparation of which takes place in such territory, region or locality, as the 
case may b e; 
(b) the class of goods to which the geogr aphical indication shall apply;  
(c) the geographical map of the territory of the country or region or locality in the country in 
which the goods orgi nate or are being manufactured;  8 
 (d) the particulars regarding t he appearance of the geographical indication as to whether it is 
comprised of the words or figurative elements or both;  
(e) a statement containing such particulars of the producers of the concerned goods, if any, 
proposed to be initially registered with th e registration of the geographical indication as may be 
prescribed; and  
(f) such other pa rticulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) A single application may be made for registration of a geographical indication for different classes 
of goods and fee payable ther efor shall be in respe ct of each such class of goods.  
(4) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in the office of the Geographical Indications 
Registry within whose territorial limits, the territory of the country or the region or locality in the country 
to which the geographical  indication relates is situated:  
Provided that where such territory, region or locality, as the case may be, is not situated in India, the 
application shall be filed in the office of the Geographical Indications Regi stry within whose territorial 
limits the place mentioned in the address for services in India as disclosed in the application, is situated.  
(5) Every applications under sub -section ( 1) shall be examined by the Registrar in su ch manner as 
may be prescribed . 
(6) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse the application or may accept it 
absolutely or subject to such amendments, modification, conditions or limitations, if any, as he thinks fit.  
(7) In the case of refusal or conditional ac ceptance of application, the Registrar shall record in writing 
the grounds for such refusal or conditional acceptance and the materials used by him in arriving at his 
decision.  
12. Withdrawal of acceptance. —Where, after the acceptance of an application for registration of a 
geographical indication but before its registratio n, the Registrar is satisfied, — 
(a) that the application  has been accepted in error, or  
(b) that in the circumstances of the case the geographical indication should not be registered o r 
should be registered subject to conditions or limitations or to conditions additional to or different from 
the conditions or limitations subject to which the application has been accepted,  
the Registrar may, after hearing the applicant if he so desires,  withdraw the acceptance and proceed as if 
the app lication had not been accepted.  
13. Advertisement of application. —(1) When an application for registration of a geographical 
indication has been accepted, whether absolutely or subject to conditions or limi tations, the Registrar 
shall, as soon as may be after acceptance, cause the application as accepted together with the conditions or 
limitations, if any, subject to which it has been accepted, to be advertised in su ch manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) Where after a dvertisement of an application — 
(a) an error in the app lication has been corrected; or  
(b) the application has been permitted to be amended under section 15,  
the Registrar may, in his discretion cause the application to be advertised again or inste ad of causing the 
application to be advertised again, notify in the prescribed manner, the corre ction made in the application.  
14. Opposition to registration .—(1) Any person may, within three months from the date of 
advertisement or readvertisement  of an application for registration or within such further period, not 
exceeding one month, in the aggregate, as the Registrar, on application made to him in such manner and 
on payment of such fee as may be prescribed allows, give notice in writing in the prescribed manner to the 
Registrar, of opposition to the registration.  
(2) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice on the applicant for registration and, within two 
months from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the notice of opposition, t he applicant shall sent 9 
 to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a counter -statement of the grounds on which he relies for his 
application, and if he does not do so, he shall be deemed to have abandoned his application.  
(3) If the applicant sends such cou nter-statement, the Registrar shall serve a copy thereof on the 
person giving notice of opposition.  
(4) Any evidence upon which the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be submitted in such 
manner and within the such time as may be prescribed to the R egistrar, and the Registrar shall give an 
opportunity to them to be heard, if they so desire.  
(5) The Registrar shall, after hearing the parties, if so required, and considering the evidence, decide 
whether and subject to what conditions or limitations, if  any, the registration is to be permitted, and may 
take into account a ground of objection wh ether reli ed upon by the opponent or not.  
(6) Where a person giving notice of opposition or an applicant sending a counter -statement after 
receipt of a copy of suc h notice neither resides nor carries on business in India, the Registrar may require 
him to give security for the costs of proceeding before him, and in default of such secu rity being duly 
given, may treat  the opposition or application, as  the case may be,  as abandoned.  
(7) The Registrar may, on request, permit correction of any error in, or any amendment of, a notice of 
opposition or a counter -statement on such terms as he thinks just.  
15. Correction and amendment. —The Registrar may, on such terms, as he thinks just, at any time, 
whether before or after acceptance of an application for registration under section 11, permit the 
correction of any error or in connection with the application or permit an amendment of the application:  
Provided that if an amendm ent is made to a single application referred to in sub -section ( 3) of     
section 11 involving division of such application into two or more applications, the date of making of the 
initial application shall be deemed to be the date of making of the d ivided  applications so divided.  
16. Registration. —(1) Subject to the provisions of section 12, when an application for registration of 
a geographical indication has been accepted and either — 
(a) the application has not been opposed and the time for notic e of opposition has expired; or  
(b) the application has been opposed and the opposition has been decided in favour of the 
applicant,  
the Registrar shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, register the said geographical 
indication and the authori sed users, if any, mentioned in the application and the geographical indication 
and the authorised users when registered shall be registered as of the date of the making of the said 
application and that date shall, subject to the provisions of section 84, be deemed to be the date of 
registration.  
(2) On the registration of a geographical indication, the Registrar shall issue each to the applicant and 
the authorised users, if registered with the geographical indication, a certificate in such form as may be 
prescribed of the registration thereof, sealed with the seal of the Geo graphical Indications Registry.  
(3) Where registration of a geographical indication is not co mpleted within twelve months fro m the 
date of the application by reason of default on the pa rt of the applicant, the Registrar may, after giving 
notice to the applicant in the prescribed manner , treat the application as abandoned unless it is completed 
within the time specified in that behalf in the notice.  
(4) The Registrar may amend the registe r or a certificate of registration for the purpose of correcting a 
clerical error or an obvious mistake.  
17. Application for registration as authorised  user.—(1) Any person claiming to be the producer 
of the goods in respect of which a geographical indica tion has been registered under section 16 may apply 
in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner for registering him as an authorised user o f such 
geographical indication.  
(2) The application under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied by a statemen t and such documents of 
facts as may be prescribed and required by the Registrar to determine as to whether such person is the 
producer of the goods referred to in that sub -section and such fee as may be prescribed.  10 
 (3) The provisio ns of this Chapter rela ting to — 
(a) the filing and examination of the application;  
(b) the refusal and acceptance of registration;  
(c) withdrawa l of acceptance of application;  
(d) advertisement of application;  
(e) opposition to registration;  
(f) correction or error in an am endment of the application; and  
(g) registration,  
shall apply in respect of the application and registration of authorised users referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
in the same manner as they apply for the application for registration and registration of the g eographical 
indication.  
18. Duration, renewal, removal and restoration of registration .—(1) The registration of a 
geographical indication shall be for a period of ten years, but may be renewed from time to time in 
accordance with the provisions of this se ction.  
(2) The registration of an authorised user shall be for a period of ten years or for the period till the date 
on which the registration of the geographical indication in respect of which the au thorised user is 
registered expires, whichever is earli er. 
(3) The Registrar shall, on application made in the prescribed manner, by the registered proprietor or 
by the authorised user and within the prescribed period and subject to the payment of the prescribed fee, 
renew the registration of the geographical indication or authorised user, as the case may be, for a period of 
ten years from the date of expiration of the original registration or of the last renewal of registration, as 
the case may be (which date is in this section referred to as the expir ation of  the last registration).  
(4) At the prescribed time before the expiration of the last registration of a geographical indication or 
the authorised user, as the case may be, the Registrar shall send notice in the prescribed manner to the 
registered p roprietor or the authorised user , as the case may be, of the date of expiration and the 
conditions as to payment of fees and otherwise upon which a renewal of registration may be obtained, 
and, if at the expiration of time prescribed in that behalf those c onditions have not been duly complied 
with, the Registrar may remove the geographical indication or the authorised user, as the case may be, 
from the register:  
Provided that the Registrar shall not remove the geographical indication or the authorised user,  as the 
case may be, from the register, if an application is made in the prescribed form and the prescribed fee and 
surcharge i s paid within six months from th e expiration of the last registration of the geographical 
indication or the authorised user, as t he case may be, and shall renew the registration of geographical 
indication or the authorised user, as the case may be, for a period of ten years under sub -section ( 3). 
(5) Where a geographical indication or authorised user, as the case may be, has been removed from the 
register for non -payment of the prescribed fee, the Registrar shall, after six months and within one year 
from the expiration of the last registration o f the geographical indication or the authorised user, as the case 
may be, on receipt of  an application in the prescribed form and on payment of the prescribed fee, if 
satisfied that it is just so to do, restore the geographical indication or the authorised user , as the case may 
be, to the register and renew registration of the geographical i ndication or authorised user, as the case may 
be, either generally or subject to such condition or limitation as he thinks fit to impose, for a period of ten 
years from the expiration of the last registration.  
19. Effect of removal from register for failur e to pay fee for renewal .—Where a geographical 
indication has been removed from the register for failure to pay the fee for renewal, it shall nevertheless, 
for the purpose of any application for the registration of another geographical indication during   one year,   11 
 next after the date of removal, be deemed to be a geographical indication already on the register, unless 
the tribunal is satisfied either — 
(a) that there has been no bona fide  trade use of the geographical indication which has been 
removed within the two years immediately preceding its removal; or  
(b) that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise from the use of the geographical 
indication which is the subject of the  application for registration by reason of any previous use of the 
geographical indi cation which has been removed.  
CHAPTER IV  
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION  
20. No action for infringement of unregistered geographical indication .—(1) No person shall be 
entitled to  institute any proceeding to prevent, or to recover damages for, the infringement of an 
unregi stered geographical indication.  
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect rights of action against any person for passing off 
goods as the goods  of anothe r person or the remedies  in respect thereof.  
21. Rights conferred by registration .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the 
registration of a geographical ind ication shall, if valid, give, — 
(a) to the registered proprietor of the geographical i ndication and the authorised user or users 
thereof the right to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the geographical indication in t he 
manner provided by this Act;  
(b) to the authorised user thereof the exclusive right to the use of the geographica l indication in 
relation to the goods in respect of which the geograp hical indication is registered.  
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a geographical indication given under clause ( b) of                            
sub-section ( 1) shall be subject to any condition and limitation to which the registr ation is subject.  
(3) Where two or more persons are authorised users of geographical indications, which are identical 
with or nearly resemble each other, the exclusive right to the use of any of those geogra phical indications 
shall not (except so far as their respective rights are subject to any conditions or limitations entered on the 
register) be deemed to have been acquired by anyone of those persons as against any other of those 
persons merely by registra tion of the geographical indications, but each of those persons has otherwise the 
same rights as against other persons as he would have if he  were the sole authorised user.  
22. Infringement or regis tered geographical indications. —(1) A registered geographi cal indication 
is infringed by a person who, not bei ng an authorised user thereof, — 
(a) uses such geographical indication by any means in the designations or presentation of goods 
that indicates or suggests that such goods originate in a geographical area other than the true place of 
origin of such goods in a manner which misleads the persons as to the geographical origin of such  
goods; or  
(b) uses any geographical indication in such manner which constitutes an act of unfair 
competition including passing of f in respect of registered geographical indicati on. 
Explanation 1 .—For the purposes of this clause, “act of unfair competi tion”  means any act of 
competition contrary to honest practices in i ndustrial or commercial matters.   
Explanation 2 .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the following acts shall be 
deemed to be acts of unfair competition, namely: — 
(i) all acts of such a nature as to create confusion by any means whatsoever with the 
establishment, the goods or the industrial or commerci al activities, of a competitor;  
(ii) false allegations in the course of trade of such a nature as to discredit the establishment, 
the goods or the industrial or commerci al activities, of a competitor;  
(iii) geographical indications, t he use of which in the course of trade is liable to mislead the 
persons as to the nature, the manufacturing process, the characteristics, the suitability for their 
purpose,  or the quantity, of the goods;  12 
 (c) uses another geographical indication to the good s which, although literally true as to the 
territory, region or locality in which the goods originate, falsely represents to the persons that the 
goods originate in the territory, region or locality in respect of which such registered g eographical 
indicati on relates.  
(2) The Central Government may, if it thinks necessary so to do for providing additional protection to 
certain goods or classes of goods under sub -section ( 3), by notification in the Official Gazette, specify 
such goods or class or classes of g oods, for the purposes of such protection.  
(3) Any person who is not an authorised user of a geographical indication registered under this Act in 
respect of the goods or any class or classes of goods notified under sub -section ( 2), uses any other 
geographi cal indication to such goods or class or classes of goods not originating in the place indicated by 
such other geographical indication or uses such other geographical indication to such goods or class or 
classes of goods even indicating the true origin of such goods  or uses such other geographic al indication 
to such goods or class or classes of goods in translation of the true place of origin or accompanied by 
expression such as “kind” , “style” , “imitation”  or the like expression, shall infringe such regi stered 
geographical indication.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where the goods in respect of which a 
geographical indication has been registered are lawfully acquired by a person other than the authorised 
user of such geographical indication, further dealings i n those goods by such person including processing 
or packaging, shall not constitute an infringement of such geographical indication, except where the 
condition of goods is impaired after they have been put in the market.  
23. Registration to be prima facie  evidence of validity. —(1) In all legal proceedings relating to a 
geographical indication, the certificate of registration granted in this regard by the Registrar under this 
Act, being a copy of the entry in the register unde r the seal of the Geographical Indications Registry, shall 
be prima facie  evidence of the validity thereof and be admissible in all courts and before the Appellate 
Board without further proof  or production of the original.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall  be deemed to be affect the right of action in respect of an unregistered 
geographical indication.  
24. Prohibition of a ssignment or transmission, etc. —Notwithstanding  anything contained in any 
law for the time being in force, any right to a registered geo graphical indication shall not be the subject 
matter of assignment, transmission, licensing, pledge , mortga ge or any such other agreement:  
Provided that on the death of an authorised user his right in a registered geographical indication shall 
devolve on his successor in title under the law for the time being in force.  
CHAPTER V  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO TRADE MARKS AND PRIOR USERS  
25. Prohibition of registration of geographical indication as trade mark .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Trade Marks Act, 1999  (47 of 1999) , the Registrar of Trade Marks referred to in 
section 3 of that Act, shall, suo motu  or at the request of an i ntereste d party, refuse or invalidate the 
registration of a trade mark which — 
(a) contains or consists of a geographical indication with respect to the goods or class or classes 
of goods not originating in the territory of a country, or a region or localit y in that territory which such 
geographical indication indicates, if use of such geographical indications in the trade mark for such 
goods, is of such a nature as to confuse or mislead the persons as to the true place of origin of such 
good s or class or cl asses of goods;  
(b) contains or consists of a geographical indication identifying goods or class or classes of goods 
notified under sub -section ( 2) of section 22.  
26. Protection to certain trade  marks .—(1) Where  a trade mark contains or consists of a 
geographical indication and has been applied for or registered in good faith under the law relating to trade   13 
 marks for the time being in force, or where rights to such trade mark have been acquired th rough use in 
good faith either — 
(a) before the commencement of this Act; or  
(b) before the date of filing the application for registration of such geographical indication under 
this Act,  
nothing contained in this Act shall prejudice the registrability or the validity of the registration of such 
trade mark under the law relating to the trade marks for the time being in force, or the right to use such 
trade mark, on the ground that such trade mark is identical with or similar to such geographical indication.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply in respect of a geographical indication with respect to 
goods or class or classes of goods for which such geographical indication is identical with the term 
customary in common language as the common name of such goods in any part of India on or befor e the 
1st day of January, 1995.  
(3) Nothing contained in this Act shall in any way prejudice the right of any person to use, in the 
course of trade, that person ’s name or the name of that person ’s predecessor in business, excep t where 
such name is used in such a manner as to  confuse or mislead the people.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999) or in this Act, no 
action in connection with the use or registration of a trade mark shall be t aken after the expiry of five 
years from the date on which such use or registration infringes any geographical indication registered 
under this Act has become known to the registered proprietor or authorised user registered in respect of 
such geographical indication under this Act or after the date of registration of the trade mark under the 
said Trade Marks Act subject to the condition that the trade mark has been published under the provisions 
of the said Trade Marks Act, 1999 or the rules made thereunder  by that date, if such date is earlier than the 
date on which such infringement became known to such proprietor or authorised user and such 
geographical indication is not used or registered in bad faith.  
CHAPTER VI  
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGI STER  
27. Power to cancel or vary registration and to rectify the register .—(1) On application made in 
the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar by any person aggrieved, the tribunal 
may make such order as it may think fit for cancelling or varying the registration of a geographical 
indication or authorised user on the ground of any contravention, or failure to observe the condition 
entered on th e register in relation thereto.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any entry, or by any entry 
made in the register without sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly remaining on the register, or by any 
error or defect in any entry in the register, may apply in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Bo ard or 
to the Registrar, and the tribunal may make such order for making, expunging or varying  the entry as it 
may think fit.  
(3) The tribunal may in any proceeding under this section decide any question that may be necessary 
or expedient to decide in conn ection with the  rectification of the register.  
(4) The tribunal, of its own motion, may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner to the parties 
concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, make any order referred to in sub -section 
(1) or s ub-section ( 2). 
(5) Any order of the Appellate Board rectifying the register shall direct that notice of the rectification 
shall be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who shall upon receipt of such notice rectify 
the register accordin gly.  
28. Correction of register. —The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner by 
the registered prop rietor or the authorised user, — 
(a) correct any error in the name, address or description of the registered proprietor or the 
authorised  user, as the case may be, of a geographical indication, or any other entry relating to the 
geographi cal indication on the register;  14 
 (b) enter any change in the name, address or description of the association of persons or of 
producers or any ogranisation or authority, as the case may be, who is registered as proprietor of a 
geographi cal indication on the register;  
(c) cancel the entry of a geographi cal indication on the register;  
(d) strike out any goods or class or classes of goods from those in respect of which a geographical 
indication is registered from the register,  
and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of registration, and for that 
purpose, may require the certificate of registration to be produced to him.  
29. Alteration of regis tered geographical indications. —(1) The registered proprietor of a 
geographical indication may apply in the prescribed manner to the Registrar for leave to add to or  alter the 
geographical indication in any manner not substantially affecting the identity thereof, and the Registrar 
may refuse leave or may grant it on such terms and subject to such l imitations as he may think fit.  
(2) The Registrar may cause an applicat ion under this section to be advertised in the prescribed 
manner in any case where it appears to him that it is expedient so to do, and where he does so, if within 
the prescribed time from the date of the advertisement any person gives notice to the Regist rar in the 
prescribed manner of the opposition to the application, the Registrar shall, after hearing the parties if so 
required, decide the matter.  
(3) Where leave is granted under this section, the geographical indication as altered shall be 
advertised i n the prescribed manner, unless the application has already been advertised under               
sub-section ( 2).  
30. Adaptation of entries in register to amend or substitute classification of goods .—(1) The 
Registrar shall not make any amendment of the re gister which would have the effect of adding any goods 
or classes of goods to those in respect of which a geographical indication is registered (whether in one or 
more classes) immediately before the amendment is to be made or antedating the registration o f a 
geographical indi cation in respect of any goods:  
Provided that this sub -section, shall not apply when the Registrar is satisfied that compliance 
therewith would involve complexity and that the addition or antedating, as the case may be, would not 
affect any substantial quantity of goods and would not sub stantially prejudice the rights of any person.  
(2) A proposal so to amend the register shall be brought to the notice of the registered proprietor and 
every authorised user of the geographical indication affected and advertised in the prescribed manner, an d 
may be opposed before the Registrar by any person aggrieved on the ground that the proposed amendment 
contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1).  
CHAPTER VII  
APPEALS TO THE APPELLATE  BOARD  
31. Appeals to the Appellate Board. —(1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the 
Registrar under this Act, or the rules made thereunder, may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Board within 
three months from the date on which the order or decision sought to be appealed against is communicated 
to suc h person  preferring the appeal.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period specified under                     
sub-section ( 1):  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period specified therefore, if t he 
appellant satisfies the Appellate Board that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appe al within the 
specified period.  
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Board shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the 
prescribed manner and shall  be accompanied by a copy of the order or decision appealed against and such 
fees as may be prescribed.  15 
 32. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc .—No court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, 
exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in re lation to the matters referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 31.  
33. Procedure of the Appellate Board .—The provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3), (4), (5), (6) of 
section 84, section 87, section 92, section 95 and section 96 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999  (47 of 1999) , 
shall apply to the Appellate Board in the discharge of its functio ns under this Act as they apply to it in the 
discharge of its functions u nder the Trade Marks Act, 1999.  
34. Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellat e Board .—(1) An application 
for rectification of the register made to the Appellate Board under section 27 shall be in such form as may 
be prescribed.  
(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating to a registered 
geographical indication under this Act shall be communicated to the Registrar by the Appellate Board and 
the Registrar shall give effect to the order of the Board and shall, when so directed, amend the entries in, 
or rectify, the register  in accordance wit h such order.  
35. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings .—(1) The Registrar shall have t he right to appear 
and be heard — 
 (a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the relief sought includes 
alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to the practice of the 
Geographical Indications Registry is raised;  
(b) in any appeal to  the Board from an order of the Registrar on an application for registration of a 
geographical  indication or authorised user — 
(i) which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the Registrar or is accepted 
by him subject to any amendments, modifications, conditions or limitations, or  
(ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers that his appearance is necessary in 
the public interest,  
and the Registrar shall appear in any case  if so directed by the Board.  
(2) Unless the Appellate  Board otherwise directs, the Registrar may, in lieu of appearing, submit a 
statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he thinks proper of the proceedings before 
him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision give n by him affecting it, or of the 
practice of the Geographical Indications Registry in like cases, or of other matters relevant to the issues 
and within his knowledge as Registrar, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.  
36. Costs of Regist rar in proceedings before Appellate Board .—In all proceedings under this Act 
before the Appellate Board the costs of the Registrar shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the 
Registrar shall not be ordered to pay the costs of any of the parties.  
CHAP TER VIII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
37. Meaning of applying geographical indications .—(1) A person shall be deemed to apply a 
geogra phical indication to goods who — 
(a) applies it to the goods themselves; or  
(b) applies it to any package in or with which the goods are sold, or exposed for sale, or had in 
possession for sale or for any purp ose of trade or manufacture; or  
(c) places, encloses or annexes any goods which are sold, or exposed for sale, or had in 
possession for sale or for any purpose of t rade or manufacture, in or with any package or other thing 
to which a geographical indication has been applied; or  16 
 (d) uses a geographical indication in any manner reasonably likely to lead to the belief that the 
goods in connection with which it is used are designated or described by that geographical indication; 
or  
(e) in relation to the goods uses a geographical indication in any sign, advertisement, invoice, 
catalogue, business letter, business paper, price list or other commercial documents and goods  are 
delivered to a person in pu rsuance of a request or order ma de by reference to the geog raphical 
indication as so used.  
(2) A geographical indication shall be deemed to be applied to goods whether it is woven in, 
impressed on, or otherwise worked into, or annexed or affixed to, the goods or  to any package or other 
thing.  
38. Falsifying and falsely app lying geographical indications. —(1) A person shall be deemed to 
falsify a geographical indication wh o, either, — 
(a) without the assent of the authorised user of the geographical indication makes that 
geographical indication or deceptively similar geographical indication; or  
(b) falsifies any genuine geographical indication, whether by alteration, addition, effacement  or 
otherwise.  
(2) A person shall be deemed to falsely apply to goods a geographical indication who, without the 
assent of the authorised user o f the geographical indication, — 
(a) applies such geographical indication or a deceptively similar geographical indication to goods 
or any package containing goods;  
(b) uses any package bearing a geographical indication which is identical with or deceptively 
similar to the geographical indication of such authorised user, for the purpose of packing, filling or 
wrappi ng therein any goods other than the genuine goods o f the authorised user of the geographical 
indication.  
(3) Any geographical indication falsified as mentioned in sub -section ( 1) or falsely applied as 
mentioned in sub -section ( 2), is in this Act referred to as a  false geographical indication.  
(4) In any prosecution for falsifying a geographical indication or falsely applying a geographical 
indication to goods, the burden of proving the assent of proprietor shall lie on the accused.  
39. Penalty for applyin g false geographical indications .—Any person who, — 
(a) falsifies any geographical indication; or  
(b) falsely applies to goods any geographical indication; or  
(c) makes, disposes of, or has in his possession, any die, block, machine, plate or other instrument 
for the purpose of falsifying or of being used for falsifying, a geographical indication; or  
(d) applies to any goods to which an indication of the country or place in which they were made 
or produced or the name and the address of the manufacturer or person for whom the goods are 
manufactured is required to be applied under section 71, a false indication of such country, place, 
name or address; or  
(e) tampe rs with, alters or effaces an indication of origin which has been applied to any goods to 
which it is required to be applied under section 71; or  
(f) causes any of the things above -mentioned in this section to be done,  
shall, unless he proves that he acte d, without intent to defraud, be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine which 
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which  may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of less than fifty thousand 
rupees.  17 
 40. Penalty for selling goods to which false geographical indication is applied .—Any person who 
sells, lets for hire or exposes for sale, or hires or has in his possession for sale, goods or things to which 
any false geographical indication is applied o r which, being required under section 71 to have  applied to 
them an indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced or the name and address 
of the manufacturer, or person for whom the goods are manufactured or without the indication s so 
required, shall, unless he proves, — 
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence against this 
section, he had at the time of commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the genuineness 
of the geographical indication or that any offence had been com mitted in respect of the goods; or  
(b) that, on demand by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his power 
with respect to the person from whom he ob tained such goods or things; or  
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,  
be pu nishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend 
to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which  may extend to 
two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for ade quate and special reasons to be mentioned in the judgment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of l ess than fifty thousand 
rupees.  
41. Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction .—Whoever having already be en 
convicted of an offence under section 39 or section 40 is again convicted of any such offence shall be 
punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than one year but which may extend to  three years and with fine which shall not be less than one 
lakh rupees but which  may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reason to be mentioned in the judgment, impose 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of l ess than one year or a fin e of less than one lakh rupees:  
Provided further that for the purposes of this section, no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction 
made befor e the commencement of this Act.  
42. Penalty for falsely representing a geographical i ndication as registered .—(1) No person  shall 
make any representation — 
(a) with respect to a geographical indication, not being a registered geographical indication, to the 
effect that it is a registered geographical indication; or  
(b) to the effect that a registered geographical indication is registered in respect of any goods in 
respect of which it is not in fact registered; or  
(c) to the effect that registration of a geographical indication gives an exclusive right to the use 
there of in any circumstances in which having regard to limitation entered on the register, the 
registration does not in fac t give that right.  
(2) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three yea rs, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) For the purposes of this section the use in India in relation to a geographical indication of the 
words “registered geographical indication ” or any other expression, symbol or sign like “R.G.I. ” referring 
whether expressly or impliedly to registration, shall be deemed to import a reference to regist ration in the 
register, except — 
(a) where that word or other expression, symbol or sign is used in direct association with other 
words delinea ted in characters at least as large as those in which that word or other expression, 
symbol or sign is delineated and indicating that the reference to registration as a geographical 
indication under the law of a country outside India being a country under the law of which the 
registration referred to is in fact in force; or  18 
 (b) where that other expression, symbol or sign is of itself such as to indicate that the reference is 
to such registration as is mentioned in clause ( a); or  
(c) where that word is use d in relation to a geographical indication registered under the law of a 
country outside India and in relation solely to goods to be exported to that country for use in that 
country.  
43. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connected w ith the Geo graphical 
Indications Registry. —If any person uses on his place of business, or on any document issued by him, or 
otherwise, words which would reasonably lead to the belief that his place of business is, or is officially 
connected with, the Geographical Indications Registry, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both.  
44. Penalty for falsification of entries in the register .—If any person makes, or causes to be made, 
a false e ntry in the register, or a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in the register, or 
produces or tenders or causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing, knowing the entry 
or writing to be false, he shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both.  
45. No offence in certain cases. —The provisions of sections 39, 40 and 41 shall in relation to a 
registered geographical indication or authorised user of such geographical  indication, be subject to the 
rights created or recognised by this Act and no act or omission shall be deemed to be an offence u nder the 
aforesaid sections if, — 
(a) the alleged offence relates to a registered geographical indication and the act or omissio n is 
permitted under this Act; and  
(b) the alleged offence relates to a registered geographical indication and the act or omission is 
permitted under any other law for the time being in force.  
46. Forfeiture of goods. —(1) Where a person is convicted of an  offence under section 39 or section 
40 or section 41 or is acquitted of an offence under section 39 or section 40 on proof that he acted without 
intend or defr aud, or under section 40 on proo f of the matters specified in clause ( a) or clause ( b) or clause  
(c) of that section, the court convicting or acquitting him may direct the forfeiture to Government of all 
goods and things by means of, or in relation to, which the offence has been committed, or but for such 
proof as afore said would have been committed.  
(2) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction and an appeal lies against the conviction, an appeal 
shall l ie against the forfeiture also.  
(3) When, a forfeiture is directed on acquittal and the goods or things to which the direction relates 
are of val ue exceeding fifty rupees, an appeal against the forfeiture may be preferred, within thirty days 
from the date of the direction, to the court to which in appealable cases appeal lie from sentences of the 
court  which directed the forfeiture.  
(4) When a forf eiture is directed on a conviction, the court, before whom the person is convicted, may 
order any forfeited articles to be destroyed or otherwise dispo sed of as the court thinks fit.  
47. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business. —Where a person 
accused of an o ffence under section 39 proves, — 
(a) that in the ordinary course of his business he is employed on behalf of other persons to apply 
geographical indications, or as the case may be, to make dies, blocks, machines, plates, or o ther 
instruments for making, or being used in ma king, geographical indications;  
(b) that in the case which is the subject of the charge he was so employed, and was not interested 
in the goods or other thing by way of profit or commission de pend on the sale  of such goods;  
(c) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing the offence charged, he had, 
at the time of the commission of the alleged offence, no reason to suspect the genuineness of t he 
geographical indication; and  19 
 (d) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his 
power with respect to the persons on whose behalf the geographical indication was applied,  
he shall be acquitted.  
48. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused. —(1) Where the offence 
charged under section 39 or section 40 or section 41 is in relation to a registered geographical indication 
and the accused pl eads that the registration of th e geographical indication is invalid, the followi ng 
procedure shall be followed: — 
(a) if the court is satisfied that such defence is prima facie  tenable, it shall not proceed with the 
charge but shall adjourn the proceeding for three months from the date on which the plea of the 
accused is recorded to en able the accused to file an application before the Appellate Board under this 
Act, for the rectification of the register on the ground th at the registration is invalid;  
(b) if the accused proves to the court that he has made such application within the tim e so limited 
or within such further time as the court may for sufficient cause allow, the further proceedings in the 
prosecution shall stand stayed till the disposal of such  application for rectification;  
(c) if within a period of three months or within such extended time as may be allowed by the court 
the accused fails to apply to the Appellate Board for rectification of the register, the court shall 
proceed with the case as if the registration were valid.  
(2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred to in sub -section ( 1), any 
application for the rectification of the register concerning the geographical indication in question on the 
ground of invalidity of the registration thereof ha s already been properly made to and is pending before 
the tribunal, the court shall stay the further proceedings in the prosecution pending the disposal of the 
application aforesaid and shall determine the charge against the accused in conformity with the result of 
the application for rectification in so far as the complainant relies upon the registration of his geographical 
indication.  
49. Offences by companies. —(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as ev ery person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided  that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable t o any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against an d  
punished a ccordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
50. Cognizance of certain offences and the powers of police officer for search and seizure .—(1) 
No court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 42 or section 43 or section 44 except on 
complaint in writing made by the Registrar or any officer authorised by him in writing : 
Provided that in relation to clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 42, a court shall take a cognizance 
of an offence on the basis of a certificate issued by the Registrar to the effect that a registered 
geographical indication has been represented as registered in respect of any goods in respect of whic h it is 
not in fact registered.  20 
 (2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Magistrate of the first class shall  
try an offence under this Act.  
(3) The offences under section 39  or section 40 or section 41 shall be cognizable.  
(4) Any police officer not below the rank of deputy superintendent of police or equivalent, may, if he 
satisfied that any of the offences referred to in sub -section ( 3) has been, is being, or is likely to be, 
committed, sea rch and seize without warrant th e goods, die, block, machine, plate, other instruments or 
things involved in committing the offence, wherever found, and all the articles so seized shall, as soon as 
practicable, be produced before the Judi cial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the 
case may be:  
Provided that the police officer, before making any search and seizure, shall obtain the opinion of the 
Registrar on the facts involved in the offence relating to geographic al indication and shall ab ide by the 
opinion so obtained.  
(5) Any person having an interest in any article seized under sub -section ( 4), may, within fifteen days 
of such seizure, make an application to the Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropol itan 
Magistrate, as the case may be, for such article being restored to him and the Magistrate, after hearing the 
application and the prosecution, shall make such order on the application as he may deem fit.  
51. Costs of defence of prosecution .—In any pro secution under this Act, the court may order such 
costs to be paid by the accused to the complainant, or by the complainant to the accused, as the court 
deemed reasonable having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the conduct of the parties and  
the costs so awarded shall be reco verable as if they were a fine.  
52. Limitation of prosecution. —No prosecution for an offence under this Act shall be commenced 
after the expiration of three years next after the commission of the offence charged or two ye ars after the 
discovery thereof by the prosecutor, whic hever expir ation first happens.  
53. Information as to commission of offence. —An officer of the Government whose duty it is to 
take part in the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter shall not be  compelled in any court to say 
whence he got any information as to the commission o f any offence against this Act.  
54. Punishment for abet ement in India of acts done out of India .—If any person, being within 
India, abets the commission, without India, of any act which, if committed in India, would, under this Act, 
be an offence, he may be tried for such abet ement in an y place in India in which he may be found, and be 
punished therefor  with the punishment to which he would be liable if he had himself commit ted in that 
place the act which he abetted.  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
55. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be  done in  pursuance of this 
Act. 
56. Certain persons to be public servants .—Every person appointed under this Act shall be deemed 
to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
57. Stay of proceedings where the valid ity of registration of the geographical  indication is 
questioned, etc. —(1) Where in any suit for infringement of a geographical indication the defendant 
pleads that registration of the geographical indication relating to plaintiff is invalid, the court trying the 
suit (hereinafter ref erred to as the court), shall, — 
(a) if any proceedings for rectification of the register to the geographical indication relating to 
plaintiff or defendant are pending before the Registrar or the Appellate Board, stay the sui t pending 
the fina l disposal of such proceedings;  
(b) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satisfied that the plea regarding the 
invalidity of the registration of the geographical indication relating to plaintiff or defendant is prima 
facie  tenable, raise an issue regarding the same and adjourn the case for a period of three months from 21 
 the date of the framing of the issue in order to enable the party concerned to apply to the Appellate 
Board for  rectification of the register.  
(2) If the part y concerned proves to the court that he has made any such application as is referred to in 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) within the time specified therein or within such extended time as the court 
may for sufficient cause allow, the trial of the suit shall  stand stayed until the final disposal of the 
rectification proceedings.  
(3) If no such application as aforesaid has been made within the time so specified or within such 
extended time as the court may allow, the issue as to the validity of the registratio n of the geographical 
indication concerned shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the court shall proceed with the suit in 
regard t o the other issues in the case.  
(4) The final order made in any rectification proceedings referred to in sub -section ( 1) or                       
sub-section ( 2) shall be binding upon the parties and the court shall dispose of the suit conformably to 
such order in so far as it relates to the issue as to the validity of the registration of the geographical 
indication.  
(5) The stay of a suit for the infringement of a geographical indication under this section shall not 
preclude the court from making any interlocutory order (including any order granting an injunction, 
directing account to be kept, appointing a receiver or attac hing any property), during the period of the stay 
of the suit.  
58. Application for rectification of register to be made to Appellate Board in certain                  
cases .—(1) Where in a suit for infringement of a registered geographical indication the v alidity of the 
registration of the geographical  indication relating to plaintif f is questioned by the defendant or where in 
any such suit the plaintiff questions the validity of the registration of the geographical indication relating 
to defendant, the iss ue as to the validity of the registration of the geographical indication concerned shall 
be determined only on an application for the rectification of the register and, notwithstanding anything 
contained in section 27, such application shall be made to the  Appellate Board and not to the Registrar.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), where an application for rectification of the register is 
made to the Registrar under section 27, the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, refer the application at any  
stage of the proceedings to the Appellate Board.  
59. Implied warranty on sale of indicated goods .—Where a geographical indication has been 
applied to the goods on sale or in the contract for sale of any goods, the seller shall be deemed to warrant 
that the geographical indication is a genuine geographical indication and not falsely applied, unless the 
contrary is expressed in writing signed by or on behalf of the seller and delivered at the time of the sale of 
goods on contract to and accepted by the buyer.  
60. Powers of Registrar. —In all proceedings under this Act before the Registrar, — 
(a) the Regist rar shall have all the powers of a civil court for the purposes of receiving evidence, 
administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the discovery and production 
of documents and issuing commissions fo r the examination of witnesses ; 
(b) the Registrar may, subject to any rules made in this behalf under section 87, make such orders 
as to costs as he considers reasonable, and any such order shall be executable as a decree of a civil 
court; 
(c) the Registrar may, on an application made in the prescribed m anner, review his own decision.  
61. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar. —Subject to the provisions of section 64, the 
Registrar shall not exercise any discretionary or other power vested in him by this Act or the rules made 
thereunder adversely to a person applying for the exercise of that power without (if so required by that 
person within the prescribed time) giving to the person an opportunity of being heard.  
62. Evidence before Registrar .—In any proceeding under this Act bef ore the Registrar, eviden ce 
shall be given by affidavit:  
Provided that the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, take oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, such 
evidence by affidavit.  22 
 63. Death of party to a proceeding .—If a person who is a party to a p roceeding under this Act (not 
being a proceeding before the Appellate Board or a court) dies pending the proceeding, the Registrar may, 
on request, and on  proof to his satisfaction of th e transmission of the interest of the deceased person, 
substitute in t he proceeding his successor in interest in his place, or, if the Registrar is of opinion that the 
interest of the deceased person is sufficiently represented by the surviving parties, permit the proceeding 
to continue without the substitutio n of his succes sor in interest.  
64. Extension of time. —(1) If the Registrar is satisfied, on application made to him in the prescribed 
manner and accompanied by the prescribed fee, that there is sufficient cause for extending the time for 
doing any act (not being a time expressly provided in the Act), whether the time so specified has expired 
or not, he may, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, extend the time and inform the 
parties accordingly.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to requir e the Registrar to hear the parties before 
disposing of an application for extension of time, and no appeal shall lie from any order of the Registrar 
under this section.  
65. Abandonment. —Where, in the opinion of the Registrar, an applicant is in default i n the 
prosecution of an application filed under this Act, the Registrar may, by notice require the applicant to 
remedy the default within a time specified and after giving him, if so, desired, an opportunity of being 
heard, treat the application as abandon ed, unless the default is remedied within th e time specified in the 
notice.  
66. Suit for infringement, etc., to be in stituted before district court. —(1) No suit, — 
(a) for the infringement of a registe red geographical indication; or  
(b) relating to any right in a registe red geographical indication; or  
(c) for passing of arising out of the use by the defendant of any geographical indication which is 
indentical on with or deceptively similar to the geographical indication relating to the plaintiff, 
whether  registered or unregistered,  
shall be instituted in any court inferior to a district court havin g jurisdiction to try the suit.  
(2) For the purpose of clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 1), a “district court having jurisdiction ” 
shall, notwithstanding an ything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or any other 
law for the time being in force, include a district court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the 
time of the institution of the suit or other proceeding, the per son instituting the suit or proceeding, or, 
where there are more than one such persons any of them, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on 
busines s or personally works for gain.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of sub -section ( 2), “person”  includes t he registered prop rietor and 
the authorised user.  
67. Relief in suit for infringement or for passing off. —(1) The relief which a court may grant in 
any suit for infringement or for passing off referred to in section 66 includes injunction (subject to such 
terms, if any, as  the court thinks fit) and at th e option of the plaintiff, either damages or account of profits, 
together with or without any order for the delivery -up of the infringing labels and indicati ons for 
destruction or erasure.  
(2) The order of i njunction under sub -section ( 1) may include an ex parte  injunction or any 
interlocutory order for any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) for discovery of documents;  
(b) preserving of infringing goods, documents or other evidence which are related to the              
subject -matter of the suit;  
(c) restraining the defendant from disposing of or dealing with his assets in a manner which may 
adversely affect plaintiff ’s ability to recover damages, costs or other pecuniary remedies which may 
be finally aw arded to the plaintiff.  23 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the court shall not grant relief by way of 
damages (other than nominal damages) on account of profits in any case — 
(a) where in a suit for infringement the  defendant satisfi es the court — 
(i) that at the time he commenced to use the geographical indication complained of in the suit 
he was unaware and had no reasonable ground for believing that the geographical indication of 
the plaintiff w as on the register; and  
(ii) that when  he became aware of the existence and nature of the plaintiff ’s right in the 
geographical indication, he forthwith ceased to use the geographical indication in relation to good 
in respect of which it was registered; or  
(b) where in a suit for passing off, the defendant satisfies the court — 
(i) that at the time he commenced to use the geographical indication complained of in the suit 
he was unaware and had no reasonable ground for believing that the geographical indication 
relating t o the plaintiff was in us e; and  
(ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature of the geographical indication 
relating to the plaintiff he forthwith ceased to use the geographical indication complained of.  
68. Authorised user to be impleaded in certain proceedings .—(1) In every proceeding under 
Chapter VI or under section 31, every authorised user of a geographical indication to which such 
proceeding relate, who is not himself an applicant in respect of an y proceeding under that Chapter or 
section, shall be made a part y to the proceeding.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, an authorised user so made a party to the 
proceeding shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the 
proceeding.  
69. Evidence of entries in register, etc., and things done by the Registrar .—(1) A copy of any 
entry in the register or of any document referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 78 purporting to be 
certified by the Registrar and sealed with t he seal of th e Geographical Indication s Registry shall be 
admitted in evidence in all courts and in all proceedings without further proof  or production of the 
original.  
(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the Registrar as to any entry, matter or thing that 
he is authorised by this Act or the rules to make or do shall be prima facie  evidence of the entry having 
been made, and of the contents thereof, or of the matter or things having been done or not done.  
70. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register, et c.—The Registrar or any 
officer of the Geographical Indications Registry shall not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a 
party, be compellable to produce the register or any other document in his custody, the contents of which 
can be proved by the  production of a certified copy issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to 
prove the matters therein recorded unless by order of th e court made for special cause.  
71. Power to require goods to show indication of origin .—(1) The Central Government m ay, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, require that goods of any class specified in the notification which are 
made or produced beyond the limits of India and imported into India, or, which are made or produced 
within the limits of India, shall, from  such date as may be appointed by the notification not being less than 
three months from its issue, have applied to them an indication of the country or place in which they were 
made or produced, or of the name and address of the manufacturer or the person  for wh om the goods were 
manufactured.  
(2) The notification may specify the manner in which such indication shall be applied, that is to say, 
whether to goods themselves or in any other manner, and the times or occasions on which the presence of 
the indica tion shall be necessary, that is to s ay, whether on importation only, or also at the time of sale, 
whether by wholesale or retail or both.  
(3) No notification under this section shall be issued, unless application is made for its issue by 
persons or associ ations substantially representing the interests of dealers in, or manufacturers, producers, 24 
 or users of, t he goods concerned, or unless th e Central Government is otherwise convinced that it is 
necessary in the public interest to issue the notification, wit h or without such inquiry, as the Central 
Government may consider necessary.  
(4) The provisions of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897)  shall apply to the issue 
of a notification under this section as they apply to the making of a rule or bye -law the making of which is 
subject to the con dition of previous publication.  
(5) A notification under this section shall not apply to goods made or produced beyond the limits of 
India and imported into India, if in respect of those goods, the Commis sioner of Customs is satisfied at the 
time of impor tation that they are intended fo r exportation whether after transhipment in or transit through 
India or otherwise.  
72. Certificate of validity. —If in any legal proceedings for rectification of the register before the 
Appellate Board a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor or, as the case may 
be, authorised user of the geographical indication on the issue as to the validity of the registration of the 
geographical indicat ion or the authorised user, the Appellate Board may grant a certificate to that effect, 
and if such a certificate is granted, then, in any subsequent legal proceeding in which the said validity 
comes into question the said proprietor or the authorised user , as the case may be, on obtaining a final 
order or judgment in his favour affirming validity of the registration of the geographical indication or the 
authorised user, a s the case may be, shall unless the said final order or judgment for sufficient reason  
directs otherwise, be entitled to his full cost charges and expenses as between legal practitioner and client.  
73. Groundless threats of legal proceedings .—(1) Where a person, by means of circulars, 
advertisements or otherwise, threatens a person with an  action or proceeding for infringement of a 
geographical indication which is registered, or alleged by the firs t-mentioned person to be registered, or 
with some other like proceeding, a person aggrieved may, whether the person making the threats is or is 
not the registered proprietor or the authorised user of the geographical indication, bring a suit against the 
first-mentioned person and may obtain a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable, and an 
injunction against the continuance of the threats and may recover such damages (if any) as he has 
sustained, unless the first -mentioned person satisfies the court that the geographical indication is 
registered and that the acts in respect of which the proceedings were threatened, constitute, o r, if done, 
would constitute, an infringement of the geographical indication.  
(2) The last preceding sub -section does not apply if the registered proprietor of the geographical 
indication or an authorised user thereof with due diligence commences and prose cutes an action against 
the person threatened for infringement of the geographical indication.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall render a legal practitioner or a registered geographical indications 
agent liable to an action under this section in respect of  an act done by him in his professional capacity on 
behalf of a client.  
(4) A suit under sub -section ( 1) shall not be instituted in any court inferior to a district court.  
74. Address for service. —An address for service stated in an application or notice of opposition 
shall, for the purposes of the application or notice of opposition be deemed to be the address of the 
applicant or opponent, as the case may be, and all documents in relation to the application or notice of 
opposition may be served by leaving  them at or sending them by post to the address for service of the 
applicant or opponent, as the case may be.  
75. Trade usages, etc., to be taken into consideration. —In any proceeding relating to a 
geographical indication, the tribunal shall admit evidenc e of the usages of the trade concerned and of any 
relevant geographical indication legitimately used by other p ersons.  
76. Agents. —Where, by or under this Act, any act, other than the making of an affidavit, is required 
to be done before the Registrar by a ny person, the act may, subject to the rules made in this behalf, be 
done instead of b y that person himself, by a pers on duly authorised in the prescribed manner, who i s,— 
(a) a legal practitioner, or  
(b) a person registered in the prescribed manner as a geographical indications agent, or  25 
 (c) a person in the sole and regular employment of the principal.  
77. Ind exes.—There shall be kept under the directions and  supervision of the Registrar, — 
(a) an index of regis tered geographical indications,  
(b) an index  of geographical indications in respect of which applications for registration are 
pending , 
(c) an index of the names of the proprietors of registere d geographical indications, and  
(d) an index of the names of authorised users.  
78. Documents open to publi c inspection. —(1) The following documents, subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed, be open to public inspection at the Geographical  Indications Registry, 
namely: — 
(a) the register and any document upon which any entry in the register is based;  
(b) every notice of opposition to the registration of a geographical indication, application for 
rectification before the Registrar, counter -statement thereto, and any affidavit or document filed by 
the parties in any pr oceedings before the Registrar;  
(c) the indexes mentioned in section 77; and  
(d) such other documents as the Central Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, 
specify:  
Provided that where such register is maintained wholly or partly on computer, the inspection of 
such register un der this section shall be made by inspecting the computer print out of the relevant 
entry in the regi ster so maintained on computer.  
(2) Any person may, on an application to the Registrar and on payment of such fee as may be 
prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register or any document referred to in                               
sub-section ( 1). 
79. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament. —The Central Government shall cause to 
be placed before both Houses of Parliament once a  year a report respecting the  execution by or under this 
Act. 
80. Fees and surcharge. —(1) There shall be paid in respect of applications and registrations and 
other matters under this Act such fees and surcharge as may be prescr ibed by the Central Governme nt. 
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Registrar, the Registrar shall not do 
that a ct until the fee has been paid.  
(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the Geographical Indications 
Registry, the document shall be deemed not to have been filed at the registry until the fee has been paid.  
81. Savings in respect  of certain matters in Chapter VIII .—Nothing in Chapter VIII shall — 
(a) exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding which might,  but for anything in that 
Chap ter, be brought against him, or  
(b) be construed so as to render liable to any prosecution or punishment any servant of a master 
resident in India who in good faith acts in obedience to the instructions of such master, and, on  
demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, has given ful l information as to his master and as to 
the instructions which h e has received from his master.  
82. Declarations as to title of geographical indication not registera ble under the Registration 
Act, 1908. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908) , no 
document declaring or purporting to declare any title of a person to a geographical indication other than a 
registered geographical indication shall be registered un der that Act.  
  26 
 83. Government to be bound. —The provisions of this Act shall be binding on the Government.  
84. Special provisions relating to applications for registration from citizens of convention 
countries .—(1) With a view to the fulfilment of a trea ty, convention or arrangement with any country or 
a country which is a membe r of a group of countries or uni on of countries or Inter -Governmental 
Organisations outside India which affords to citizens of India similar privileges as granted to its own 
citize ns, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such country or 
group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental Organisations to be a convention country 
or  convention countrie s for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Nothing contained in this Act or the Trade Marks Act, 1999  (47 of 1999)  shall prevent a continued 
and similar use of geographical indication relating to a country or a country which is a member of a group 
of countries or union of countries or any Inter -Governmental Organisations, as the case may be, notified 
under sub -section  (1) identifying wines or spirits in connection with goods by any citizen or domiciliary 
of such country who has used that geographical indication in continuou s manner with regard to such 
goods or any goods relating to such goods, as the case may be, in an y part of the t erritory of that country 
either — 
(a) for at least ten years preceding the 15th day of April, 1994; or  
(b) in good faith preceding the date referred to in clause ( a).  
85. Provision as to reciprocity. —Where any country or a country which is a  member of a group of 
countries or union of countries or any Inter -Governmental Organisation specified by the Central 
Government in this behalf by n otification in the Official Gaze tte does not accord to citizens of India the 
same rights in respect of the r egistration and protection of geographical indications as it accords to its own 
nationals, no nationals of such country or a country which is a memb er of a group of countries or un ion or 
countries or Inter -Governmental Organisations, as the case may be, sh all be entitled — 
(a) to apply for the registration of, or be registered as the proprie tor of geographical indication;  
(b) to apply for registration or be registered as an authorised user of a geographical indication.  
86. Powers of Central Government to re move difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving 
effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to b e 
necessa ry for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid be fore each 
House of Parliament.  
87. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette 
and subject to the condition of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, an d without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the matters to be included in the Register of Geographical Indications under sub -section ( 1), 
and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of such register in computer floppies or 
diskettes under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
(b) the manner of incorporation of particulars relating to registration of geographical indications 
in Part A under sub -section ( 2) and th e manner of incorporation of particulars relating to the 
registration of the authorised users unde r sub -section ( 3) of section 7;  
(c) the classification of goods and the manner of publication of the alphabetical index of 
classification of goods and the def inite territory or locality or region for the purpose of registration of 
geographical indications under sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 8;  27 
 (d) the form in which and the manner in which an application for registration of a geographical 
indication may be made and  the fees which may accompany the application under sub -section ( 1) and 
the particulars to be made in the statement of producers of goods who proposes to be initially 
registered with the registration under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 2) of section 11;  
(e) the manner of publication of advertisement of accepted application, for registration of 
geographical indications, etc., under sub -section ( 1), and the manner of notifying the corrections or 
amendments made in the application under sub -section ( 2) of section  13; 
(f) the manner in which and the fee which may accompany an application and the manner of 
giving notice under sub -section ( 1) and the manner of sending  counter statement under sub -section ( 2) 
and the manner of submission of  evidence and the time therefor  under  sub-section ( 4) of section 14;  
(g) the form of certificate of registration under sub -section ( 2) and the manner of giving notice to 
the applicant under sub -section ( 3) of section 16;  
(h) the manner of applying for regi stration as an authorised user under sub -section ( 1) and the 
manner of submitting statements and documents along with such application and the fee which may 
accompany such application under sub -section ( 2) of section 17 ; 
(i) the manner of making applicatio n, the time within which such application is to be made and 
the fee payable with each application, under sub -section ( 3) and the time within which the Registrar 
shall send notice and the manner of such notice under sub -section ( 4) and the form in which and  the 
fee which may accompany an application for renewal to be made under sub -section ( 5) of section 18;  
(j) the manner of making applications under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the manner of giving notice 
under sub -section ( 4) and the manner of service of notice of rectification under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 27;  
(k) the manner of making an application for corr ection, etc., under section 28;  
(l) the manner of making an application under sub -section ( 1), the manner of advertising an 
application under sub -section ( 1), the time and manner of notice by which an application may be 
opposed under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 29;  
(m) the manner of advertisement under sub -section ( 2) of section 30;  
(n) the form of making an appeal, the manner of verification and the fee payable under                           
sub-section ( 3) of section 31;  
(o) the form in which an application for rectification shall be made, under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 34;  
(p) the manner of making an application for review under clause ( c) of section 60;  
(q) the time within which an application is to be made to the Registrar for exercising his 
discretionary power under section 61;  
(r) the manner of making an application and the fe e payable therefore under sub -section (1) of 
section 64;  
(s) the manner of authorising any person to act and the manner of registration of a geographical 
indications agent under section 76;  
(t) the fee and surcharge payable for applications and registrati ons and other matters under                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 80;  
(u) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
--------------------------The Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999--------------------------
1 
 THE INSURANCE REGULATORY AND DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY ACT, 1999  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
INSURANCE  REGULATORY  AND DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Authority.  
4. Composition of Authority.  
5. Tenure of office of Chairperson and other members.  
6. Removal from office.  
7. Salary and allowances of Chairperson and members.  
8. Bar on  future employment of members . 
9. Administrative  powers of Chairperson.  
10. Meetings of Authority.  
11. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Authority.  
12. Officers and employees  of Authority.  
 
CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF INTERIM  INSURANCE  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  
13. Transfer of asset s, liabilities, etc., of Interim Insurance Regulatory Authority.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES , POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF AUTHORITY  
14. Duties, powers and functions of Authority.  
 
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
15. Grants by Central Government.  
16. Constitution of Fund.  
17. Accounts and audit.  
 
  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
18. Power of Central Government to issued directions.  
19. Power of Central Government to supersede Authority.  
20. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government.  
21. Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of Authority to be public servants.  
22. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
23. Delegation of powers.  
24. Power to make rules.  
25. Establishment of Insurance Advisory Committee.  
26. Power to make regulations.  
27. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
28. Application of other laws not barred.  
29. Power to remove difficulties.  
30. Amendment  of Act 4 of 1938.  
31. Amendment of Act 31 of 1956.  
32. Amendment of Act 57 of 1972.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE INSURANCE REGUL ATORY AND DEVELOPM ENT AUTHORITY  
ACT, 1999  
ACT NO. 41 OF 1999  
[29th December, 1999 .]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of an Authority to protect the interests of holders of 
insurance policies, to regulate, promote and ensure orderly growth of the insurance industry 
and for matters connected therew ith or incidental thereto and fu rther to amend the Insurance 
Act, 1938, the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 and the General Insurance Business 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Yea r of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title , extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Insurance Regulatory 
and Development Au thority Act, 1999.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act  shall be construed as a reference to the comin g 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
 (a) “appointed day ” means the date on which the Authority is established unde r sub -section ( 1) 
of section 3;  
(b) “Authority ” means the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 2[of India] 
established unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(c) “Chairperson ” means the Chairper son of the Authority;  
(d) “Fund ” means the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Fund constituted under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 16;  
(e) “Interim Insurance Regulatory Authority ” means the Insurance Regulatory Authority set up by 
the Central Government through Resolution No. 17 (2)/94-Ins.-V, dated the 23rd January, 1996;  
3[(f) “intermediary ” or “insurance intermediary ” includes insurance brokers, re -insurance brokers, 
insurance consultants , corporate agents, third party administrator, surveyors and loss assessors  and 
such other entities, as may be notified by the Authority from time to time; ] 
(g) “member ” means a whole -time or a part -time member of the Authorit y and includes the 
Chairperson;  
(h) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette ; 
(i) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(j) “regulations ” means the regulations made by  the Authority.  
                                                           
1.19th April , 2000, vide notification No. S.O. 397(E), dated 1 9th April , 2000 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,  
sec. 3( ii). 
2. Ins. by  Act 5 of 2015, s. 105 (w.e.f. 26-12-2014).  
3. Subs. by s. 105 , ibid., for clause  (f) (w.e.f. 26-12-2014).  4 
 (2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but def ined in the Insurance Act, 1938  
(4 of 1938) or the Life Insur ance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956) or the General Insurance Business  
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (57 o f 1972) shall hav e the meanings respectively assigned to them in those 
Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
INSURANCE  REGUL ATORY  AND DEVELOPMENT  AUTHORITY  
3. Establishment and incorp oration of Authority .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act, an 
Authority to be called “the Insurance Regulatory and Developm ent Authority  1[of India] ”.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by t he said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government may decide 
from time to time.  
(4) The Authority may establish of fices at other places in India.  
4. Composition o f Authority .—The Authority shall consist of  the following members, namely: —  
(a) a Chairperson;  
(b) not mor e than five whole -time members;  
(c) not mo re than four part -time members,  
to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst persons of ability, integrity and standing who 
have knowledge or experience in life insurance, general insurance, actuarial science, finance, economics, 
law, accountancy, administration or any othe r discipline which would, in the opinion of the Central 
Government, be useful to the Authority:  
Provided that the Central Government shall, while appointing the Chairperson and the whole -time 
members, ensure that at least one person each is a person having knowledge or experience in life 
insurance, general insura nce or actuarial scienc e, respect ively.  
5. Tenure of office of  Chairperson and other members .—(1) The Chairperson and every other 
whole -time member shall hold office for a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his 
office and shall  be eli gible for reappointment:  
Provided that no person shall hold office as a Chairperson after he has attained the age of sixty -five 
years:  
Provided further that no person shall hold office as a whole -time member after he has attai ned the age 
of sixty -two year s. 
(2) A part -time member shall hold office for a term not exceeding five years from the date on w hich 
he enters upon his office.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), a member may — 
(a) relinquish  his office by giving in writing to the Central Government notice of  not less than 
three months; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of section 6.  
6. Removal from office .—(1) The Central Government may re move from office an y member who — 
(a) is, or at any time has bee n, adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has become physically or mentally inca pable of acting as a member; or  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2015, s. 106 (w.e.f. 26 -12-2014).  5 
 (c) has been convicted of any offence which, in the opinion of the Central Governmen t, involves 
moral turp itude; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuation in office detrimental to the public 
interest.  
(2) No such member shall be removed under clause ( d) or clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) unless he has 
been given a reasonable opportunit y of being heard in the matter.  
7. Salary and allowances of Ch airperson and members .—(1) The salary and allowances payable 
to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the members other than part -time members shal l be such 
as may be prescribed.  
(2) The part -time members shall receive such allowances as may be pr escribed.  
(3) The salary, allowances and other conditions of service of a m ember shall not be varied to his 
disadvantage after appointment.  
8. Bar o n future employment of members .—The Chairperson and the whole -time members shall 
not, for a period of two years from the date on which they cease to hold office as such, except with the 
previous approval of the Central Government, accept — 
(a) any employment either under the Central Gover nment or under any State Government; or 
(b) any appointment in any c ompany in the insurance sector.  
9. Admini strative powers of Chairperson .—The Chairperson shall have the powers of general 
superintendence and direction in respect of all administrative matters of the Authority.  
10. Meetings of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such time and places and shall observe 
such rules and procedures in regard to transaction of business at its meetings (including quorum at such 
meetings) as may be  determined by the regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson, or if for any reason he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority, any other 
member chosen by the members present from amongst themselves at the meeting shall preside at the 
meetin g. 
(3) All questio ns which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a majority 
of votes by the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or 
in his absence, the person presiding shall have a  second or castin g vote.  
(4) The Authority may make regulations for the transacti on of business at its meetings.  
11. Vacancies, etc., not to inval idate proceedings of Authority .—No act or proceeding of the 
Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in,  or any defect in the con stitution of, the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting a s a member of the Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not af fecting the merits of the case.  
12. Offic ers and employees of Authority .—(1) The Authority may appoint officers and such other 
employees as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge o f its functions under this Act.  
(2) The terms and other conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Authority 
appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall be governed by the r egulations made under this Act.  
  6 
 CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF INTERIM  INSURANCE  REGULATORY  AUTHORITY  
13. Transfer of assets, liabilities, etc., of Interim Insurance Regulatory Authority .—On the 
appointed day, — 
(a) all the assets and liabilities of the Interim Insurance Regulatory Authority shall stand 
transferred to , and vested in, the Authority.  
Explanation .—The assets of the Interim Insurance Regulatory Authority shall be deemed to 
include all rights and powers, and all properties, whether movable or immovable, including, in  
particular, cash balances, deposits and all other interests and rights in, or arising out of, such 
properties as may be in the posse ssion of the Interim Insurance Regulatory Authority and all books of 
account and other documents relating to the same;  and liabilities shall be deemed to include all debts, 
liabilities and obligations of whatever kind;  
(b) without prejudice to the provisio ns of clause ( a), all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, 
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Interim 
Insurance Regulatory Authority immediately before that day, for or in connection with th e purpose of 
the said Regulatory Authority, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into or engaged to be 
done by, with or for, the Authority;  
(c) all sums of money due to the Interim Insurance Regulatory Authority immediately before that 
day shall be deemed to be due to the Authority; and  
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Interim Insurance Regulatory Authority immediately before that day may be continued or 
may be institut ed by  or against the Authority.  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF  AUTHORITY  
14. Duties, pow ers and functions of Authority .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any 
other law for the time being in force, the Authority shall have the duty to regulate, promote and ensure 
orderly growth of the insurance busi ness and re -insurance business.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the powers and 
functions o f the Authority shall include, — 
(a) issue to the applicant a certificate of registration, renew, modify, withdraw, suspe nd or cancel 
such registration;  
(b) protection of the interests of the policy -holders in matters concerning assigning of policy, 
nomination by policy -holders, insurable interest, se ttlement of insurance claim, surrender value of 
policy and other terms and condit ions of contracts of insurance;  
(c) specifying requisite qualifications, code of conduct and practical training for intermediary or 
insur ance intermediaries and agents;  
(d) specifying the code of conduct fo r surveyors and loss assessors;  
(e) promoting efficiency in the  conduct of insurance business;  
(f) promoting and regulating professional organisations connected with the insur ance and  
re-insurance business;  
(g) levying fees and other charges for carryin g out the purposes of this Act;  
(h) calling for information from, undertaking inspection of, conducting enquiries and 
investigations including audit of the insurers, intermediaries, insurance intermediaries and other 
organisati ons connect ed with the insurance business;  
(i) control and regulation of the rates, advantages, terms and conditions that may be offered by 
insurers in respect of general insurance business not so controlled and regulated by the Tariff 
Advisory Committee u nder section 64U of the I nsurance Act, 19 38 (4 of 1938);  7 
 (j) specifying the form and manner in which books of account shall be maintained and statement 
of accounts shall be rendered by insurers and other insurance intermediaries;  
(k) regulating investment of funds by insurance companies;  
(l) regulating mai ntenance of margin of solvency;  
(m) adjudication of disputes between insurers and intermediari es or insurance intermediaries;  
(n) supervising the functioning of the Tariff Advisory Committee;  
(o) specifying the percentage of premium income of the insurer to finance schemes for promoting 
and regulating professional organisations referred to i n clause ( f); 
(p) specifying the percentage of life insurance business and general insurance business to be 
undertaken by the insurer in the rural or social sector; and  
(q) exercising such oth er powers as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
15. Grants by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Authority grants of such sums of money as the 
Government may think fit for being utilise d for the purposes of this Act.  
16. Constitution of Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called “the Insuranc e 
Regulatory and Development Authority Fund ” and there shall be cr edited thereto — 
(a) all Government grants, fees and cha rges received by the Authority;  
(b) all sums received by the Authority from such other source as may be decided upon by the 
Central Gov ernment;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(2) The Fun d shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the members, officers and ot her employees 
of the Authority;  
(b) the other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its functions an d for 
the purposes of this Act.  
17. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Authority shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant 
records and prepare an annual statement of acco unts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation wit h the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Authority shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection wi th the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in particular , shall have the right to demand 
the production of books of account, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any o f the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Ce ntral Government and that Gover nment  shall cause the same to be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
                                                           
1. Clause (c) omitted b y Act 5 of 2015, s. 107 (w.e.f  26-12-2014).  8 
 CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
18. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Authority shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions 
under this Act, be bound by such directions on question s of policy, other than those relating to technical 
and administrative matters, as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Authority shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express i ts views 
before any direction i s given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.  
19. Power of Central Gov ernment to supersede Authority .—(1) If, at any time the Central  
Government is of the opinion, — 
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Authority, it is unable to discharge 
the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under  the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Authority has per sistently defaulted in complying with any direction given by the 
Central Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of the duties 
imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the fi nancial 
position of the Authority or the administration of  the Authority has suffered; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary i n the public interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by notification and for reasons to be specified th erein, supersede the 
Authority for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification and appoint a 
person to be the Controller of Insurance under s ection  2B of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4  of 1938), if not 
already done:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government shall give a reasonable 
opportunity to the Authority to make representations against the proposed supersession and shall consider 
the representat ions, if any, of the Authority.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section (1) superseding the Authority, — 
(a) the Chairperson and other members shall, as from the date of supersession, vacate their offices 
as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the  provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the C ontroller of Insurance; and  
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Authority shall, until the Authority is reconstituted 
under sub -section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government shall reconstitute the Authority by a fresh appointment of its 
Chairperson and other members and in such case any person who had vacated his office under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualif ied for reappointment.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a copy of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a 
full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid 
before each House  of Parl iament at the earliest.  
20. Furnishing of return s, etc., to Central Government .—(1) The Authority shall furnish to the 
Central Government at such time and in such form and manner as may be prescribed, or as the Central 
Government may direct to fur nish such  returns, statements an d other particulars in regard to any proposed 
or existing programme for the promotion and development of the insurance industry as the Central 
Government m ay, from time to time, require.  9 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Authority shall, within nine months 
after the close of each financial year, submit to the Central Government a report giving a true and full 
account of its activities including the activitie s for promotion and development of the insurance  business 
during the previous financial year.  
 (3) Copies of the reports received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon as may be after they are 
received, before  each House of Parliament.  
21. Chairpers on, members, officers and other employees of A uthority to be public servants .—
The Chairperson, members, officers and other employees of the Authority shall be deemed, when acting 
or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Ac t, to be public servants within the 
meaning of section  21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
22. Protectio n of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer of the Central Government or any member, officer or 
other emplo yee of the Authority for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act or the rules or regulations made thereunder:  
Provided that nothing in this Act shall exempt any person from any suit or other proceedings which 
might, apart  from th is Act, be brought against him.  
23. Delegation of powers .— (1) The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate 
to the Chairperson or any other member or officer of the Authority subject to such conditions, if any, as 
may be spec ified in the order, such of its powers and functions under this Act as it may deem necessary.  
(2) The Authority may, by a general or special order in writing, also form committees of the members 
and delegate to them the powers and functions of the Authorit y as may be specified by the regul ations.  
24. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
members other than part -time members unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 7;  
(b) the allowances to be paid to the part -time members unde r sub -section ( 2) of section 7;  
(c) such other powers that may be exercised by the Authority under clause ( q) of sub-section ( 2) 
of section 14;  
(d) the form of annual statement of accounts to be maintaine d by the Authority under   
sub-section ( 1) of section 17;  
(e) the form and manner in which and the time within which returns and statements and 
particulars are to be furnished to the Central Government under  sub-section ( 1) of section 20;  
(f) the matters un der sub -section ( 5) of section 25 on which the Insurance Advisory Commit tee 
shall advise the Authority;  
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which 
provision is  to be or may be made by rules.  
25. Establishmen t of Insurance Advisory Committee .—(1) The Authority may, by notification, 
establish with effect from such date as it may specify in such notification, a Committee to be known as 
the Insurance Advisory Committee.  
(2) The Insurance Advisory Committee shall consist of not more than twenty -five members excluding 
ex officio  members to represent the interests of commerce, industry, transport, agriculture, consumer fora, 
surveyors, agents, intermediaries, organisations eng aged in safety and loss prevention,  research bodies 
and employees‟  assoc iation in the insurance sector.  10 
 (3) The Chairperson and the members of the Authority shall be the ex officio  Chairperson and  
ex officio  members of th e Insurance Advisory Committee.  
(4) The objects of the Insurance Advisory Committee shall be to advise the Authority on matters 
relating to the making of th e regulations under section 26.  
(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the Insurance Advisory Committee may 
advis e the Authority on such othe r matters as may be prescribed.  
26. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Authority may, in consultation with the Insurance 
Advisory Committee, by notification, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to carr y out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the time and places of meetings of the A uthority and the procedure to be followed at such 
meetings including the quorum necessary for the transaction of business under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 10;  
(b) the transaction of business at its meetings under sub -section ( 4) of section 10;  
(c) the term s and other conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Authority 
under  sub-section ( 2) of section 12;  
(d) the powers and functions which may be delegated to committees of the members under  
sub-section ( 2) of section 23; and  
(e) any other  matter which is required to be, or may be, specified by regulations or in respect of 
which provision is to be  or may be made by regulations.  
27. Rules and regulations to be laid before Par liament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days whic h may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
succes sive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modif ication in the rule or regulatio n or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should n ot be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modif ication or annulment shall be wi thout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done u nder 
that rule or regulation.  
28. Applic ation of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
29. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If an y difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the  difficulty:  
 Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of tw o years from the 
appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
30. Amendment of Act 4 of 1938 .—The Insurance Act, 1938 shall be amended in the manner 
specified in the First Schedule to this Act.  
31. Amendment of Act 31 of 1956 .—The Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 shall be amended in 
the manner specified in t he Second  Schedule to this Act.  
32. Amendment of Act 57 of 1972 .—The General Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 
shall be amended in the manner specified in the Third Schedule to this Act.   11 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 30)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE INSURANCE  ACT, 1938  
(4 OF 1938)  
1. In the Act, except in clause ( 5B) of section 2 and section 2B, for “Controller ” wherever it occurs, 
substitute “Authority ” and such consequential changes as the rules of grammar may require shall also be 
made.  
2. In sections 27, 27A, 27B, 31, 32A, 40A, 48B, 64F, 64G, 64 -I, 64J, 64L, 64R, 64UC, 64UM, 113 
and 115, for “Central Government ” wherever they  occur, substitute “Authority ”. 
3. Section 2, — 
(a) after clause ( 1), insert the following: —  
„(1A) “Authority ” means the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority established 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Insurance Regulatory and Dev elopment Authority Act, 
1999;‟ ; 
(b) for clause ( 5B), substitute the following: — 
„(5B) “Controller of Insurance ” means the officer appointed by the Central Government 
under section 2B to exercise all the powers, discharge the functions and perform the duties of the 
Authority under this Act or the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956) or the General 
Insur ance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (57 of 1972) or the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Au thority Act, 1999;‟ ; 
(c) after cla use ( 7), insert the following: — 
„(7A) “Indian insurance company ” means any insurer being a company — 
(a) which  is formed and registered under the C ompanies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(b) in which the aggregate holdings of equity shares by a foreign company, either by 
itself or through its subsidiary companies or its nominees, do not exceed twenty -six per cent. 
paid-up equity capital of  such Indian insurance company;  
(c) whose sole purpose is to carry on life insurance business or general insurance bus iness 
or re-insurance business.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the expression “foreign company ” shall hav e 
the meaning assigned to it under clause ( 23A) of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961 ( 43 of 
1961);‟ ; 
(d) in clause ( 14), for “section 114 ”, substitute “this Act ”. 
4. After se ction 2, insert the following: — 
“2A. Interpretation of  certain words and expressions .—Words and expressions used and not 
defined in this Act but defined in the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), the General 
Insurance Business (Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (57 of 1972) and the Insurance Regulator y and 
Development Authority Act, 1999 shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those 
Acts. ”. 
5. Section 2B, for sub -section (1), substitute the following: — 
“(1) If at any time, the Authority is superseded under sub -section ( 1) of section 19  of the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, app oint a person to be the Controll er of Insurance till such time 
the Authority is reconstituted under sub -section ( 3) of section 19 of that Act. ”.  12 
 6. Section 2C, in sub -section ( 1), after the second proviso, insert the following: — 
“Provided also that no insurer other than an Indian insurance company shall begin to carry on any 
class of insurance business in India under this Act on or after the commencement of the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999. ”. 
7. Section 3 ,— 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), after the first proviso, insert the following: — 
“Provided further that a person or insurer, as the case may be, carrying on any class of 
insurance business in India, on or before the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Act, 1999, for which no registration certificate wa s necessary prior to 
such commencement, may continue to do so for a  period of three months from such 
commencement or, if he had made an application for such registration within the said period of 
three months, till th e disposal of such application:  
Provided also that any certificate of registration, obtained immediately b efore the 
commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, shall be 
deemed to have been obtained from the Authority in accordance with the provisions o f this Act. ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2),— 
(i) in the opening portion, for “Every application for registration shall be accompanied b y—”, 
substitute the following: — 
“Every application for registration shall be made in such manner as may be determined by the 
regulations made by the Authorit y and shall be accompanied by —”; 
 (ii) in clause ( d), for “working capital ”, substitute “paid-up equity capital or working 
capital ”; 
(iii) in clause ( f), in the proviso, o mit “and” occurring at the end;  
(iv) for clause (g), substitute the following: — 
“(g) the receipt showing payment of fee as may be determined by the regulations which 
shall not exceed fifty thousand rupees for each class of business as may be specified by the 
regulations made by the Authority;  
(h) such other documents as may be specified by the regulations made by the Authority; ”; 
(c) after sub -section ( 2A), insert— 
“(2AA) The Authority shall give preference to register the applicant and grant him a 
certificate of registration if such applicant agrees, in the form and manner as may be specified by 
the regulations made by the Authori ty, to carry on the life insurance business or general insurance 
business for providing health cover to individuals or group  of individuals. ”; 
(d) in sub -section ( 4),— 
(i) in clause ( f), for “of any rule or order made thereunder, or”, substitute the following: — 
“of any rule or any regulation or order made or, any di rection issued thereunder, or ”; 
(ii) in clause ( h), insert “or” at the end;  
(iii) after cla use ( h), insert the following: — 
“(i) if the insurer makes a default in complying with any directio n issued or order made, 
as the case may be, by the Authority under the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999, o r 
(j) if the insurer makes a default in complying with, or acts in contravention of, any 
requirement of the Companies Act, 195 6 (1 of 1956) or the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 
1956 (31 of 1956) or the General Insurance Bus iness (Nationalisation) Act, 197 2 (57 of 1972) 
or the Foreign Exchange Regul ation Act, 1973 (46 of 1973). ”;  13 
 (e) in sub -section ( 5C),— 
(i) for “clause ( h)”, substitute “clause ( h) or clause ( i) or clause ( j)”; 
(ii) for “any requirement of this Act or of any rule or order made there under ”, substitute the 
following: — 
“any requirement of this Act or the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 
1999, or of any rule or any regulation, or any order made thereunder or any dire ction issued under 
those Acts ”; 
(f) after sub -section ( 5D), insert the following: — 
“(5E) The Authority may, by order, suspend or cancel any registration in such manner as may 
be determined  by the regulations made by it:  
Provided that no order under this sub -section shall be made unless the person concerned has 
been given a reasonabl e opportunity of being heard. ”; 
(g) for sub -section (7), substitute the following: — 
“(7) The Authori ty may, on payment of such fee, not exceeding five thousand rupees, as may 
be determined by the regulations, issue a duplicate certificate of registration to replace a 
certificate lost, destroyed or mutilated, or in any other case where the Authority is of  opinion that 
the issue of duplicate certificate is necessary. ”.  
8. Section 3A, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for “the 31st day of December, 194 1.”, substitute the following: — 
“the 31st day of March, after the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Dev elopment 
Authority Act, 1999. ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2),— 
(i) for “prescribed fee ”, substitute “fee as determined by the regulations made by the 
Authority ”; 
(ii) for clause (i), substitute the following: — 
“(i) exceed one -fourth of one per cent. of such prem ium income or rupees fi ve crores, 
whichever is less, ”; 
(iii) for clause ( ii), substitute the following: — 
“(ii) be less, in any case, than fifty thousand rupees for each class of insurance business: ”;  
(c) in sub -section ( 3), for “prescribed fee ”, substitute “fee as determined by the regu lations made 
by the Authority ”; 
(d) in sub -section ( 4), for “prescribed fee ”, substitute “fee as determined by the regulatio ns made 
by the Authority, and ”. 
9. For sectio n 6, substitute the following: — 
“6. Requirement as to capital .—No insurer carrying on the business of life insurance, general 
insurance or re -insurance in India on or after the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and 
Development Authority Act, 1999, shal l be registered unless he has, — 
(i) a paid -up equity capital of rupees one hundred crores, in case of a person carrying on the 
business of life ins urance or general insurance; or  
(ii) a paid -up equity capital of rupees two hundred crores, in case of a person carrying on 
exclusivel y the bu siness as a re -insurer:   14 
 Provided that in determining the paid -up equity capital specified under clause ( i) or clause ( ii), the 
deposit to be made under section 7 and any preliminary expenses incurred in the formation and 
registration of  the company shall be excluded:  
Provided further that an insurer carrying on business of life insurance, general insurance or re -
insurance in India before the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
Act, 1999 and who is required to be registered under this Ac t, shall have a paid -up equity capital in 
accordance with clause ( i) and clause ( ii), as the case may be, within six months of the 
commencement of that Act. ”.  
10. Section 6A, — 
(a) in s ub-section ( 4), in clause ( b),— 
(I) in sub -clause ( i), omit “and” occurring at the end;  
(II) in sub -clause ( ii), for “sanction of the Central Government has been obtained to the 
transfer. ”, substitute “approval of the Authority has b een obtained to the transfer; ”; 
(III) after sub -clause ( ii), insert the following: —  
„(iii) where, the nominal value of the shares intended to be transferred by any individual, 
firm, group, constituents of a group, or body corporate under the same management, jointly 
or severally exceeds one per cent. of the paid -up equity capital of th e insurer, unless the 
previous approval of the Authority has been obtained for the transfer.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -clause, the expressions “group ” and “same 
management ” shall have the same meanings respectively assigned to them in the M onopolies 
and Restrictive Trade Prac tices Act, 1969 (54 of 1969).‟ ; 
(b) in sub -section ( 11),— 
(i) for “Explanatio n 1”, substitute “Explanation ”; 
(ii) omit Explanati on 2. 
11. After sec tion 6A, insert the following: — 
“6AA. Manner of divesting excess shareholdin g by promoter in certain cases .—(1) No promoter 
shall at any time hold more than twenty -six per cent. or such other percentage as may be prescribed, 
of the paid -up equity capital in an Indian insurance company:  
Provided that in a case where an Indian insurance company begins the business of life insurance, 
general insurance or re -insurance in which the promoters hold more than twenty -six per cent. of the 
paid-up equity capital or such other excess percentage as may be prescribed, the promoters shall 
divest in a phased manner the share capital in excess of the twenty -six per cent. of the paid -up equity 
capital or such excess paid -up equity capital as may be prescribed, after a period of ten years from the 
date of t he commencement of the said business by such Indian insurance company or within such 
period as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that nothing contained in the 
proviso shall apply to t he promoters being foreign company, referred to in sub -clause ( b) of clause 
(7A) of section 2.  
(2) The manner and procedure for divesting the excess share capital under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
specified by the regul ations made by the Authority. ”. 
12. Section 7, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) omit “not being an insurer specified in sub -clause ( c) of clause ( 9) of section 2 ”;  15 
 (ii) for clauses ( a) and (b), substitute the following: — 
“(a) in the case of life insurance business, a sum equivalent to one per cent. of his total 
gross premium written in India in any financial year commencing after the 31st day of March, 
2000, n ot exceeding rupees ten crores;  
(b) in the case of general insurance business, a sum equivalent to three per cent. of his 
total gross pre mium written in India, in any financial year commencing after the 31st day of 
March, 2000, n ot exceeding rupees ten crores;  
(c) in the case of re -insurance business, a  sum of rupees twenty crores: ”; 
(b) omit sub -sections ( 1A), (1B), (1C), (1D) and ( 1E). 
13. Section 11, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for “calendar year ”, substitute “financial year ”; 
(b) after sub -section (1), insert the following: — 
“(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), every insurer, on or after the 
commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, in respect of 
insurance business transacted by him an d in respect of his shareholders‟  funds, shall, at the 
expiration of each financial year, prepare with reference to that year, a balance -sheet, a  profit and 
loss account, a separate account of receipts and payments, a revenue account in accordance with 
the regulations made by the Autho rity.  
(1B) Every insurer shall keep separate accounts relating to funds of sha reholders and policy -
holders. ”. 
14. Section 13, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), — 
(i) for “once at least in every three y ears”, substitute “every year ”; 
(ii) in the first proviso, for “not later than four years ”, substitute “not later than two years ”; 
(iii) after the second proviso, insert the following: — 
“Provided also that for an insurer carrying on life insurance business in India 
immediately before the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999, the last date as at which the first investigation after such commencement 
should be caused by an actuary, shall be  the 31st day of March, 2001: ”; 
(iv) after the third proviso, insert the following: — 
“Provided also that every insurer, on or after the commencement of the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, shall cause an abstract of the report of the 
actuary to be made in the manner specified by th e regulations made by the Autho rity.”;  
(b) in sub -section ( 4), after the  proviso, insert the following: —  
“Provided further that the statement referred  to in sub -section ( 4) shall be appended in the 
form and in the manner specified by the regul ations made by the Authority. ”. 
15. After sect ion 27B, insert the following: — 
“27C. Prohibition for inv estment of funds outside India .—No insurer shall directly or  indirectly 
invest outside India t he funds of the policy -holders.  
27D. Manne r and conditions of investment .—(1) Without prejudice to anything contained in 
sections 27, 27A and 27B, the Authority may, in the interests of the policy -holders, specify by the 
regulations made by it, the time, manner and other conditions of investment of assets to be held by an 
insure r for the purposes of this Act.   16 
 (2) The Authority may give specific directions for the time, manner and other conditions subject 
to which the funds  of policy -holders  shall be invested in the infra structure and social sector as may be 
specified by regulations made by the Authority and such regulations shall apply uniformly to all the 
insurers carrying on the business of life insurance, general insuran ce, or re -insurance in India on or 
after the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and D evelopment Authority Act, 1999.  
(3) The Authority may, after taking into account the nature of business and to protect the interests 
of the policy -holders, issue to an insurer the directions relating to the time, manner and other 
conditions of investme nt of assets to be held by him:  
Provided that no direction under this sub -section shall be issued unless the insurer concerned has 
been given a reasonabl e opportunity of  being heard. ”. 
16. Section 28A, in sub -section ( 1), for “31st day of December ”, substitute “31st day of March ”. 
17. Section 28B, in sub -section ( 1), for “31st day of December ”, substitute “31st day of March ”. 
18. Section 31B, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for “Central Government ” at both the places where they  occur, substitute 
“Authority ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for “a statement in the prescribed form ”, substitute “a statement, in the 
form specified by the regulations made by the Aut hority, ”; 
(c) after sub -section (3), insert the following: — 
“(4) Every direction under this section shall be issued by an order made by the Authority:  
 Provided that no order under this section shall be made unless the person concerned has been 
given an opportunity of being heard. ”.  
19. After sect ion 32A, insert the following: — 
“32B. Insurance busi ness in rural or social sector .—Every  insurer shall, after the commencement 
of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, undertake such percentages of 
life insurance business and general insurance business in the rural or social sector, as may be 
specified, in the Official  Gazette by the Authority, in this behalf.  
32C. Obligations of insurer in respect of rural or unorganis ed sector and backward classes .—
Every insurer shall, after the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
Act, 1999, discharge the obligations specified under section 32 B to provide life insurance or general 
insurance policies to the persons residing in the rural sector, workers in the unorganised or informal 
sector or for economically vulnerable or backward classes of the society  and other categories of 
persons as may be specified by regulations made by the Authority and such insurance policies shall 
include insurance for crops. ”.  
20. For section  33, substitute the following: — 
„INVESTIGATION  
33. Power of investigati on and inspect ion by Authority .—(1) The Authority may, at any time, by 
order in writing, direct any person (hereafter in this section referred to as “Investigating Authority ”) 
specified in the order to investigate the affairs of any insurer and to report to the Authority on any 
investigation made b y such Investigating Authority:  
Provided that the Investigating Authority may, wherever necessary, employ any auditor or 
actuary or both for the purpose of assisting him in any in vestigation under this section.  
(2) Notw ithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 235 of the Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956), the Investigating Authority may, at any time, and shall, on being directed so to do 
by the Authority, cause an inspection to be made by one or more of his  officers of any insurer and his 
books of account; and the Investigating Authority shall supply to the insurer a copy of his report on 
such inspection.   17 
 (3) It shall be the duty of every manager, managing director or other officer of the insurer to 
produce  before the Investigating Authority directed to make the investigation under sub -section ( 1), 
or inspection under sub -section ( 2), all such books of ac count, registers and other documents in his 
custody or power and to furnish him with any statement and in formation relating to the affairs of the 
insurer as the said Investigating Authority may require of him within such time as the said 
Investig ating Authority may specify.  
(4) Any Investigating Authority, directed to make an investigation under sub -section ( 1), or 
inspection under sub -section ( 2), may examine on oath, any manager, managing director or other 
officer of the insurer in relation to his business and ma y administer oaths accordingly.  
(5) The Investigating Authority shall, if he has been directed by  the Authority to cause an 
inspection to be made, and may, in any other case, report to the Authority on any inspection made 
under this secti on. 
(6) On receipt of any report under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 5), the Authority may, after 
giving such opp ortunity to the insurer to make a representation in connection with the report as, in the 
opinion of the Aut hority, seems reasonable, by ord er in writing, — 
(a) require the insurer, to take such action in respect of any matter arising out of the report as 
the Authority may think fit; or  
(b) cancel the registration of the insurer; or  
(c) direct any person to apply to the court for the winding up of the insurer, if a company, 
whether the registration of the insurer has been can celled under clause ( b) or not.  
(7) The Authority may, after giving reasonable notice to the insurer, publish the report submitted 
by the Investigating Authority under sub -section ( 5) or such portion thereof as may appear to it to be 
necessary.  
(8) The Authority may by the regulations m ade by it specify the minimum information to be 
maintained by insurers in their books, the manner in which such information shall be maintained, the 
checks and other verifications to be adopted by insurers in that connection and all other matters 
incidenta l thereto as are, in its opinion, necessary to enable the Investigating Authority to discharge 
satisfactorily his functions under this section . 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “insurer ” shall include in the case 
of an  insurer incorporated in India — 
(a) all its subsidiaries formed for the purpose of carrying on the business of insurance 
exclusively outside India; and  
(b) all its branches whether situ ated in India or outside India.  
(9) No order made under this section other than an order made under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 6) 
shall be capable of being c alled in question in any court.  
(10) All expenses of, and incidental to, any investigation made under this section shall be 
defrayed by the insurer, shall have priority over that debts due from the insurer and shall be 
recoverabl e as an arrear of land revenue.‟ .  
21. Section 33A, omit “Central Government or the ”.  
22. Sec tion 34H, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) for “Controller ”, substitute “Chairperson of the Authority ”; 
(ii) for “an Assistant Controller of Insurance ”, substitute “an office r authorised by the 
Authority ”; 
(b) in sub -sections ( 5) and ( 7), for “Controller ” wherever it occurs, substitute “Chairperson of 
the Authority ”.  18 
 23. Section 35, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for “sanctioned by the Controller ”, substitute “approved by the Authority ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 3),— 
(i) in the first paragraph, for “to sanction any such scheme ”, substitut e “to approve any such 
scheme ”; 
(ii) in the second paragraph, for “the amalgamation or t ransfer if sanctioned ”, substitute “the 
amalgam ation or transfer if approved ”. 
24. Section 36, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for “may sanction the arrangement ”, substitute  “may approve the 
arrangement ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2),— 
(i) for “the insurers concerned in the amalgamation, the Controller may sanction ”, substitute 
“the insurers concerned in the amalgamati on, the Authority may approve ”; 
(ii) for “contracts as sanctioned by the Controller ”, substitute “contracts as approved by the 
Authority ”.  
25. Section 37, in clause ( c), for “scheme sanctioned ”, substitute “scheme approved ”. 
26. In section 40A, in sub -section ( 3), for the portion beginning with the words “an amount 
exceeding ” and ending with the words “ten per cent. of the premium payable on the policy ”, substitute 
“an amount not exceeding fift een per cent. of the premium pay able on the policy where the policy relates 
to fire or marine insurance or misce llaneous insurance. ”. 
27. Section 42, — 
(a) for sub -section (1), substitute the following: — 
“(1) The Au thority or an officer authorised by it in this behalf shall, in the manner determined 
by the regulations made by it and on payment of the fee determined by the regulations, which 
shall not be more than two hundred and fifty rupees, issue t o any person maki ng an application in 
the manner determined by the regulations, a licence to act as an insurance agent for the purpose of 
soliciting or procuring insurance business:  
Provided that, — 
(i) in the case of an individual, he does not suffer from any of the disqua lifications 
mentioned in sub -section ( 4); and  
(ii) in the case of a company or firm, any of its directors or partners does not suffer from 
any of the said disqualifications:  
Provided further that any licence issued immediately before the commencement of the 
Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 shall be deemed to have been issued 
in accordance with the regulations which provide for such li cence. ”; 
(b) for sub -section (3), substitute the following: — 
“(3) A licence issued under this section, after the date of the commencement of the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999, shall remain in force for a period of three 
years only from the date of issue, but shall, if the applic ant, being an individual does not, or being 
a company or firm any of its directors or partners does not, suffer from any of the 
disqualifications mentioned in clauses ( b), (c), (d), (e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 4) and the 
application for renewal of licen ce reaches the issuing authority at least thirty days before the date 
on the licence ceases to remain in force, be renewed for a period of three years at any one time on 
payment of the fee determined by the regulations made by the Authority which shall not b e more 
than rupees two hundred and fifty, and additional fee of an amount determined by the               19 
 regulations not exceeding rupees one hundred by way of penalty, if the application for renewal of 
the licence does not reach the issuing authority at least thirty days before the date on which the 
licen ce ceases to remain in force. ”; 
(c) in sub -section ( 3A), for the pro viso, substitute the following: —  
“Provided that the Authority may, if satisfied that undue hardship would be caused otherwise, 
accept a ny application in contravention of this sub -section on payment by the applicant of a 
penalty of se ven hundred and fifty rupees. ”; 
(d) in sub -section ( 4), after cla use ( d), insert the following: — 
“(e) that he does not possess the requisite qualifications an d practical training for a period not 
exceeding twelve months, as may be specified by the regulations made b y the Authority in this 
behalf;  
(f) that he has not passed such examination as may be specified by the regulations made b y 
the Authority in this behalf:  
Provided that a person who had been issued a licence under sub -section ( 1) of this section or 
sub-section ( 1) of section 64UM shall not be required to possess the requisite qualifications, 
practical training and pass such examination as r equired by  clauses ( e) and ( f); 
(g) that he violates the code of conduct as may be specified by the regul ations made by the 
Authority. ”; 
(e) for sub -section (6), substitute the following: — 
“(6) The Authority may issue a duplicate licence to replace a licence lost, d estroyed or 
mutilated, on payment of such fee not exceeding fifty rupees as may be d etermined by the 
regulations. ”; 
(f) in sub -section ( 7),— 
(i) for “fifty rupees ”, substitute “five hundred rupees ”; 
(ii) for “one hundred rupees ”, substitute “one thousand rupees ”; 
(g) in sub -section ( 8), for “fifty rupees ”, substitute “five thousand rupees ”.  
28. Se ction 42A, in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) for “Controller or an officer authorised by him ”, substitute “Authority or an officer auth orised 
by it”; 
(b) for “an applicat ion to him ”, substitute “an application to it ”.  
29. After sect ion 42C, insert the following: — 
“42D. Issue of licence to intermed iary or insurance intermediary .—(1) The Authority or an 
officer authorised by it in this behalf shall, in the manner determined by the regulations made by the 
Authority and on payment of the fees determined by the r egulations  made by the Authority, issue to 
any person making an application  in the manner determined by the regulations, and not suffering 
from any of the disqualifications herein mentioned, a licence to act as an intermediary or an insuran ce 
intermediary under this Act:  
Provided that, — 
(a) in the case of an individual, he does n ot suffer from any of the disqualifications mentioned 
in su b-section ( 4) of section 42, or  
(b) in the case of a company or firm, any of its directors or partners does not suffer from any  
of the said disqualifications.  
(2) A licence issued under this section shall entitle the holder thereof to act as an intermediar y or 
insurance intermediary.   20 
 (3) A licence issued under this section shall remain in force for a period of three years only from 
the date of issue, but shall, if the applicant, being an indi vidual does not, or being a company or firm 
any of its directors or partners does not suffer from any of the disqualifications mentioned in clauses 
(b), (c), (d), (e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 4) of section 42 and the application for renewal of licence 
reach es the issuing authority at least thirty days before the date on which the licence  ceases to remain 
in force, be renewed for a period of three years at any one time on payment of the fee, determined by 
the regulations made by the Authority and additional f ee for an amount determined by the regulations, 
not exceeding one hu ndred rup ees by way of penalty, if the application for renewal of the licence 
does not reach the issuing authority at least thirty days before the date on which the lic ence ceases to 
remai n in force.  
(4) No application for the renewal of a licence under this section shall be entertained if the 
application does not reach the issuing authority before the licence ceases to remain in force:  
Provided that the Authority may, if satisfied that und ue hardship would be caused otherwise, 
accept any application in contravention of this sub -section on payment by the applicant of a penalty 
of seven hundred and fifty rupees.  
(5) The disqualifications above refer red to shall be the following: — 
(a) that  the person is a minor;  
(b) that he is found to be of unsound mind by a co urt of competent jurisdiction;  
(c) that he has been found guilty of criminal misappropriation or criminal breach of trust or 
cheating or forgery or an abetment of or attempt to commi t any such offence by a c ourt of 
competent jurisdiction:  
Provided that, where at least five years have elapsed since the completion of the sentence 
imposed on any person in respect of any such offence, the Authority shall ordinarily declare in 
respect of s uch person that his conviction shall cease to operat e as a disqualificati on under this 
clause;  
(d) that in the course of any judicial proceeding relating to any policy of insurance of the 
winding up of an insurance company or in the course of an investigat ion of the affairs of an 
insurer it has been found that he has been guilt y of or has knowi ngly participated in or connived 
at any fraud dishonestly or misrepresentation ag ainst an insurer or an insured;  
(e) that he does not possess the requisite qualificat ions and practical training for a period not 
exceeding twelve months, as may be specified by the regulations made b y the Authority in this 
behalf;  
(f) that he has not passed such examinations as may be specified by the regulations made b y 
the Authority in this behalf;  
(g) that he violates the code of conduct as may be specified by the reg ulations made by the 
Authority.  
(6) If it be found that an intermediary or an insurance intermediary suffers from any of the 
foregoing disqualifications, without prejudice to any other penalty to which he may be liable, the 
Authority shall, and if the intermediary or an insurance int ermediary has knowingly contravened any 
provision of this Act may cancel the licence issued to the intermediary or insurance i ntermediary 
under this section.  
(7) The Authority may issue a duplicate licence to replace a licence lost, destroyed or mutilated, 
on payment of such fee, as may be determined by the reg ulations made by the Authority.  
(8) Any person who acts as an intermediary or an insuran ce intermediary without holding a 
licence issued under this section to act as such, shall be punishable with fine, and any insurer or any 
person who appoints as an int ermediary or an insurance inter mediary  or any person not licensed to act 
as such or transacts any insurance business in India through any such person, shall be pu nishable with 
fine. 21 
 (9) Where the person contravening sub -section ( 8) is a company or a firm, then, without prejudice 
to any other p roceedings which may be taken against the company or firm, every director, manager, 
secretary or other officer of the compan y, and every partne r of the firm who is knowingly a party to 
such contravention s hall be punishable with fine. ”. 
30. Section 64UA, i n sub -section ( 1), in sub -clause ( a), for “Controller of Insurance ”, substitute 
“Chairperson of the Authority ”.  
31. Section 64UB,— 
(a) for sub -section (1), substitute the following: — 
“(1) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations to carryout 
the purposes of this Part. ”;  
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for “rules”, substitute “regulations ”; 
(c) in sub -section ( 3), for “Central  Government ” at both the places where it  occur, substitute 
“Authority ”; 
(d) in sub -section ( 5), for “Controller of Insurance ”, substitute “Chairperson of the Authority ”.  
32. Section 64UC, in sub -section ( 1), in proviso, for “the Controller may, with the previous appr oval 
of the Central Government ”, substitute “the Authority may ”. 
33. Section 64UD, after sub -section (1), insert the following: — 
“Provided that the Chairperson of the Authority shall become the Chairman of the Advisory 
Committee with effect from the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999 and function as such, and  any Chairman of the Tariff Com mittee  holding office 
immediately before such commencement sh all cease to be the Chairman. ”. 
34. Section 64UJ, in sub -section (5), for “Central Government ”, wherever it occurs, substitute 
“Authority ”. 
35. Section 64UM, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) in paragraph ( B), after “the Insurance (Amendment) Act, 1968 ”, insert “but before the 
commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and  Development Authority Act, 1999 ”; 
(ii) after parag raph ( B), insert the following: —  
“(BA) Every person who intends to act as a surveyor or loss assessor after the expiry of a 
period of one year from the commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development 
Authority Act, 1999, shall make an application to the Authority within such tim e, in such 
manner and on payment of such fee as may be determined by the reg ulations made by the 
Authority:  
Provided that any licence issued immediately before the commencement of the Insurance 
Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 shall be deemed to h ave been issued in 
accordance with the regulation s providing for such licence. ”; 
(iii) in paragraph ( C), for “as may be prescribed ”, substitute “as may be determined by the 
regulations ”; 
(iv) in paragraph ( D), in clause ( i),— 
(A) for item (a), substitute the following: — 
“(a) has been in practice as a surveyor or loss assessor on the date of commencement 
of the Insurance Regulatory and Develo pment Authority Act, 1999, or ”; 
(B) in item ( f), for “prescribed ”, substitute “specified by the regu lations made by t he 
Authority ”;  22 
 (b) after sub -section ( 1), insert— 
“(1A) Every surveyor and loss assessor shall comply with the code of conduct in respect of 
their duties, responsibilities and other professional requirements as may be specified by the 
regulations made by the Authority. ”.  
36. Section 64V, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) in clause ( i), after sub -clause ( g), insert the following: — 
“(h) such other asset or assets as may be specified by the reg ulations made in this 
behalf; ”; 
(ii) in clause ( ii),— 
(A) in sub-clause ( b), in items ( i) and ( ii), for “40 per cen t.”, substitute “50 per cent. ”; 
(B) after sub -clause ( f), insert the following: — 
“(g) such other liability which may be made in this behalf to be included fo r the 
purpose of clause ( ii).”; 
(b) for sub-section  (2), substitute the following: — 
 “(2) Every insurer shall furnish to the Authority with his returns under section 15 or section 
16, as the case may be, a statement certified by an auditor approved by the Authority in respect of 
general insuran ce business, or an actuary approved by th e Authority in respect of life insurance 
business, as the case may be, of his assets and liabilities assessed in the manner required by this 
section as on the 31st day of March of the preceding year.  
(3) Every insur er shall value his assets and liabilities in the manner required by this section 
and in accordance with the regulations which may be made by the Authority in  this behalf. ”. 
37. Section 64VA, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for “at all times ”, substitute “at all times before the commencement of the 
Insurance Regulatory and De velopment Authority Act, 1999 ”; 
(b) after sub -section (1), insert the following: — 
„(1A) Every insurer shall, at all times, on or after the commencement of the Insurance 
Regulatory and Developm ent Authority Act, 1999, maintain an excess of the value of his assets 
over the amount of his liabilities of not less than the amount arrived at as follows (hereinafter 
referred to in this section referred to as the “requi red solvency margin ”), namely: — 
(i) in the case of an insurer carrying on life insurance business, the required solvency 
margin shall be the h igher of the following amounts — 
(a) fifty crores of rupees (one hundred crores of rup ees in case of re -insurers); or  
(b) the aggregate sums of the r esults arrived at in it ems ( I) and ( II) stated below: — 
(I) the aggregate of the results arrived at by applying the calculation described in 
item ( A) below (Step I) and the calculation describ ed in item ( B) below (Step II):  
(A) for Step I — 
(A. 1) there shall be taken, a sum equal to a percentage determined by the 
regulations not exceeding five per cent. of the mathematical reserves for direct 
business and re -insurance acceptances without any deduc tion for re -insurance 
cessions;  
(A. 2) the am ount of mathematical reserves at the end of the preceding 
financial year after the deduction of re -insurance cessions shall be expressed as a 23 
 percentage of the amount of those mathematical reserves before any such 
deduction; and  
(A. 3) the sum mentioned in  item (A . 1) above shall be multiplied — 
(A.3.1) where the percentage arrived at under item (A. 2) above is 
greater than eighty -five per cent. (or in the case of a re -insurer carrying on 
exclusive re -insurance business, fifty per cent.), by that greater per centage; 
and 
(A.3.2) in any other case, by eighty -five per cent. (or in the case of a re -
insurer carrying on exclusive re -insurance  business, by fifty per cent.);  
(B) for Step  II— 
(B. 1) there shall be taken, a sum equal to a percentage determined by the 
regulations made by the Authority not exceeding one per cent. of the sum at risk 
for the policies on which the sum at ris k is not a negative figure, and  
(B. 2) the amount of sum at risk at the end of the preceding financial year for 
policies on which the su m at risk is not a negative figure after the deduction of 
re-insurance cession shall be expressed as a percentage of the amount of that sum 
at ris k before any such deduction, a nd 
(B. 3) the sum arrived at under item (B . 1) above shall be multiplied — 
(B. 3.1) where the percentage arrived at under item (B. 2) above is 
greater than fifty per cent., by that greater percentage; and  
(B. 3.2) in any  other case, by fifty per cent.  
(II) a percentage determined by the regulations made by the Authority of the 
value of assets determined in accordance with  the provisions of section 64V;  
(ii) in the case of an insurer carrying on general insurance business, the required solvency 
margin, shall b e the hig hest of the following amounts: — 
(a) fifty crores of rupees (one hundred crores of rupees in case of re -insurer); or  
(b) a sum equivalent to twenty per cent. of net premium income; or  
(c) a sum equivalent to thirty per cent. of net incurred claims , 
subject to credit for re -insurance in computing net premiums and net incurred claims being actual but a 
percentage, determined by the regulations  not exceeding fifty per cent.:  
Provided that if in respect of any insurer, the Authority is satisfied that ei ther by reason of an 
unfavourable claim experience or because of sharp increase in the volume of the business, or for any other 
reason, compl iance with the provisions of thi s sub -section would cause undue hardship to the insurer, the 
Authority may direct, for such period and subject to such conditions, such solvency margin not being less 
than the lower of the amount mentioned in sub -clause ( i) or sub -clause ( ii) above as the case may be.  
 Explanation .—For the purposes of thi s sub -section, the expressions — 
(i) “mathematical reserves ” means the provision made by an insurer to cover liabilities (excluding 
liabilities which have fallen due and liabilities arising from deposit back arrangement in relation to any 
policy whereby  an amount is deposited by re -insurer  with the cedant) arising under or in connection with 
policies or contracts for life insurance business. Mathematical reserves also include specific provision for 
adverse deviations of the bases, such as mortality an d morbidity rates, interest rate s, and e xpense rates, 
and any explicit provisions made, in the valuation of liabilities, in accordance with the regulations made 
by the Authority for this purpose;  
(ii) “net incurred claims ” means the average of the net incurred claims during the specified period of 
not exceeding t hree preceding financial years;   24 
 (iii) “sum at risk ”, in relation to a life insuranc e policy, means a sum which is — 
(a) in any case in which an amount is payable in consequence of death other than a case falling 
within sub -clause ( b) below, t he amount payable on death, and  
(b) in any case in which the benefit under the policy in question consists of the making, in 
consequence of death, of the payments of annuity, payment of a sum by instalments or any other kind 
of periodic payments, t he pr esent value of that benefit,  
less in either case the mathematical reserves in resp ect of the relevant policies.';  
(c) after sub -section ( 2), insert the following: — 
“(2A) If, at any time an insurer does not maintain the required solvency margin in accordance 
with the provisions of this section, he shall, in accordance with the directions issued by the Authority, 
submit a financial plan, indicating a plan of action  to corr ect the deficiency to the Authority within a 
specified per iod not exceeding three months.  
(2B) An insurer who has submitted a plan under sub -section ( 2A) to the Authority shall propose 
modifications to the plan if the Authority considers it inadequate, and  shall give effect to any plan 
accepte d by the Authority as adequate.  
(2C) An insurer who does not comply with the provisions of sub -section ( 2A) shall be deemed to 
be insolvent and may be wound up by the court. ”; 
(d) after sub -section ( 6), insert the  following:— 
“(7) Every insurer shall furnish to the Authority his returns under section 15 or section 16, as the 
case may be, in case of life insurance business a statement certified by an actuary approved by the 
Authority, and in case of general insuranc e bus iness a statement certified by an auditor approved by 
the Authority, of the required solvency margin maintained by the insurer in the manner required by 
sub-section ( 1A).”.  
38. Section 70, in sub -section ( 1), for “the Controller a certificate of registrat ion”, substitute “the 
Authority, before the date of commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority 
Act, 1999, a certificate of registration ”.  
39. Section 95, in sub -section ( 1), for “In this Part —”, substitute “In this Part, before the  date of 
commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and D evelopment Authority Act, 1999, —”. 
40. Section 101A, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for “the Central Government ”, substitute “the Authority, with the previous 
approv al of the Central Government, ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for “the Central Government ”, substitute “the Authority ”.  
41. Section 101B, — 
(a) in sub -section ( 1), for “the Central Government ”, substitute “the Authority with the previous 
approv al of the Central Government. ”; 
(b) in sub -section ( 2), for “prescribed ”, substitute “determined by the regu lations made by the 
Authority ”. 
42. For sections 102 to 105, substitute the following: — 
“102. Penalty for default in complying with, or act in contravention of, this Act .—If any person, 
who is required under this Act, or rules o r regulations made thereunder, — 
(a) to furnish any document, statement, account, return or report to the Authority , fails to 
furnish the same; or  
(b) to comply with the directions, fails to comply with such directions;   25 
 (c) to maintain solvency margin, fails to  maintain such solvency margin;  
(d) to comply with the directions on the insurance treaties, fails to comply with such 
direct ions on the insurance treaties,  
he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees f or each such fa ilure and punishable with 
fine. 
103. Penalty for carrying on insurance business in contra vention of sections 3, 7 and 98 .—If a 
person makes a statement, or furnishes any document, statement, account, return or report which is 
false and which  he either knows or believes to be false o r doe s not believe to be true, — 
(a) he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five lakh ru pees for each such failure; and  
(b) he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to three years or w ith fine 
for each such failure.  
104. Penalty f or false statement in document .—If a person fails to comply with the provisions of 
section 27 or section 27A or section 27B or section 27C or section 27D, he shall be liable to a penalty 
not exceeding five lak h rup ees for each such failure.  
105. Wrongfully obt aining or withholding property .—If any director, managing director, manager 
or other officer or employees of an insurer wrongfully obtains possession of any property or 
wrongfully applies to any purpose of the Act, he shall be liable t o a penalty not exceeding two lak h 
rupees for each such failure.  
105A. Offences b y companies .—(1) Where any offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in cha rge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the condu ct of the business of the compa ny as well as the company 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contai ned in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised all due diligence to prev ent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has 
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent 
or connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or 
other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be 
guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section,— 
(a) “company ” means an y body corporate, and includes — 
(i) a firm; and  
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals w hether incorporated or not; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to — 
(i) a fir m, means a partner in the firm;  
(ii) an association of persons or a body of individuals, means any member c ontrolling the 
affairs thereof.  
105B. Penalty for fai lure to comply with section 32B .—If an insurer fails to comply with the 
provisions of section 32B, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five lakh rupees for each such 
failure and shall be punishable with imprisonment which ma y extend to three years or with fine for 
each such failur e. 
105C. Penalty for fai lure to comply with section 32C .—If an insurer fails to comply with the 
provisions of section 32C, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding twenty -five lakh rupees for 26 
 each such failure and in the case of subsequent and continu ing failure, the registration granted to such 
insurer under section 3 shall be cancelled by the Authority. ”.  
43. In sections 110A, 110B and 110C, for “Controller ” wherever it occurs, substitute “Chairperson of 
the Authority ”. 
44. Section 110G, for “Contro ller” at both the places where it occurs, substitute  “Chairperson of the 
Authority ”. 
 45. Section 110H, in sub -section ( 1), for “under sections ”, substitute “under sections 27D, ”.  
46. Se ction 114, in sub -section ( 2),— 
(a) after cla use ( a), insert the following: — 
“(aa) such other percentage of paid -up equity capital in excess of twenty -six per cent. of the 
paid-up equity capital and the period within which such excess paid -up equity capital shall be 
divested under sub -section ( 1) of section 6AA. ”; 
(b) omit clauses ( g) and ( ll). 
47. After sect ion 114, insert the following: — 
“114A. Power of  Authority to make regulations .—(1) The Authority may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to carr y out 
the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the matters including fee relating to the registrat ion of insurers under section 3;  
(b) the manner of suspension or cancellation of registration under  sub-section ( 5E) of  
section 3;  
(c) such  fee, not exceeding five thousand rupees, as may be determined by the regulations for 
issue of a duplicate certificate of registration unde r sub -section ( 7) of section 3;  
(d) the matters relating to the renewal of registration and  fee therefor under sectio n 3A;  
(e) the manner and procedure for divesting excess share capital under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 6AA;  
(f) the preparation of balance -sheet, profit and loss account and a separate account of receipts 
and payments and revenue account under sub-section (1A) of section 11;  
(g) the manner in which an abstract of the report of the actuary to be specified under the 
fourth proviso to  sub-section ( 1) of section 13;  
(h) the form and manner in which the statement referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 13 
shall be appended;  
(i) the time, manner and other conditions of investment of assets held by an insurer under 
sub-sections (1), (2) and ( 3) of section 27D;  
(j) the minimum information to be maintained by insurer in their books, the manner in which 
such informa tion should be maintained, the checks and other verifications to be adopted by 
insurers in that connection and all othe r matters incidental thereto und er sub-section ( 8) of section 
33; 
(k) the manner for making an application, the manner and the fee for is sue of a licence to act 
as an insurance agent under  sub-section ( 1) of section 42;  
(l) the fee and the additional fee to be determined for renewal of licence of insurance agent 
under  sub-section ( 3) of section 42;   27 
 (m) the requisite qualifications and practical training to act as an insurance agent under clause 
(e) of sub -section ( 4) of section 42 ; 
(n) the passing of examination to act as an insurance agent under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 4) 
of section 42;  
(o) the code of conduct under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 4) of section 42;  
(p) the fee not exceeding rupees fifty for issue of duplicate licence under  sub-section ( 6) of 
section 42;  
(q) the manner and the fees for issue of a licence to an intermediary or an insurance 
intermediary under sub-section ( 1) of section 42D;  
(r) the fee and the additional fee to be determined for renewal of licence of intermediaries or 
insurance intermediaries under sub-section ( 3) of section 42D;  
(s) the requisite qualifications and practical tra ining of intermediaries or insurance 
intermediaries under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 5) of section 42D;  
(t) the examination to be passed to act as an intermediary or insurance intermediary under 
clause ( f) of sub-section ( 5) of section 42D;  
(u) the code of conduct under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 5) of section 42D;  
(v) the fee for issue of duplicate licence under sub -section ( 7) of section 42D;  
(w) such matters as specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 64UB relating to  the Tariff 
Advisory Commit tee; 
(x) the matters relating to licensing of surveyors and loss assessors, their duties, 
responsibilities and other professional requi rements under section 64UM;  
(y) such other asset or assets as may be specified under clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
64V for the purposes of ascertaining sufficienc y of assets under section 64VA;  
(z) the valuation of assets and liabilities under s ub-section ( 3) of section 64V;  
(za) the matters specified under sub -section ( 1A) of section 64VA rel ating to sufficien cy of 
assets;  
(zb) the matters relating to re -insuranc e under sections 101A and 101B;  
(zc) the matters relating to redressal of grievances of policy -holders to protect their interest 
and to regulate, promote and ensure orderly gr owth of insurance industry;  and 
(zd) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified by the regulations made by the 
Authority or in respect of which provision is to be made or may be made by the regulations.  
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as ma y be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or  in two or more successive sessi ons, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following th e session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation s hould not be made, the regulatio n shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no e ffect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previousl y done 
under that regulation. ”. 
48. Section 116A, for “Central Government ”, at both places where they occur, sub stitute “Central 
Government, before the date of commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Dev elopment Authority 
Act, 1999, ”.  28 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 31)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE LIFE INSURANCE  CORPORATION  ACT, 1956  
(31 OF 1956)  
1. In the Act, for “Controller ” wherever it occurs, substitute “Authority ”. 
2. After section 30, inser t the following: — 
“30A. Exclusive pri vilege of Corporation to cease .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the exclusive privilege of carrying on life insurance business in India by the Corporation shall 
cease on and from the commencement of the Insurance Regula tory and Development Authority Act, 
1999 and the Corp oration shall, thereafter, carry on life insurance business in India in accordance 
with the provisions of the Insuran ce Act, 1938 (4 of 1938). ”.  29 
  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 32)  
AMENDMENT TO THE GENERAL  INSURANCE  BUSINESS  (NATIONALISATION ) ACT, 1972  
(57 OF1972)  
After sect ion 24, insert the following :— 
“24A. Exclusive privilege of Corporation and acquiring companies to cease .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the exclusive privilege of the Corporation and the acquiring 
companies of carryi ng on general insurance business in India shall cease on an d from the 
commencement of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 and the 
Corporation and the acquiring companies shall, thereafter, carry on general insurance business in 
India in accordance with the provisions of the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938). ” 
--------------------------The Leaders and Chief Whips of Recognised Parties and Groups in Parliament (Facilities) Act, 1998--------------------------
1 
 THE LEADERS AND CHIEF WHIPS OF RECOGNISED PARTIES AND GROUPS IN 
PARLIAMENT (FACILITIES) ACT, 1998  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
3. Facilities to the Leaders and Chief Whips of recognised  groups and  parties . 
4. Power to make rules . 
5. Amendment of section 3 of Act 10 of 1959 . 
 
  2 
 THE LEADERS AND CHIEF WHIPS OF RECOGNISED PARTIES AND GROUPS IN 
PARLIAMENT (FACILITIES) ACT, 1998  
ACT NO. 5 OF 1999  
[7th January, 1999 .] 
An Act to provide for facilities to Leaders and Chief Whips of recognised parties and groups in 
Parliament.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Forty -ninth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Leaders and Chief Whips of 
Recognised Parties and Groups in Parliament (Facilities) Act, 1998.  
1[(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day of February, 1999. ] 
2[2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the contex t otherwise requires, — 
(a)„„recognised group” means, — 
(i)in relation to the Council of States, every party which has a strength  of not less than fifteen 
members and not more than twenty -four members in the Council;  
(ii)in relation to the House of the People, every party which has a strength  of not less than 
thirty members and not more than fifty -four members  in the House;  
(b) “recognised party” means, — 
(i)in relation to the Council of States, every party which has a streng th of not less than 
twenty -five members in the Council;  
(ii)in relation to the House of the People, every party which has a strength  of not less than 
fifty-five members in the House. ] 
3[3. Facilities to the Leaders and Chief Whips of recognised groups and  parties.—Subject to any 
rules made in this behalf by the Central Government,  each leader, deputy leader and each Chief Whip of a 
recognised group and a  recognised party shall be entitled to telephone and secretarial facilities:  
Provided that such facilitie s shall not be provided to such leader, deputy  leader or Chief Whip, as the 
case may be, who — 
(i)holds an office of Minister as defined in section 2 of the Salaries and  Allowances of Ministers 
Act, 1952  (58 of 1952) ; or 
(ii)holds an office of the Leader of  the Opposition as defined in section 2of the Salary and 
Allowances of Leaders of Opposition in Parliament  Act, 1977  (33 of 1977) ; or 
(iii)is entitled to similar telephone and secretarial facilities by virtue of  holding any office of, or 
representation in,  a Parliamentary Committee  or other Committee, Council, Board, Commission or 
other body set up  by the Government; or  
(iv)is entitled to similar telephone and secretarial facilities provided to him  in any other capacity 
by the Government or a local authority or  Corporation owned or controlled by the Government or any 
local  authority. ] 
4. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 18 of2000 , s.2, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 5 -2-1999) . 
2. Subs. by s.3 ,ibid., for section 2 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2000). 
3. Subs. by s.4, ibid., for section 3 (w.e.f. 7 -6-2000).  3 
 (2) Every rule made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, be fore the expiry of the session immediately 
following  the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making  any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be  made, the rule shall thereafter have effect onl y 
in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that  rule. 
5. Amendment of section 3 of Act 10 of 1959. —In the  Parliament (Prevention  of Disqualification) 
Act, 1959, in section 3, — 
(i) after clause (ab),the following clause shall be inserted, namely: — 
“(ac) the office of1[each leader and each deputy leader] of a recognised party  and a 
recognised grou p in either Ho use of Parliament;”;  
(ii) after Explanation 2, the following Explanation shall be inserted,  namely: — 
Explanation 3.—In clause (ac),the expressions “recognised party” and  “recognised group” 
shall have the meanings assigned to them in Leaders  and Chief Whips of Recognised Parties and 
Groups in Parliament (Facilities)Act, 1998. ‟. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 18 of 2000, s. 5, for “each leader” (w.e.f . 5-2-1999).  
--------------------------The National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999--------------------------
1THE NATIONAL TRUST FOR WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH AUTISM, CEREBRAL 
PALSY, MENTAL RETARDATION AND MULTIPLE DISABILITIES ACT, 1999 
_______________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
_______________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY 
SECTIONS 
1.Short title and extent. 
2.Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL TRUST FOR WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH  AUTISM, CEREBRAL PALSY,  MENTAL
RETARDATION AND  MULTIPLE  DISABILITY
3.Constitution of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disability, etc. 
4.Term of office of Chairperson and Members, meeting of Board, etc. 
5.Resignation of Chairperson and Members. 
6.Disqualifications. 
7.Vacation of office by Members. 
8.Chief Executive Officer and staff of Trust. 
9.Vacancies in Board not to invalidate acts, etc. 
CHAPTER III 
OBJECTS OF THE TRUST
10.Objects of Trust. 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD
11.Powers and duties of Board. 
CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE FOR REGISTRATION 
12.Procedure for registration. 
CHAPTER VI 
LOCAL LEVEL COMMITTEES 
13.Constitution of local level committees. 
14.Appointment for guardianship. 
15.Duties of guardian. 
16.Guardian to furnish inventory and annual accounts. 
17.Removal of guardian. 
CHAPTER VII 
ACCOUNTABILITY AND MONITORING 
18.Accountability. 
19.Monitoring. 
20.Annual general meeting. 2CHAPTER VIII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT 
SECTIONS 
21.Grants by the Central Government. 
22.Fund. 
23.Budget. 
24.Accounts and audit. 
25.Annual report. 
26.Authentication of orders, etc. 
27.Returns and information. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS 
28.Power of Central Government to issue directions. 
29.Power of Central Government to supersede Board. 
30.Exemption from tax on income. 
31.Protection of action taken in good faith. 
32.Chairperson, Members and officers of Trust to be public servants. 
33.Delegation. 
34.Power to make rules. 
35.Power to make regulations. 
36.Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. 3THE NATIONAL TRUST FOR WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH AUTISM, CEREBRAL 
PALSY, MENTAL RETARDATION AND MULTIPLE DISABILITIES ACT, 1999 
ACT NO. 44 OF 1999 
[30th December , 1999.] 
An Act to provide for the constitution of a body at the national level for the Welfare of Persons 
with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with 
Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Act, 1999. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,— 
(a) “autism” means a condition of uneven skill development primarily affecting the 
communication and social abilities of a person, marked by repetitive and ritualistic behaviour; 
(b) “Board” means Board of trustees constituted under section 3; 
(c) “cerebral palsy” means a group of non-progressive conditions of a person characterised by 
abnormal motor control posture resulting from brain insult or injuries occurring in the pre-natal, 
perinatal or infant period of development; 
(d) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Board appointed under clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 4) of section 3; 
(e) “Chief Executive Officer” means the Chief Executive Officer appointed under sub-section ( 1) 
of section 8; 
(f) “Member” means a Member of the Board and includes the Chairperson; 
(g) “mental retardation” means a condition of arrested or incomplete development of mind of a 
person which is specially characterised by sub-normality of intelligence; 
(h) “multiple disabilities” means a combination of two or more disabilities as defined in clause ( i) 
of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full 
Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996); 
(i) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
(j) “person with disability” means a person suffering from any of the conditions relating to 
autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation or a combination of any two or more of such conditions and 
includes a person suffering from severe multiple disability; 
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(l) “professional” means a person who is having special expertise in a field which would promote 
the welfare of persons with disability; 
(m) “registered organisation” means an association of persons with disability or an association of 
parents of persons with disability or a voluntary organisation, as the case may be, registered under 
section 12; 
(n) “regulations” means the regulations made by the Board under this Act; 
(o) “severe disability” means disability with eighty per cent. or more of one or more multiple 
disabilities; 4(p) “Trust” means the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disability constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 3. 
CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL TRUST FOR WELFARE OF PERSONS WITH AUTISM, CEREBRAL PALSY, MENTAL 
RETARDATION AND MULTIPLE DISABILITY
3. Constitution of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, 
Mental Retardation and Multiple Disability, etc. —(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be constituted, for the purposes of this Act, a body 
by the name of the National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental 
Retardation and Multiple Disabilities, which shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having 
perpetual succession and a common seal, with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, 
sue or be sued. 
(2) The general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs and business of the Trust 
shall vest in a Board which may exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be exercised or 
done by the Trust. 
(3) The head office of the Trust shall be at New Delhi and the Board may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Government, establish offices at other places in India. 
(4) The Board shall consist of— 
(a) a Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government from amongst the persons having 
expertise and experience in the field of autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation and multiple 
disability; 
(b) nine persons to be appointed in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed from 
amongst the registered organisations out of which three members each shall be from voluntary 
organisations, association of parents of persons with autism, cerebral palsy, mental retardation and 
multiple disability and from association of persons with disability, Members: 
Provided that initial appointment under this clause shall be made by the Central Government by 
nomination; 
(c) eight persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India nominated by 
that Government to represent the Ministries or Departments of Social Justice and Empowerment, 
Women and Child Development, Health and Family Welfare, Finance, Labour, Education, Urban 
Affairs and Employment and Rural Employment and Poverty Alleviation, Members, ex officio ; 
(d) three persons to be nominated by the Board representing the associations of trade, commerce 
and industry engaged in philanthropic activities, Members; 
(e) the Chief Executive Officer, who, shall be of the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of 
India, Member-Secretary, ex officio . 
(5) The Board may associate with itself, in such manner and for such purposes as may be determined 
by regulations, any person whose assistance or advice it may desire for carrying out the objects of the 
Trust: 
Provided that such person shall have a right to take part in the discussions relevant to that purpose but 
shall not have a right to vote at a meeting of the Board and shall not be a member for any other purpose: 
Provided further that the maximum number of persons so associated shall not exceed eight and so far 
as possible the person so associated shall belong to the registered organisation or from the professionals. 
4. Term of office of Chairperson and Members, meeting of Board, etc. —(1) The Chairperson or a 
Member shall hold office for a term of three years from the date of his appointment 1***: 
1. The words “or until his successor shall have been duly appointed, whichever is longer” omitted by Act 35 of 2018, s. 2,  
(w.e.f  29.12.2018) 5Provided that no person shall hold office as the Chairperson or other Member after he has attained the 
age of sixty-five years. 
1[(1A) The Central Government shall initiate the process for appointment of the Chairperson or 
Member, as the case may be, at least six months prior to the expiry of the term of office of such 
Chairperson or Member.] 
(2) The conditions of service of the Chairperson and other Members shall be such as may be 
prescribed. 
(3) A casual vacancy in the Board shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of section 3 and a 
person appointed shall hold office only for the remainder of the term for which the member, in whose 
place he was appointed, would have held that office: 
2[Provided that the Central Government may, in case of a casual vacancy in the office of the 
Chairperson, by order in writing, direct an officer of appropriate level, to perform the functions of the 
Chairperson until such vacancy is filled in.] 
(4) Before appointing any person as the Chairperson or a Member, the Central Government shall 
satisfy itself that the person does not and will not, have any such financial or other interest as is likely to 
affect prejudicially his functions as such Member. 
(5) No Member of the Board shall be a beneficiary of the Trust during the period such Member holds 
office. 
(6) The Board shall meet at least once in three months at such time and place as may be determined 
by the Board by regulations and shall observe such rules of procedure in the transaction of business at a 
meeting as may be prescribed. 
(7) The Chairperson, if for any reason is unable to attend the meeting of the Board, any Member 
elected by the Members present from amongst themselves at the meeting, shall preside at the meeting. 
(8) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Board shall be decided by a majority of 
votes of the Members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson, or in 
his absence, the person presiding shall have a second or casting vote. 
5. Resignation of Chairperson and Members .—(1) The Chairperson may resign his office by 
writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall continue in office 3[until his resignation is accepted by the Central 
Government]. 
(2) A Member may resign from office by writing under his hand addressed to the Chairperson. 
6. Disqualifications .—No person shall be a Member if he— 
(a) is, or becomes, of unsound mind or is so declared by a competent court; or 
(b) is, or has been, convicted of an offence, which in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves moral turpitude; or 
(c) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as an insolvent. 
7. Vacation of office by Members .—If a member— 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in section 6; or 
(b) is, without obtaining leave of absence, absent from three consecutive meetings of the Board; 
or 
(c) tenders his resignation under section 5, 
his seat shall thereupon become vacant. 
1. Ins. by Act 35 of 2018, s. 2, (w.e.f. 29.12.2018) .
2. The proviso ins. by s. 2, ibid (w.e.f. 29.12.2018)  
3. Subs. by s. 3 ibid, for the words “until the appointment of his successor is made by the Central Government”  
(w.e.f 29.12.2018) 68. Chief Executive Officer and staff of Trust .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint the Chief 
Executive Officer to exercise such powers and perform such duties under the direction of the Board as 
may be prescribed or as may be delegated to him by the Chairperson. 
(2) The Board shall, with the previous approval of the Central Government, appoint such other 
officers and employees as it considers necessary to carry out the objectives of the Trust. 
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Chief 
Executive Officer, other officers and employees of the Trust shall be such as may be determined by 
regulations. 
9. Vacancies in Board not to invalidate acts, etc. —No act or proceeding of the Board shall be 
called in question on the grounds merely of the existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in the 
constitution of, the Board. 
CHAPTER III 
OBJECTS OF THE TRUST
10. Objects of Trust .—The objects of the Trust shall be— 
(a) to enable and empower persons with disability to live as independently and as fully as 
possible within and as close to the community to which they belong; 
(b) to strengthen facilities to provide support to persons with disability to live within their own 
families; 
(c) to extend support to registered organisations to provide need based services during the period 
of crisis in the family of persons with disability; 
(d) to deal with problems of persons with disability who do not have family support; 
(e) to promote measures for the care and protection of persons with disability in the event of 
death of their parent or guardian; 
(f) to evolve procedure for the appointment of guardians and trustees for persons with disability 
requiring such protection; 
(g) to facilitate the realisation of equal opportunities, protection of rights and full participation of 
persons with disability; and 
(h) to do any other act which is incidental to the aforesaid objects. 
CHAPTER IV 
POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BOARD
11. Powers and duties of Board. —(1) The Board shall— 
(a) receive from the Central Government a one-time contribution of rupees one hundred crores 
for a corpus, the income whereof shall be utilised to provide for adequate standard of living for 
persons with disability; 
(b) receive bequest of movable property from any person for the benefit of the persons with 
disability in general and for furtherance of the objectives of the Trust in particular: 
Provided that it shall be obligatory on the part of the Board to make arrangement for adequate 
standard of living for the beneficiary named in the bequest, if any, and to utilise the property 
bequeathed for any other purpose for which the bequest has been made: 
Provided further that the Board shall not be under any obligation to utilise the entire amount 
mentioned in the bequest for the exclusive benefit of the persons with disability named as beneficiary 
in the bequest; 
(c) receive from the Central Government such sums as may be considered necessary in each 
financial year for providing financial assistance to registered organisations for carrying out any 
approved programme. 7(2) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), the expression “approved programme” means— 
(a) any programme which promotes independent living in the community for persons with 
disability by— 
(i) creating a conducive environment in the community; 
(ii) counselling and training of family members of persons with disability; 
(iii) setting up of adult training units, individual and group homes; 
(b) any programme which promotes respite care, foster family care or day care service for persons 
with disability; 
(c) setting up of residential hostels and residential homes for persons with disability; 
(d) development of self-help groups of persons with disability to pursue the realisation of their 
rights; 
(e) setting up of local level committee to grant approval for guardianship; and 
(f) such other programmes which promote the objectives of the Trust. 
(3) While earmarking funds for the purposes of clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2), preference shall be given 
to women with disability or to persons with severe disability and to senior citizens with disability. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression,— 
(a) “persons with severe disability” shall have the same meaning as is assigned to it under       
sub-section ( 4) of section 56 of the Persons with Disabilities (Equal Opportunities, Protection of 
Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996); 
(b) “senior citizen” means a person who is above the age of sixty-five years or more. 
CHAPTER V 
PROCEDURE FOR REGISTRATION 
12. Procedure for registration. —(1) Any association of persons with disability, or any association 
of parents of persons with disability or a voluntary organisation whose main object is promotion of  
welfare of persons with disability may make an application for registration to the Board. 
(2) An application for registration shall be made in such form and manner and at such place as the 
Board may by regulation provide and shall contain such particulars and accompanied with such 
documents and such fees as may be provided in the regulations. 
(3) On receipt of application for registration, the Board may make such enquiries as it thinks fit in 
respect of genuineness of the application and correctness of any particulars thereon. 
(4) Upon receipt of such application the Board shall either grant registration to the applicant or reject 
such application for reasons to be recorded in writing: 
Provided that where registration has been refused to the applicant, the said applicant may again make 
an application for registration after removing defects, if any, in its previous application. 
CHAPTER VI 
LOCAL LEVEL COMMITTEES
13. Constitution of local level committees .—(1) The Board shall constitute a local level committee 
for such area as may be specified by it from time to time. 
(2) A local level committee shall consist of— 
(a) an officer of the civil service of the Union or of the State, not below the rank of a District 
Magistrate or a District Commissioner of a district; 
(b) a representative of a registered organisation; and 8(c) a person with disability as defined in clause ( t) of section 2 of the Persons with Disabilities 
(Equal Opportunities, Protection of Rights and Full Participation) Act, 1995 (1 of 1996). 
(3) A local level committee shall continue to work for a period of three years from the date of its 
constitution or till such time it is reconstituted by the Board. 
(4) A local level committee shall meet at least once in every three months or at such interval as may 
be necessary. 
14. Appointment for guardianship .—(1) A parent of a person with disability or his relative may 
make an application to the local level committee for appointment of any person of his choice to act as a 
guardian of the persons with disability. 
(2) Any registered organisation may make an application in the prescribed form to the local level 
committee for appointment of a guardian for a person with disability: 
Provided that no such application shall be entertained by the local level committee, unless the consent 
of the guardian of the disabled person is also obtained. 
(3) While considering the application for appointment of a guardian, the local level committee shall 
consider— 
(a) whether the person with disability needs a guardian; 
(b) the purposes for which the guardianship is required for person with disability. 
(4) The local level committee shall receive, process and decide applications received under            
sub-sections ( 1) and ( 2), in such manner as may be determined by regulations: 
Provided that while making recommendation for the appointment of a guardian, the local level 
committee shall provide for the obligations which are to be fulfilled by the guardian. 
(5) The local level committee shall send to the Board the particulars of the applications received by it 
and orders passed thereon at such interval as may be determined by regulations. 
15. Duties of guardian .—Every person appointed as a guardian of a person with disability under this 
Chapter shall, wherever required, either have the care of such person of disability and his property or be 
responsible for the maintenance of the person with disability. 
16. Guardian to furnish inventory and annual accounts .—(1) Every person appointed as a 
guardian under section 14 shall, within a period of six months from the date of his appointment, deliver to 
the authority which appointed him, an inventory of immovable property belonging to the person with 
disability and all assets and other movable property received on behalf of the person with disability, 
together with a statement of all claims due to and all debts and liabilities due by such person with 
disability. 
(2) Every guardian shall also furnish to the said appointing authority within a period of three months 
at the close of every financial year, an account of the property and assets in his charge, the sums received 
and disbursed on account of the person with disability and the balance remaining with him. 
17. Removal of guardian .—(1) Whenever a parent or a relative of a person with disability or a 
registered organisation finds that the guardian is— 
(a) abusing or neglecting a person with disability; or 
(b) misappropriating or neglecting the property, 
it may in accordance with the prescribed procedure apply to the committee for the removal of such 
guardian. 
(2) Upon receiving such application the committee may, if it is satisfied that there is a ground for 
removal and for reasons to be recorded in writing, remove such guardian and appoint a new guardian in 
his place or if such a guardian is not available make such other arrangements as may be necessary for the 
care and protection of person with disability. 9(3) Any person removed under sub-section ( 2) shall be bound to deliver the charge of all property of 
the person with disability to the new guardian, and to account for all moneys received or disbursed by 
him. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this Chapter, the expression “relative” includes any person related 
to the person with disability by blood, marriage or adoption. 
CHAPTER VII 
ACCOUNTABILITY AND MONITORING
18. Accountability .—(1) The books and documents in the possession of the Board shall be open to 
inspection by any registered organisation. 
(2) Any registered organisation can submit a written requisition to the Board for getting a copy of any 
book or document maintained by the Board. 
(3) The Board shall frame such regulations as it thinks necessary for allowing the access of any book 
or document to a registered organisation. 
19. Monitoring .—The Board shall determine by regulations the procedure for evaluating the 
prefunding status of registered organisations seeking financial assistance from it and such regulations may 
also provide for the guidelines for monitoring and evaluating the activities of the registered organisations 
who are receiving financial assistance from the Trust. 
20. Annual general meeting .—(1) The Board shall in each year hold an annual general meeting of 
registered organisations, and not more than six months shall elapse between the date of one annual 
general meeting and that of the next. 
(2) A notice of the annual general meeting along with a statement of accounts and records of its 
activities during the preceding year shall be sent by the Board to every registered organisation at such 
time as may be determined by regulations. 
(3) The quorum of such meeting shall be such number of persons of the registered organisations as 
may be determined by regulations. 
CHAPTER VIII 
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT
21. Grants by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Trust a one-time contribution of rupees one 
hundred crores for a corpus, the income whereof may be utilised to achieve the objects of the Trust under 
this Act. 
22. Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the National Trust for Welfare of 
Persons with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental Retardation and Multiple Disabilities Fund and there shall 
be credited thereto— 
(a) all moneys received from the Central Government; 
(b) all moneys received by the Trust by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefactions, bequests or 
transfers; 
(c) all moneys received by the Trust in any other manner or from any other source. 
(2) All moneys belonging to the fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Board may, subject to the approval of the Central Government, decide. 
(3) The funds shall be applied towards meeting the administrative and other expenses of the Trust 
including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and performance of duties by the Board in 
relation to any of its activities under section 10 or for anything relatable thereto. 
23. Budget .—The Board shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may be 
prescribed, the budget for the next financial year showing the estimated receipt and expenditure of the 
Trust and shall forward the same to the Central Government. 1024. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Board shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts of the Trust including the income and expenditure accounts 
in such form as the Central Government may prescribe and in accordance with such general direction as 
may be issued by that Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(2) The accounts of the Trust shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such 
audit shall be payable by the Board to the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India. 
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor-General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Trust shall have the same rights, privileges and authority 
in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Government accounts and in particular, shall have the right to demand the 
production of books of account, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect any 
of the offices of the Trust. 
(4) The accounts of the Trust as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government, and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament. 
25. Annual report .—The Board shall prepare every year, in such form and within such time as may 
be prescribed an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous year and 
copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to 
be laid before each House of Parliament. 
26. Authentication of orders, etc .—All orders and decisions of the Board and instruments issued in 
the name of the Trust shall be authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson, the Chief Executive 
Officer or any other officer authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf. 
27. Returns and information .—The Board shall furnish to the Central Government such reports, 
returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time. 
CHAPTER IX 
MISCELLANEOUS
28. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Board shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its duties under this 
Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to 
it from time to time: 
Provided that the Board shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub-section. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy or not shall be final. 
29. Power of Central Government to supersede Board .—(1) If the Central Government on the 
complaint of a registered organisation or otherwise has reason to believe that the Board is unable to 
perform or has persistently made default in the performance of the duties imposed on it, the Central 
Government may issue notice to the Board asking why it should not be superseded: 
Provided that no order superseding the Board shall be made by the Central Government, unless a 
notice affording reasonable opportunity to the Board has been given in writing that why it should not be 
superseded. 
(2) The Central Government after recording reasons in writing and by issuing a notification in the 
Official Gazette supersede the Board for a period of not more than six months: 
Provided that on the expiration of the period of supersession, the Central Government may 
reconstitute the Board, in accordance with section 3. 
(3) Upon the publication of the notification under sub-section ( 2),— 11(a) all the members of the Board shall, notwithstanding that their term of office had not expired as 
on the date of supersession, vacate their office as such members; 
(b) all the powers and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be exercised or 
performed by or on behalf of the Trust shall, during the period of supersession, be exercised and 
performed by such person or persons as the Central Government may direct. 
(4) On the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under           
sub-section ( 2), the Central Government may— 
(a) extend the period of supersession for such further period as it may consider necessary so that 
the total period of supersession does not exceed more than six months; or 
(b) reconstitute the Board in the manner provided in section 3. 
30. Exemption from tax on income .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income-tax Act, 
1961 (43 of 1961), or any other law for the time being in force relating to tax on income, profits or gains, 
the Trust shall not be liable to pay income-tax or any other tax in respect of its income, profits or gains 
derived. 
31. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or the Trust or any member of the Board or Chief Executive Officer or 
any officer or other employee of the Trust or any other person authorised by the Board to perform duties 
under this Act for any loss or damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is done in good 
faith. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “good faith” shall have the same 
meaning as is assigned to it in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
32. Chairperson, Members and officers of Trust to be public servants .—All Members, Chief 
Executive Officer, other officers and employees of the Trust shall be deemed, when acting or purporting 
to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servant within the meaning of section 
21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
33. Delegation .—The Board may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the Chairperson 
or any member or any officer of the Trust or any other person subject to such conditions and limitations, 
if any, as may be specified in the order such of its powers under this Act (except the power to make 
regulations under section 35) as it may deem necessary. 
34. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the procedure in accordance with which the persons representing registered organisation shall 
be elected under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 4) of section 3; 
(b) the conditions of service of the Chairperson and Members under sub-section ( 2) of section 4; 
(c) the rules of procedure in the transaction of business at meetings of the Board under            
sub- section ( 6) of section 4; 
(d) the powers and duties of the Chief Executive Officer under sub-section ( 1) of section 8; 
(e) the form in which an application for guardianship may be made by a registered organisation 
under sub-section ( 2) of section 14; 
(f) the procedure in accordance with which a guardian may be removed under section 17; 
(g) the form in which, and the time within which, the budget of the Trust shall be forwarded to 
the Central Government under section 23; 
(h) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be maintained under sub-section ( 1) 
of section 24; 12(i) the form in which, and the time within which, the annual reports shall be prepared and 
forwarded under section 25; 
(j) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
35. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Board may, with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and rules 
generally to carry out the purposes of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely:— 
(a) the manner and purpose for which a person may be associated under sub-section ( 5) of section 
3; 
(b) the time and place at which the Board shall meet under sub-section ( 6) of section 4; 
(c) the terms and conditions of service of, Chief Executive Officer, other officers and employees 
of the Trust under sub-section ( 3) of section 8; 
(d) the form and manner in which the application shall be made for registration under              
sub-section ( 2) of section 12 and the particulars which such application shall contain under that             
sub-section;  
(e) the manner in which application for guardianship shall be received, processed and decided by 
the local level committee under sub-section ( 4) of section 14; 
(f) the particulars of applications and orders passed thereon by the local level committee under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 14; 
(g) the procedure for evaluating the pre-funding status of the registered organisations and framing 
of guidelines for monitoring and evaluating the activities of such registered organisations under 
section 19; 
(h) the time within which notice for annual general meeting shall be sent and quorum for such 
meeting under sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 20; and 
(i) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, provided by regulations. 
36. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation. 
--------------------------The Trade Marks Act, 1999--------------------------
1 
 THE TRADE MARKS ACT,  1999  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions and interpretation.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION  
3. Appointment o f Registrar and other officers.  
4. Power of Registrar to w ithdraw or transfer cases, etc.  
5. Trade Mark s Registry and offices thereof.  
6. The Register of Trade Marks.  
7. Classi fication of goods and services.  
8. Publication of alphabetical index.  
9. Absolute groun ds for refusal of registration.  
10. Limita tion as to colour.  
11. Relative groun ds for refusal of registration.  
12. Registration in the case  of honest concurrent use, etc.  
13. Prohibition of registration of names of chemical elements or inter national non -proprietary names.  
14. Use of names and representations of living pe rsons or persons recently dead.  
15. Registration of parts of trade marks and of trade marks as a series.  
16. Registration of trade m arks as associated trade marks.  
17. Effect of registration of parts of a mark.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION  
18. Application for registration.  
19. Withdrawal of acceptance.  
20. Advertisement of application.  
21. Opposition to registration.  
22. Correction and amendment . 
23. Registration.  
24. Jointly owned trade marks . 
25. Duration, renewal, removal a nd restoration of registration.  
26. Effect of removal from register for failure to pay fee for renewal.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION  
27. No action for infringem ent of unregistered trade mark.  
28. Rights conferred by registration.  
29. Infringe ment of registered trade marks.  
30. Limits on effect of registered trade mark.  
31. Registration to be prima facie  evidence of validity.  
32. Protection of registration on ground of di stinctiveness in certain cases.  
33. Effect of acquiescence.  2 
 SECTIONS  
34. Saving for vested rights.  
35. Saving for use of name, address or de scription of goods or services.  
36. Saving for words used as name or description of an article or substance or service.  
 
CHAPTER IVA  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO PROTECTION OF TRADE MARKS THROUGH INTERNATIONAL 
REGISTRATION UNDER THE MADRID PROTOCOL  
36A. Application of Act in case of international registration under Madrid Protocol.  
36B. Definitions.  
36C. Trade Marks Registry to  deal with  international applications.  
36D. International application originating from India.  
36E. International registrations whe re India has been designated.  
36F. Effects of international registration.  
36G. Duration and renewal of international registration.  
 
CHAPTER V  
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION  
37. Power of registered propriet or to assign and give receipts.  
38. Assignability and transmis sibility of registered trade marks.  
39. Assignability and transmissibili ty of unregistered trade marks.  
40. Restriction on assignment or transmission where multiple exc lusive rights would be created.  
41. Restriction on assignment or transmission when exclusive rights would be created in differen t 
parts of India.  
42. Conditions for assignment otherwise than in connection w ith the goodwill of a business.  
43. Assignability and transmissibilit y of certification trade marks.  
44. Assignability and transmissibi lity of associated trade ma rks. 
45. Registration of  assignments and transmissions.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
USE OF TRADE MARKS AND REGISTERED USERS  
46. Proposed use of trade mark by company to be formed, etc.  
47. Removal from register and imposition of limitations on ground of non -use.  
48. Registered user s.  
49. Registration as registered user.  
50. Power of Registrar for variation or cancellation of registration as registered user.  
51. Power of Registrar to call for information relating to agreement in respect of registered users.  
52. Right of registered user to take proce edings against infringement.  
53. No right of permitted user to take proceeding against infringement.  
54. Registered user not to have right  of assignment or transmission.  
55. Use of one of associated or substantially identical trade marks equivalent to use of another .  
56. Use of trade mark for export trade and use when form of trade connection changes.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER  
57. Power to cancel or vary registrati on and to rectify the register.  
58. Correction of register.  
59. Altera tion of register ed trade marks.  
60. Adaptation of entries in register to amended or substituted class ification of goods or services.  
 3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
COLLECTIVE MARKS  
SECTIONS  
61. Special p rovisions for collective marks.  
62. Collective mark not to be misleading a s to character or significance.  
63. Application to be accompanied by regulations gov erning use of collective marks.  
64. Acceptance of applicatio n and regulations by Registrar.  
65. Regulations to be open to inspection . 
66. Amendment of regulations.  
67. Infringement proceedings by registered  proprietor of collective mark.  
68. Additional grounds for removal of r egistration of collective mark.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
CERTIFICATION  TRADE MARKS  
69. Certain provisions of this Act not applicabl e to certification trade marks.  
70. Registratio n of certification trade marks.  
71. Application s for registratio n of certification trade marks.  
72. Consideration of application  for registration by Registrar.  
73. Opposition to registration of c ertification trade marks.  
74. Filing of regulations governing use  of a certification trade mark.  
75. Infringemen t of certification trade marks.  
76. Acts not constituting infringemen t of certification trade marks.  
77. Cancellation or varying of registratio n of certification trade marks.  
78. Rights conferred by registratio n of certification trade marks.  
 
CHAPTER X . —SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR TEXTILE GOODS . [Omitted ] 
79. [Omitted .] 
80. [Omitted. ] 
81. [Omitted .] 
82. [Omitted .] 
 
CHAPTER XI  
APPELLATE BOARD  
83. Establishment of Appellate Board.  
84. Composition of Appellate Board.  
85. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson , Vice- Chairperson , or other Members.  
86. Term  of office of Chairperson , Vice-Chairperson and other Members.  
87. Vice -Chairperson or senior -most Member to act as Chairperson or discharge his func tions in 
certain circumstances.  
88. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson , Vice-Chairperson  
and other Members.  
89. Resignation and removal.  
89A.  Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and Member . 
90. Staff of Appellate Board.  
91. Appeals to Appellate Board.  
92. Procedure  and powers of Appellate Board.  
93. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc.  4 
 SECTIONS  
94. Bar to  appear before Appellate Board.  
95. Conditions as to making of interim orders.  
96. Power of Chairperson  to transfer c ases from one Bench to another.  
97. Procedure for application for r ectificatio n, etc. , before Appellate Board.  
98. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings.  
99. Costs of Registrar in proc eedings before Appellate Board.  
100. Transfer of pending proceedings to Appellate Board.  
 
CHAPTER XII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
101. Meaning o f applying trad e marks and trade descriptions.  
102. Falsifying an d falsely applying trade marks.  
103. Penalty for applying false trade marks, trade descriptions, etc.  
104. Penalty for selling goods or providing services to which false trade mark or fals e trade 
description is applied.  
105. Enhanced penalty on s econd or subsequent conviction.  
106. Penalty for removing piece goods, etc., contrar y to section 81.  
107. Penalty for falsely represent ing a trade mark as registered.  
108. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connect ed with the Trade Marks Office.  
109. Penalty for falsificat ion of entries in the register.  
110. No o ffence in certain cases.  
111. Forfeiture of goods.  
112. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business.  
113. Procedure where invalidity of registra tion is pleaded by the accused.  
114. Offences by companies.  
115. Cognizance of certain offences and the powers of police officer for search and seizure.  
116. Evidence of o rigin of goods imported by sea.  
117. Costs of defence or prosecution.  
118. Limitation of prosecution.  
119. Informati on as to commission of offence.  
120. Punishment of abetment in I ndia of acts done out of India.  
121. Instructions of Central Government as to permissible variation to be observed by criminal 
courts.  
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
122. Protection  of action taken in good faith.  
123. Certain persons to be public servants.  
124. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the  trade mark is questioned, etc.  
125. Application for rectification of register to be made to Ap pellate Board in certain cases.  
126. Implied warranty on sale of mark ed goods.  
127. Powers of Registrar.  
128. Exercise of di scretionary power by Registrar.  
129. Evidence before Registrar.  
130. Death of party to a proceeding.  
131. Extension of time.  
132. Abandonment.  
133. Preliminary advice by the Registrar as to dist inctiveness.  
134. Suit for infringement, etc. , to be in stituted before District Court.  
135. Relief in suits for i nfringement or for passing off.  
136. Registered user to be im pleaded in certain proceedings.  
  5 
 SECTIONS  
137. Evidence of entries in register, etc. , and things done by the Registrar.  
138. Registrar and other officers not compel lable to produce register, etc.  
139. Power to require good s to show indication of origin.  
140. Power to require information of imported g oods bearing false trade marks.  
141. Certificate of validity.  
142. Groundles s threats of legal proceedings.  
143. Address for service.  
144. Trade usage s, etc. , to be taken into consideration.  
145. Agents.  
146. Marks registered by an agent or re presentative without authority.  
147. Indexes.  
148. Docum ents open to public inspection.  
149. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament.  
150. Fees and surcharge.  
151. Savings in respect of certain matters in Chapter XII.  
152. Declaration as to ownership of trade mark not registrable unde r the Registration Act, 1908.  
153. Government  to be bound . 
154. Special provisions relating to applications for registration from ci tizens of convention  countries.  
155. Provision as to reciprocity.  
156. Power of Central Gov ernment to remove difficulties.  
157. Power to make rules.  
158. Amendments.  
159. Repeal and savings.  
THE SCHEDUL E. 
  6 
 THE TRADE MARKS ACT,  1999 
ACT NO. 47 OF 1999  
[30th December,  1999. ] 
An Act to amend and consolidate the law relating to trade marks, to provide for registration and 
better protection of trade marks for goods and services and for the prevention of the use of 
fraudulent marks.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fiftieth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be ca lled the Trade Marks Act, 1999.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoin t: 
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construe d as a reference to the comin g 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions a nd interpretation .—(1) In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Appellate Board” means the Appellate Board  established under section 83;  
(b) “assignment” means an  assignment in writing b y act of the parties concerned;  
(c) “associated trade marks” means trade marks deemed to be, or required to be, registered as 
associa ted trade marks under this Act;  
(d) “Bench” means a Bench of the Appellate Board;  
(e) “certification trade mark” means a mark capable of distinguishing the goods or services in 
connection with which it is used in the course of trade which are certified by the proprietor of the 
mark in respect of origin, material, mode of manufacture of go ods or performance of services, quality, 
accuracy or other characteristics from goods or services not so certified and registrable as such under 
Chapter IX in respect of those goods or services in the name, as proprietor of the certificat ion trade 
mark, of  that person;  
(f) 2[“Chairperson ”] means the 2[Chairperson]  of the Appellate Board;  
(g) “collective mark” means a trade mark distinguishing the goods or services of members of an 
association of persons (not being a partnership within the meaning of the Ind ian Partnership          
Act, 1932 ) (9 of 1932)  which is the proprietor of  the mark from those of others;  
(h) “deceptively similar” .—A mark shall be deemed to be deceptively similar to another mark if 
it so nearly resembles that other mark as to be likely  to deceive or cause confusion;  
(i) “false trade description” means — 
(I) a trade description which is untrue or misleading in a material respect as regards the goods 
or serv ices to which it is applied; or  
(II) any alteration of a trade description as regar ds the goods or services to which it is applied, 
whether by way of addition, effacement or otherwise, where that alteration makes the description 
untrue or misle ading in a material respect; or  
                                                           
1. 15th September, 2003, vide notification No . S.O. 1048(E), dated 15th September, 2003, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs.  by Act 7 of 2017 , s.161,  for “Chairman” (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).   7 
 (III) any trade description which denotes or implies that there  are contained, as regards the 
goods to which it is applied, more yards or metres than there are contained therein standa rd yards 
or standard metres; or  
(IV) any marks or arrangement or com bination thereof when applied — 
(a) to goods in such a manner as to be likely to lead persons to believe that the goods are 
the manufacture or merchandise of some person other than the person whose merchandise or 
manufacture they really are;  
(b) in relation to services in such a manner as to be likely to lead persons to be lieve that 
the services are provided or rendered by so me person other than the person  whose services 
they really are; or  
(V) any false name or initials of a person applied to goods or services in such manner as if 
such name or initials were a trade descrip tion in any ca se where the name or initials — 
(a) is or are not a trade ma rk or part of a trade mark; and  
(b) is or are identical with or deceptively similar to the name or initials of a person 
carrying on business in connection with goods or services of th e same description or both and 
who has not authorise d the us e of such name or initials; and  
(c) is or are either the name or initials of a fictitious person or some person not bona fide  
carrying on business in connecti on with such goods or services,  
and the fact that a trade description is a trade mark or part of a trade mark shall not prevent such 
trade description being a false trade description within the meaning of this Act;  
(j) “goods” means anything which is the s ubject of trade or manufacture;  
(k) “Judicial Member” means a Member of the Appellate Board appointed as such under this Act, 
and includes the 1[Chairperson]  and the 2[Vice -Chairperson] ; 
(l) “limitation s” (with its grammatical variations) means any limitation of the exclusive right to 
the u se of a trade mark given by the registration of a person as proprietor thereof, including 
limitations of that right as to mode or area of use  within India or outside India;  
(m) “mark” includes a device, brand, heading, label, ticket, name, signature, word,  letter, 
numeral, shape of goods, packaging or combination of colour s or any combination thereof;  
(n) “Member” means a Judicial Member or  a Technical Member of the Appellate Board and 
includes the 1[Chairperson]  and the 2[Vice -Chairperson] ; 
(o) “name” incl udes any abbreviation of a name;  
(p) “notify” means to notify in the Trade Mark Journal published by the Registrar;  
(q) “package” includes any case, box, container, covering, folder, receptacle, vessel, casket, 
bottle, wrapper, label, band, ticket, reel, f rame, capsu le, cap, lid, stopper and cork;  
(r) “permitted use”, in relation to a registered trade mark,  means the use of trade mark — 
(i) by a registered user of the trade mark in relation to goods or services — 
(a) with which he is connec ted in the course of trade; and  
(b) in respect of which the trade mark remains reg istered for the time being; and  
(c) for which he is reg istered as registered user; and  
(d) which complies with any conditions or limitations to which the registration of  
registered user is sub ject; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 161, for “Chairman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 161, ibid., for “Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  8 
 (ii) by a person other than the registered proprietor and registered user in relation t o goods or 
services — 
(a) with which he is connec ted in the course of trade; and  
(b) in respect of which the trade mark remains reg istered for the time being; and 
(c) by consent of such registered proprie tor in a written agreement; and  
(d) which complies with any conditions or limitations to which such user is subject and to 
which the registratio n of the trade mark is subject;  
(s) “prescribed” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(t) “register” means the Register of Trade Marks referred to i n sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(u) “registered” (with its grammatical variations) m eans registered under this Act;  
(v) “registered proprietor”, in relation to a tra de mark, means the person for the time being 
entered in the register as proprietor of the  trade mark;  
(w) “registered trade mark” means a trade mark which is actually on the r egister and remaining in 
force;  
(x) “registered user” means a person who is for t he time being regis tered as such under        
section 49;  
(y) “Registrar” means the Registrar of Trade Marks referred to in section 3;  
(z) “Service” means service of any description which is made available to potential users and 
includes the provision of s ervices in connection with business of any industrial or commercial matters 
such as banking, communication, education, financing, insurance, chit funds, real estate, transport, 
storage, material treatment, processing, supply of electrical or other energy, boarding, lodging, 
entertainment, amusement, construction, repair, conveying of news or information and advertising;  
(za) “trade description” means any description, statement or other indication, direc t or indirect, — 
(i) as to the number, quantity, measure, g auge or weight of any goods; or  
(ii) as to the standard of quality of any goods or services according to a classification 
commonly used  or recognise d in the trade; or  
(iii) as to fitness for the purpose, strength, perfor mance or behaviour of any goods, being 
“drug” as defined in the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940  (23 of 1940) , or “food” as defined in the 
Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954  (37 of 1954) ; or 
(iv) as to the place or country in which or the time at which  any goods or services were made, 
produced or p rovided, as the case may be; or  
(v) as to the name and address or other indication of the identity of the manufacturer or of the 
person providing the services or of the person for whom the goods are manufactur ed or services 
are provided; or  
(vi) as to the mode of manufacture or producing any goods or providing services; or  
(vii) as to the material of w hich any goods are composed; or  
(viii) as to any goods being the subject of an existing patent, privilege or co pyright,  
and includes — 
(a) any description as to the use of any mark which according to the custom of the trade is 
commonly taken to be an indicati on of any of the above matters;  
(b) the description as to any imported goods contained in any bill o f entry or shipping bill;  
(c) any other description which is likely to be misunderstood or mistaken for all or any of the 
said matters;  
 9 
  
(zb) “trade mark” means a mark capable of being represented graphically and which is capable of 
distinguishing the goods or se rvices of one person from those of others and may include shape of 
goods, their packaging an d combination of colours; and — 
(i) in relation to Chapter XII (other than section 107), a registered trade mark or a mark used 
in relation to goods or services for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in 
the course of trade between the goods or services, as the case may be, and some person having the 
right as proprietor to use the mark; and  
(ii) in relation to other provisions of this Act, a ma rk used or proposed to be used in relation 
to goods or services for the purpose of indicating or so as to indicate a connection in the course of 
trade between the goods or services, as the case may be, and some person having the right, either 
as proprietor  or by way of permitted user, to use the mark whether with or without any indication 
of the identity of that person, and includes a certification  trade mark or collective mark;  
(zc) “transmission ” means transmission by operation of law, devolution on the personal 
representative of a deceased person and any other mode of transfer, not being assignment;  
(zd) “Technical Member” means a Membe r who is not a Judicial Member;  
(ze) “tribunal” means the Re gistrar or, as the case may be, the Appellate Board, before which the 
proceeding concerned is pending;  
(zf) 1[“Vice -Chairperson ”] means a 1[Vice -Chairperson]  of the Appellate Board;  
(zg) “well known trade mark”, in relation to any goods or services, means a mark which has 
become so to the substantial segment of the public which uses such goods or receives such services 
that the use of such mark in relation to other goods or services would be likely to be taken as 
indicating a connection in the course of tra de or rendering of services between those goods or services 
and a person using the mark in relation to the fir st-mentioned goods or services.  
(2) In this Act, unless the context othe rwise requires, any reference — 
(a) to “trade mark” shall include reference  to “collective mark” or “certification trade m ark”;  
(b) to the use of a mark shall be construed as a reference to the use of printed or other vis ual 
representation of the mark;  
(c) to the use of a mark, — 
(i) in relation to goods, shall be construed as a r eference to the use of the mark upon, or in 
any physical or in any other rela tion whatsoever, to such goods;  
(ii) in relation to services, shall be construed as a reference to the use of the mark as or as part 
of any statement about the availability, provi sion o r performance of such services;  
(d) to the Registrar shall be construed as including a reference to any officer when discharging the 
functions of the Registrar in pursuance of sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
(e) to the Trade Marks Registry shall be construed as including a reference to any offi ce of the 
Trade Marks Registry.  
(3) For th e purposes of this Act, goods and  services are associated with each other if it is likely that 
those goods might be sold or otherwise  traded in and those services might be provided by the same 
business and so with descriptions of good s and descriptions of services.  
(4) For the purposes of this Act, “existing registered trade mark” means a trade mark registered under 
the Trade and Mercha ndise Marks Act, 1958  (43 of 1958)  immediately befor e the commencement of this 
Act. 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s.  161, for “ Vice -Chairman” (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  10 
 CHAPTER II  
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS FOR REGISTRATION  
3. Appointment o f Registrar and other officers .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a perso n to be known as the Controller -General of Patents, 
Designs and Trade Marks, who shall be the Registrar of Trade Mark s for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other officers with such designations a s it thinks fit for 
the purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and direction of the Registrar, such functions of the 
Registrar under this Act as he may from time to ti me authorise  them to discharge.  
4. Power of Registrar to w ithdraw or transfer cases, etc .—Without prejudice to the generality of 
the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 3, the Registrar may, by order in writing and for reasons to be 
recorded therein, withdraw any matter pending before an officer appointed under the said sub -section ( 2) 
and deal with such matter himself either de novo  or from the stage it was so withdrawn or transfer the 
same to another officer so appointed who may, subject to special directions in the order of transfer, 
proceed with the matter either de novo  or from t he stage it was so transferred.  
5. Trade Marks Registry and offices t hereof .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, there shall be a 
trade marks registry and the Trade Marks Registry established under the Trade and Merchandise Marks 
Act, 1958  (43 of 1958)  shall be the Trade  Marks Registry under this Act.  
(2) The head office of the Trade Marks Registry shall be at such place as the Central Government 
may specify, and for the purpose of facilitating the registration of trade marks, there may be established a t 
such places as the Central Government may think fit branch offices of the Trade Mark s Registry.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define the territorial limits 
within which an office of the Trade Marks Regis try may exercise its functions.  
(4) There shall be a se al of the Trade Marks Registry.  
6. The Register of Trade Marks .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, a record called the Register of 
Trade Marks shall be kept at the head office of the Trade Marks Registry, where in shall be entered all 
registered trade marks with the names, addresses and description of the proprietors, notifications of 
assignment and transmissions, the names, addresses and descriptions of registered users, conditions, 
limitations and such other ma tter relating to registered tr ade marks as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Registrar to keep 
the records wholly  or partly in computer floppies  diskettes or in any other electronic for m subject to such 
safeguards as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where such register is maintained wholly or partly on computer under sub -section ( 2) any 
reference in this Act to entry in the Register shall be construed as the reference to any entry as maintained 
on computer o r in any other electronic form.  
(4) No notice of any trust, express or implied or constructive, shall be entered in the register and no 
such notice shall be receivable by the Registrar.  
(5) The register shall be kept under the control a nd manage ment of the Registrar.  
(6) There shall be kept at each branch office of the Trade Marks Registry a copy of the register and 
such of the other documents mentioned in section 148 as the Central Government may, by notification i n 
the Official Gazette, direct.  
(7) The Register of Trade Marks, both Part A and Part B, existing at the commencement of this Act, 
shall be incorporated in and form part of the register under this Act.  
7. Classi fication of goods and services .—(1) The Registrar shall classify goods and s ervices, as far 
as may be, in accordance with the International classification of goods and services for the purposes of 
registration of trade marks.  
(2) Any question arising as to the class within which any goods or services fall s shall be determined 
by the Registrar  whose decision shall be final.  11 
 8. Publication of alphabetical index .—(1) The Registrar may publish in the prescribed manner an 
alphabetical index of classification of goods and ser vices referred to in section 7.  
(2) Where any goods or services  are not specified in the alphabetical index of goods and services 
published under sub -section ( 1), the classification of goods or services shall be determined by the 
Registrar in accordance with sub -section ( 2) of section 7.  
9. Absolute groun ds for refusa l of registration .—(1) The trade marks — 
(a) which are devoid of any distinctive character, that is to say, not capable of distinguishing the 
goods or services of one perso n from those of another person;  
(b) which consist exclusively of marks or indications  which may serve in trade to designate the 
kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, values, geographical origin or the time of production of the 
goods or rendering of the service or other character istics of the goods or service;  
(c) which  consist exclusively of marks or indications which have become customary in the 
current language or in the bona fide  and established practices of the trade,  
shall not be registered:  
Provided that a trade mark shall not be refused registration if before the  date of application for 
registration it has acquired a distinctive character as a result of the use made of it  or is a well-known trade 
mark.  
(2) A mark shall not be registered as a trade mark if — 
(a) it is of such nature as to deceive  the public or cause  confusion;  
(b) it contains or comprises of any matter likely to hurt the religious susceptibilities of any class 
or se ction of the citizens of India;  
(c) it comprises or contain s scandalous or obscene matter;  
(d) its use is prohibited under the Emblems an d Names (Prevention of Improper Use) Act, 1950  
(12 of 1950).  
(3) A mark shall not be registered as a trade mark if it consists exclusively of — 
(a) the shape of goods which results from the nat ure of the goods themselves; or  
(b) the shape of goods which is necessary t o obtain a technical result; or  
(c) the shape which gives substantial value to the goods.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the nature of goods or services in relation to which 
the trade mark is used or prop osed to be used shall not be a grou nd for refusal of registration.  
10. Limitation as to colour .—(1) A trade mark may be limited wholly or in part to any combination 
of colours and any such limitation shall be taken into consideration by the tribunal having  to decide on the 
distinctive character of the trade mark.  
(2) So far as a trade mark is registered without limitation of colour, it shall be deemed to be  registered 
for all colours.  
11. Relative grounds for refusal of registration .—(1) Save as provided in  section 12, a trade mark 
shall not  be registered if, because of — 
(a) its identity with an earlier trade mark and similarity of goods or services cove red by the trade 
mark; or  
(b) its similarity to an earlier trade mark and the identity or similarity of th e goods or serv ices 
covered by the trade mark,  
there exists a likelihood of confusion on the part of the public, which includes the likelihood of 
associati on with the earlier trade mark.  
  12 
 (2) A trade mark which — 
(a) is identical with or simila r to an earlier trade mark; and  
(b) is to be registered for goods or services which are not similar to those for which the earlier 
trade mark is registered in the name of a different proprietor,  
shall not be registered if or  to the extent  the earlier trade mark is  a well -known trade mark in India and the 
use of the later mark without due cause would take unfair advantage of or be detrimental to the distinctive 
character or re pute of the earlier trade mark.  
(3) A trade mark shall not be registered if, or to the exte nt that, its use in In dia is liable to be 
prevented — 
(a) by virtue of any law in particular the law of passing off protecting an unregistered trade mark 
used in the course of trade; or  
(b) by virtue of law of copyright.  
(4) Nothing in this section shall pr event the registration of a trade mark where the proprietor of the 
earlier trade mark or other earlier right consents to the registration, and in such case the Registrar may 
register the mark under special circumstances under section 12.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sect ion, earlier trade mark means — 
1[(a) a registered trade mark or an application under section 18 bearing an earlier date of filing or 
an international registration referred to in section 36E or convention application referred to in    
section 154 which has a date of application earlier than that of the trade mark in question, taking 
account, where appropriate, of the priorities claimed in respect of the trade marks; ] 
(b) a trade mark which, on the date of the application for registra tion of the trade mark in 
question, or where appropriate, of the priority claimed in respect of the application, was entitled to 
protect ion as a well -known trade mark.  
(5) A trade mark shall not be refused registration on the grounds specified in sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), 
unless objection on any one or more of those grounds is raised in opposition proceedings by the propri etor 
of the earlier trade mark.  
(6) The Registrar shall, while determining whether a trade mark is a well-known trade mark, take into 
account any fact which he considers relevant for determining a trade mark as a well-known trade mark 
including — 
(i) the knowledge or recognition of that trade mark in the relevant section of the public including 
knowledge in India obtained as a result of pr omotion of the trade mark;  
(ii) the duration, extent and geographical area  of any use of that trade mark;  
(iii) the duration, extent and geographical area of any promotion of the trade mark, including 
advertising or publicity and presentation, at fairs or exhibition of the goods or services t o which the 
trade mark applies;  
(iv) the duration and geographical area of any registration of or any application for registration of 
that trade mark under this Act to the extent that they reflect the use or r ecognition  of the trade mark;  
(v) the record of successful enforcement of the rights in that trade mark, in particular the extent to 
which the trade mark has been recognise d as a well -known trade mark by any court or Registrar under 
that record.  
(7) The Registrar shall, while determining as to whether a trade mark is known or recognise d in a 
relevant section of the public for the purposes of sub -section ( 6), take into account — 
(i) the number of actual or potential cons umers of the goods or services;  
(ii) the number of persons involved in the channels of distrib ution of the goods or services;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s.  2, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  13 
 (iii) the business circles deal ing with the goods or services,  
to which that trade mark applies.  
(8) Where a trade mark has been determined to be well known in a t least one relevant section of the 
public in India by any court or Registrar, the Registrar shall consider that trade mark as a well -known 
trade mark f or registration under this Act.  
(9) The Registrar shall not require as a condition, for determining whe ther a trade mark is a          
well-known trade mark, any of the following, namely: — 
(i) that the tra de mark has been used in India;  
(ii) that the trade mark has been registered;  
(iii) that  the application for registration of the trade mark has been filed in I ndia;  
(iv) that the trade mark — 
(a) is well -known in; or  
(b) has been registered in; or  
(c) in respect of which an application for registration has been filed in,  
any ju risdiction other  than India;  or 
(v) that the trade mark is well -known to  the public at large in India.  
(10) While considering an application for registration of a trade mark and opposition filed in respect  
thereof, the Registrar shall — 
(i) protect a well -known trade mark against the id entical or similar trade marks;  
(ii) take into consideration the bad faith involved either of the applicant or the opponent affecting 
the ri ght relating to the trade mark.  
(11) Where a trade mark has been registered in good faith disclosing t he material information s to the 
Registrar or where right to a trade mark has been acquired through use in good faith before the 
commencement of this Act, then, nothing in this Act shall prejudice the validity of the registration of that 
trade mark or right  to use that trade mark on the ground that such trade mark is iden tical with or similar to 
a well -known trade mark.  
12. Registration in the case of honest concurrent use, etc .—In the case of honest concurrent use or 
of other special circumstances which in the opinion of the Registrar, make it proper so to do, he may 
permit the registration by more than one proprietor of the trade marks which are identical or similar 
(whether any such trade mark is already registered or not) in respect of the same or similar  goods or 
services, subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as the Reg istrar may think fit to impose.  
13. Prohibition of registration of names of chemical elements or international non -propriet ary 
names .—No word — 
(a) which is the commonly used and accepted name of any single chemical element or any single 
chemical compound (as distinguished from a mixture) in respect of a chemical sub stance or 
preparation, or  
(b) which is decl ared by the World Health Organis ation and notified in the prescribed m anner by 
the Registrar from time to time, as an international non -proprietary name or which is de ceptively 
similar to such name,  
shall be registered as a trade mark and any such registration shall be deemed for the purpose of section 57 
to be an entry made  in the register without sufficient cause or an entry wrongly remaining on the register, 
as the circumstances may require.  
14. Use of names and representations of living pe rsons or persons recently dead .—Where an 
application is made for the registration of a trade mark which falsely suggests a connection with any 
living person, or a person whose death took place within twenty years prior to the date of application for 
registration of the trade mark, the Re gistrar may, before he proceeds with the application, require the 14 
 applicant to furnish him with the consent in writing of such living person or, as the case may be, of the 
legal representative of the deceased person to the connection appearing on the trade  mark, and may refuse 
to proceed with the application unless the applicant furnishes t he Registrar with such consent.  
15. Registration of parts of trade marks and of trade marks as a s eries.—(1) Where the 
proprietor of a trade mark claims to be entitled to  the exclusive use of any part thereof separately, he may 
apply to register the whole and th e part as  separate trade marks.  
(2) Each such separate trade mark shall satisfy all the conditions applying to and have all the incidents  
of, an independent trade m ark. 
(3) Where a person claiming to be the proprietor of several trade marks in respect of the same or 
similar goods or services or description of goods or description of services, which, while resembling each 
other in the material particulars ther eof, yet  differ in respect of — 
(a) statement of the goods or services in relation to which they are respectively used or proposed  
to be used; or  
(b) statement of number, price,  quality or names of places; or  
(c) other matter of a non -distinctive character which do es not substantially affect the  identity of 
the trade mark; or  
(d) colour,  
seeks to register those trade marks, they may be registered a s a series in one registration.  
16. Registration of trade m arks as associated trade marks .—(1) Where a trade mark which is 
registered, or is the subject of an application for registration, in respect of any goods or services is 
identical with another trade mark which is registered, or is the subject of an application for registration, in 
the name of the same proprietor in r espect of the same goods or description of goods or same services or 
description of services or so nearly resembles it as to be likely to deceive or cause confusion if used by a 
person other than the proprietor, the Registrar may, at any time, require that  the trade marks shall be 
entered on the regi ster as associated trade marks.  
(2) Where there is an identity or near resemblance of marks that are registered, or are the subject of 
applications for registration in the name of the same proprietor, in respect  of goods and services which are 
associated with those goods or services, or goods or services of that description, sub -section ( 1) shall 
apply as it applies as where there is an identity or near resemblance of marks that are registered, or are the 
subject  of applications for registration, in the name of the same proprietor in respect of the same goods or 
description of goods or same servi ces or description of services.  
(3) Where a trade mark and any part thereof are, in accordance with the provisions of su b-section ( 1) 
of section 15, registered as separate trade marks in the name of the same proprietor, they shall be deemed 
to be, and shall be registe red as, associated trade marks.  
(4) All trade marks registered in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3) of section 15 as a 
series in one registration shall be deemed to be, and shall be registered as, associated trade marks.  
(5) On application made in the prescribed manner by the registered proprietor of two or more trade 
marks  registered as associated trade marks, the Registrar may dissolve the association as respects any of 
them if he is satisfied that there would be no likelihood of deception or confusion being caused if that 
trade mark were used by any other person in relati on to any of the goods or services or both in respect of 
which it is registered, and may amend the register accordingly.  
17. Effect of registration of parts of a mark .—(1) When a trade mark consists of several matters, 
its registration shall confer on the proprietor exclusive right to the use of t he trade mark taken as a whole.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section (1), when a trade mark — 
(a) contains any part — 
(i) which is not the subject of a separate application by the proprietor for r egistration as a 
trade mark; or  15 
 (ii) which is not separately registered by the  proprietor as a trade mark; or  
(b) contains any matter which is common to the trade or is otherwise of a non -distinctive 
character,  
the registration thereof shall not confer any  exclusive right in the matter forming only a part of the whole 
of the trade mark so registered.  
CHAPTER III  
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION  
18. Application for registration .—(1) Any person claiming to be the proprietor of a trade mark used 
or proposed to be used by him, who is desirous of registering it, shall apply in writing to the Registrar in 
the prescribed manner for the registration of his trade mark.  
(2) A single applicat ion may be made for registration of a trade mark for different classes of goods 
and services and fee payable therefor shall be in respect of each s uch class of goods or services.  
(3) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in the office of t he Trade Marks Registry 
within whose territorial limits the principal place of business in India of the applicant or in the case of 
joint applicants the principal place of business in India of the applicant whose name is first mentioned in 
the application as having a place of  business in India, is situate:  
Provided that where the applicant or any of the joint applicants does not carry on business in India, 
the application shall be filed in the office of the Trade Marks Registry within whose territorial limi ts the 
place mentioned in the address for service in India as disclosed in the application, is situate.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse the application or may accept it 
absolutely or subject to such amendments, modificat ions, conditions or limitation s, if any, as he may 
think fit.  
(5) In the case of a refusal or conditional acceptance of an application, the Registrar shall record in 
writing the grounds for such refusal or conditional acceptance and the materials used by h im in arriving at 
his decision.  
19. Withdrawal of acceptance .—Where, after the acceptance of an application for registration of a 
trade mark but before its registratio n, the Registrar is satisfied — 
(a) that the application  has been accepted in error; or  
(b) that in the circumstances of the case the trade mark s hould not be registered or should  be 
registered subject to conditions or limitations or to conditions additional to or different from the 
conditions or limitations subject to which the  application has  been accepted,  
the Registrar m ay, after hearing the applicant  if he so desires, withdraw the acceptance and proceed as if 
the app lication had not been accepted.  
20. Advertisement of application .—(1) When an application for registration of a trade mark has  
been accepted, whether absolutely or subject to conditions or limitations, the Registrar shall, as soon as 
may be after acceptance, cause the application as accepted together with the conditions or limitations, if 
any, subject to which it has been accepte d, to be adver tised in the prescribed manner:  
Provided that the Registrar may cause the application to be advertised before acceptance if it relates 
to a trade mark to which sub -section ( 1) of section 9 and sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of section 11 apply, or in 
any other case where it appears to him that it is expedient by reason of any excepti onal circumstances so 
to do.  
(2) Where — 
(a) an application has been advertised before acceptance under sub -section ( 1); or 
(b) after adv ertisement of an application, — 
(i) an error in the app lication has been corrected; or  
(ii) the application has been permitted to be amended under section 22,  16 
 the Registrar may in his discretion cause the application to be advertised again or in any case falling under 
clause ( b) may, inste ad of causing the application to be advertised again, notify in the prescribed manner 
the correction or ame ndment made in the application.  
21. Opposition to registration .—1[(1) Any person may, within four months from the date of the 
advertisement or re-advertisement of an application for registration, give notice in writing in the 
prescribed manner and on payment of such fee as may be prescribed, to the Registrar, of opposition to the 
registration .] 
(2) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice o n the applicant for registration and, within two 
months from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the notice of opposition, the applicant shall send 
to the Registrar in the prescribed manner a counter -statement of the grounds on which he relies for  his 
application, and if he does not do so he shall be deemed to have abandoned his application.  
(3) If the applicant sends such counter -statement, the Registrar shall serve a copy thereof on the 
person giving notice of opposition.  
(4) Any evidence upon wh ich the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be submitted in the 
prescribed manner and within the prescribed time to the Registrar, and the Registrar shall give an 
opportunity to them to be heard, if they so desire.  
(5) The Registrar shall, after hear ing the parties, if so required, and considering the evidence, decide 
whether and subject to what conditions or limitations, if any, the registration is to be permitted, and may 
take into account a ground of objection whether reli ed upon by the opponent or  not. 
(6) Where a person giving notice of opposition or an applicant sending a counter -statement after 
receipt of a copy of such notice neither resides nor carries on business in India, the Registrar may require 
him to give security for the costs of procee dings before him, and in default of such security being duly 
given, may treat the opposition or application, as  the case may be, as abandoned.  
(7) The Registrar may, on request, permit correction of any error in, or any amendment of, a notice of 
opposition  or a counter -statement o n such terms as he thinks just.  
22. Correction and amendment .—The Registrar may, on such terms as he thinks just, at any time, 
whether before or after acceptance of an application for registration under section 18, permit the 
correction of any error in or in connection with the application or permit a n amendment of the 
application:  
Provided that if an amendment is made to a single application referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 
18 involving division of such application in to two or more applications, the date of making of the initial 
application shall be deemed to be the date of making of the divided application s so divided.  
23. Registration .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 19, when an application for registration of 
a trade mark  has been accepted and either — 
(a) the application has not been opposed and the time for notic e of opposition has expired; or  
(b) the application has been opposed and the opposition has been deci ded in favour of the 
applicant,  
the Registrar shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, register the said trade mark 2[within 
eighteen months of the filing of the application] and the trade mark when registered shall be registered as 
of the date of the making of the said ap plication and that date shall, subject to the provisions of section 
154, be deemed to be the date of registration.  
(2) On the registration of a trade mark, the Registrar shall issue to the applicant a certificate in the 
prescribed form of the registration thereof, sealed with the se al of the Trade Marks Registry.  
(3) Where registration of a trade mark is not completed within twelve months from the date of the 
application by reason of default on the part of the applicant, the Registrar may, after giving noti ce to the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s.  3, for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
2. Ins. by s.  4, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  17 
 applicant in the prescribed manner, treat the application as abandoned unless it is completed within the 
time specifie d in that behalf in the notice.  
(4) The Registrar may amend the register or a certificate of registration for the purpose of cor recting a 
cleric al error or an obvious mistake.  
24. Jointly owned trade marks .—(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), nothing in this Act shall 
authorise  the registration of two or more persons who use  a trade mark independently, or propose so to 
use it , as joint proprietors thereof.  
(2) Where the relations between two or more persons interested in a trade mark are such that no one 
of them is entitled as between himself and the other or ot hers of them to use it except — 
(a) on be half of both or all of them ; or 
(b) in relation to an article or service with which both or all of them are co nnected in the course of 
trade,  
those persons may be registered as joint proprietors of the trade mark, and this Act shall have effect in 
relation to any rights to the use o f the trade mark vested in those persons as if those rights had been vested 
in a single person.  
25. Duration, renewal, removal and restoration of re gistration .—(1) The registration of a trade 
mark , after the commencement of this Act, shall be for a period of ten years, but may be renewed from 
time to time in accordance with the provisions of this section.  
(2) The Registrar shall, on application made by the registered proprietor of a trade mark in the 
prescribed manner and within the prescribed period and subject to payment of the prescribed fee, renew 
the registration of the trade mark for a period of ten years from the date of expiration of the original 
registration or of the last renewal of registration, as the case may be (which date is in this section referred 
to as the expira tion of the last registration).  
(3) At the prescribed time before the expiration of the last registration of a trade mark the Registrar 
shall send notice in the prescribed manner to the registered proprietor of the date of expirati on and the 
conditions as to payment of fees and otherwise upon which a renewal of registration may be obtained, 
and, if at the expiration of the time prescribed in that behalf those conditions have not been duly complied 
with the Registrar may remove th e trade mark from the register:  
Provided that the Registrar shall not remove the trade mark from the register if an application is made 
in the prescribed form and the prescribed fee and surcharge is paid within six months from the expiration 
of the last regis tration of the trade mark and shall renew the registration of the trade mark for a period of 
ten years under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Where a trade mark has been removed from the register for non -payment of the prescribed fee, the 
Registrar shall, after six mo nths and within one year from the expiration of the last registration of the 
trade mark, on receipt of an application in the prescribed form and on payment of the prescribed fee, if 
satisfied that it is just so to do, restore the trade mark to the register  and renew the registration of the trade 
mark either generally or subject to such conditions or limitations as he thinks fit to impose, for a period of 
ten years from the expir ation of the last registration.  
26. Effect of removal from register for failure to pay fee for renewal .—Where a trade mark has 
been removed from the register for failure to pay the fee for renewal, it shall nevertheless, for the purpose 
of any application for the registration of another trade mark during one year, next after the date of the 
removal, be deemed to be a trade mark already on the register, unless the  tribunal is satisfied either — 
(a) that there has been no bona fide  trade use of the trade mark which has been removed during 
the two years immedi ately preceding its removal; o r 
(b) that no deception or confusion would be likely to arise from the use of the trade mark which is 
the subject of the application for registration by reason of any previous use of the trade mark which 
has been removed.  
  18 
 CHAPTER IV  
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION  
27. No action for infringem ent of unregistered trade mark .—(1) No person shall be entitled to 
institute any proceeding to prevent, or to recover damages for, the infringement  of an unregistered trade 
mark.  
(2) Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to affect rights of action against any person for passing off 
goods or services as the goods of another person or as services provided by another person, or t he 
remedies in respect thereof.  
28. Ri ghts conferred by registration .—(1) Subject to the ot her provisions of this Act, the 
registration of a trade mark shall, if valid, give to the registered proprietor of the trade mark the exclusive 
right to the use of the trade mark in relation to the goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is 
registered and to obtain relief in respect of infringement of the trade mark in t he manner provided by this 
Act. 
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a trade mark given under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to any 
conditions and limitations to whi ch the re gistration is subject.  
(3) Where two or more persons are registered proprietors of trade marks , which are identical with or 
nearly resemble each other, the exclusive right to the use of any of those trade marks shall not (except so 
far as their respective rights are subject to any conditions or limitations entered on the register) be deemed 
to have been acquired by any one of those persons as against any other of those persons merely by 
registration of the trade marks but each of those persons has otherwise  the same rights as against other 
persons (not being registered users using by way of permitted use) as he would have if he were the sole 
registered proprietor.  
29. Infringe ment of registered trade  marks .—(1) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person 
who, not being a registered proprietor or a person using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of 
trade, a mark which is identical with, or deceptively similar to, the trade mark in relation to goods or 
services in respect of which the trade m ark is registered and in such manner as to render the use of the 
mark likely to be taken  as being used as a trade mark.  
(2) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or a person 
using by way of permitted use, u ses in the course of t rade, a mark which because of — 
(a) its identity with the registered trade mark and the similarity of the goods or services covered 
by such registered trade mark; or  
(b) its similarity to the registered trade mark and the identity or s imilarity of the goods or services 
covered by  such registered trade mark; or  
(c) its identity with the registered trade mark and the identity of the goods or services covered  by 
such registered trade mark,  
is likely to cause confusion on the part of the pu blic, or which is likely to have an association with the 
registered trade mark.  
(3) In any case falling under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2), the court shall presume that it is likely to 
cause confu sion on the part of the public.  
(4) A registered trade mark  is infringed by a person who, not being a registered proprietor or a person 
using by way of permitted use, uses in the course of trade, a mark which — 
(a) is identical with or similar to  the registered trade mark; and  
(b) is used in relation to goods or se rvices which are not similar to those for which the trade mark 
is registered ; and  
(c) the registered trade mark has a reputation in India and the use of the mark without due cause 
takes unfair advantage of or is detrimental to, the distinctive character or repute of the registered trade 
mark.  19 
 (5) A registered trade mark is infringed by a perso n if he uses such registered trade mark, as his trade 
name or part of his trade name, or name of his business concern or part of the name , of his business 
concern dealing in goods or services in respect of whic h the trade mark is registered.  
(6) For the pu rposes of this section, a person uses a registere d mark, if, in particular, he — 
(a) affixes it to goods or the packaging thereof;  
(b) offers or exposes goods for sale, puts them on the market, or stocks them for those purposes 
under the registered trade ma rk, or offers or supplies services u nder the registered trade mark;  
(c) imports or e xports goods under the mark; or  
(d) uses the registered trade mark on bus iness papers or in advertising.  
(7) A registered trade mark is infringed by a person who applies su ch registered trade mark to a 
material intended to be used for labeling or packaging goods, as a business paper, or for advertising goods 
or services, provided such person, when he applied the mark, knew or had reason to believe that the 
application of the  mark was not duly authorise d by the proprietor or a licensee.  
(8) A registered trade mark is infringed by any advertising of that t rade mark if such advertising — 
(a) takes unfair advantage of and is contrary to honest practices in indus trial or commercial  
matters; or  
(b) is detrimental t o its distinctive character; or  
(c) is against th e reputation of the trade mark.  
(9) Where the distinctive elements of a registered trade mark consist of or include words, the trade 
mark may be infringed by the spoken use o f those words as well as by their visual representation and 
reference in this section to the use of a mark shall be construed accordingly.  
30. Limits on e ffect of registered trade mark .—(1) Nothing in section 29 shall be construed as 
preventing the use of a registered trade mark by any person for the purposes of identifying goods or 
services as those of th e proprietor provided the use — 
(a) is in accordance with honest practices in indust rial or commercial matters, and  
(b) is not such as to take unfair advan tage of or be detrimental to the distinctive charact er or 
repute of the trade mark.  
(2) A registered t rade mark is n ot infringed where — 
(a) the use in relation to goods or services indicates the kind, quality, quantity, intended purpose, 
value, geographica l origin, the time of production of goods or of rendering of services or other 
charac teristics of goods or services;  
(b) a trade mark is registered subject to any conditions or limitations, the use of the trade mark in 
any manner in relation to goods to be  sold or otherwise traded in, in any place, or in relation to goods 
to be exported to any market or in relation to services for use or available for acceptance in any place 
or country outside India or in any other circumstances, to which, having regard to those conditions or 
limitations, th e registration does not extend;  
(c) the us e by a person of a trade mark — 
(i) in relation to goods connected in the course of trade with the proprietor or a registered user 
of the trade mark if, as to those goods or a bulk  of which they form part, the registered proprietor 
or the registered user conforming to the permitted use has applied the trade mark and has not 
subsequently removed or obliterated it, or has at any time expressly or impliedly consented t o the 
use of the trade mark; or  
(ii) in relation to services to which the proprietor of such mark or of a registered user 
conforming to the permitted use has applied the mark, where the purpose and effect of the use of 
the mark is to indicate, in accordance with the fact, that those services have been performed by 
the proprietor or  a registered user of the mark;  20 
 (d) the use of a trade mark by a person in relation to goods adapted to form part of, or to be 
accessory to, other goods or services in relation to which the trade mark has been used without 
infringement of the right given by registration under this Act or might for the time being be so used, if 
the use of the trade mark is reasonably necessary in order to indicate that the goods or services are so 
adapted, and neith er the purpose nor the effect of the use of the trade mark is to indicate, otherwise 
than in accordance with the fact, a connection in the course of trade between any person and the 
goods o r services, as the case may be;  
(e) the use of a registered trade mark, being one of two or more trade marks registered under this 
Act which are identical or nearly resemble each other, in exercise of the right to the use of that trade 
mark given by r egistration under this Act.  
(3) Where the go ods bearing a registered trade mark are lawfully acquired by a person, the sale of the 
goods in the market or otherwise dealing in those goods by that person or by a person claiming under or 
through him is not infringement of a  trade mark by reason only of — 
(a) the registered trade mark having been assigned by the registered proprietor to some other 
person, after the  acquisition of those goods; or  
(b) the goods having been put on the market under the registered trade mark by the proprietor or 
with his conse nt. 
(4) Sub -section ( 3) shall not apply where there exists legitimate reasons for the proprietor to oppose 
further dealings in the goods in particular, where the condition of the goods , has been changed or 
impaired after th ey have been put on the market.  
31. Registration to be prima facie  evidence of validity .—(1) In all legal proceedings relating to a 
trade mark registered under this Act (including applications under section 57), the original registration of 
the trade mark and of all subsequent assignments and transmissions of the trade mark shall be prima facie  
evidence of the validity thereof.  
(2) In all legal proceedings as aforesaid a registered trade mark shall not be held to be invalid on the 
ground that it was not a registrable trade mark under section 9 except upon evidence of distinctiveness 
and that such  evidence was not submitted to the Registrar before registration, if it is proved that the trade 
mark had been so used by the registered proprietor or his predecessor in title as to have become 
distincti ve at the date of registration.  
32. Protection of reg istration on ground of di stinctiveness in certain cases .—Where a trade mark 
is registered in breach of sub -section ( 1) of section 9, it shall not be declared invalid if, in consequence of 
the use which has been made of it, it has after registration and bef ore commencement of any legal 
proceedings challenging the validity of such registration, acquired a distinctive character in relation to the 
goods or servi ces for which it is registered.  
33. Effect of acquiescence .—(1) Where the proprietor of an earlier tr ade mark has acquiesced for a 
continuous period of five years in the use of a registered trade mark, being aware of that use, he shall no 
longer be entitled on the bas is of that earlier trade mark — 
(a) to apply for a declaration that the registration of th e later trade mark is invalid, or  
(b) to oppose the use of the later trade mark in relation to the goods or services in relatio n to 
which it has been so used,  
unless the registration of the later trade mark  was not applied in good faith.  
(2) Where sub-section ( 1) applies, the proprietor of the later trade mark is not entitled to oppose the 
use of the earlier trade mark, or as the case may be, the exploitation of the earlier right, notwithstanding 
that the earlier trade mark may no longer be invoke d against his later trade mark.  
34. Saving for vested rights .—Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor or a registered user of 
registered trade mark to interfere with or restrain the use by any person of a trade mark identical with or 
nearly resembli ng it in relation to goods or services in relation to which that person or a predecessor in 
title of his has continuously used that  trade mark from a date prior — 21 
 (a) to the use of the first -mentioned trade mark in relation to those goods or services by the  
proprietor or a predecessor in title of his; or  
(b) to the da te of registration of the first -mentioned trade mark in respect of those goods or 
services in the name of the proprietor of  a predecessor in title of his;  
whichever is the earlier, and the Regis trar shall not refuse (on such use being proved) to register the 
second mentioned trade mark by reason only of the registration of the first -mentioned trade mark.  
35. Saving for use of name, address or de scription of goods or services .—Nothing in this Act 
shall entitle the proprietor or a registered user of a registered trade mark to interfere with any bona fide  
use by a person of his own name or that of his place of business, or of the name, or of the name of the 
place of business, of a ny of his predecessors in business, or the use by any person of any bona fide  
description of the character or quality  of his goods or services.  
36. Saving for words used as name or description of an a rticle or substance or service .—(1) The 
registration of a trade mark shall not be deemed to have become invalid by reason only of any use after 
the date of the registration of any word or words which the trade mark contains or of which it consists as 
the name or description of an a rticle or substance or service : 
Provided  that, if it is proved either — 
(a) that there is a well known and established use of the said word as the name or description of 
the article or substance or service by a person or persons carrying on trade therein, not being use in 
relation to goods or services connected in the course of trade with the proprietor or a registered user 
of the trade mark or (in the case of a certification trade mark) in relation to goods or services certified 
by the proprietor; or  
(b) that the article or substance was formerly manufact ured under a patent  that a period of two 
years or more after the c esser of the patent has elapsed  and that the said word is the only practicable 
name or description of the article or substance,  
the provisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply.  
(2) Where the facts mentioned in clause  (a) or clause ( b) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) are proved 
with respect to any words, then, — 
(a) for the purposes of any proceedings under section 57 if the trade mark consists solely of such 
words, the registration of the trade mark, so far as regards registration in respect of the article or 
substance in question or of any goods of the same description, or of the services or of any services of 
the same description, as the case requires, shall be deemed to be an entry wro ngly remaining on the 
register;  
(b) for the purposes of any other legal proceedings r elating to the trade mark, — 
(i) if the trade mark consists solely of such words, all rights of the proprietor under this Act or 
any other law t o the use of the trade mark; or  
(ii) if the t rade ma rk contains such words and  other matter, all such right of the propr ietor to 
the use of such words,  
in relation to the article or substance or to any goods of the same description, or to the service or to any 
services of the same description, as the case r equires, shall be deemed to have ceased on the date on 
which the use mentioned in clause ( a) of the proviso to sub -section ( 1) first became well known and 
established or at the expiration of the period of two years mentioned in clause ( b) of the said provi so. 
  22 
 1[CHAPTER IVA  
SPECIAL PROVISIONS RELATING TO PROTECTION OF TRADE MARKS THROUGH INTERNATIONAL 
REGISTRATION UNDER THE MADRID PROTOCOL  
36A. Application of Act in case of international registration under Madrid Protocol .—The 
provisions of this Chapter shall apply to international applications and international registrations under 
the Madrid Protocol.  
36B. Definitions .—In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “application”, in relation to a Contracting State or a Contracting Organisation, means an 
application made by a person who is a citizen of, or is domiciled in, or has a real and effective 
industrial or commercial establishment in, that Contracting State or a State which is a member of that 
Contracti ng Organisation, as the case may be.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this clause, “real and effective industrial or commercial 
establishment” means and includes any establishment where some bona fide industrial or commercial 
activity takes place and need not necessarily be the principal place of business;  
(b) “basic application” means an application for the registration of a trade mark filed under 
section 18 and which is used as a basis for applying for an international registration;  
(c) “basic registratio n” means the registration of a trade mark under section 23 and which is used 
as a basis for applying for an international registration;  
(d) “Common Regulations” means the Regulations concerning the implementation of the Madrid 
Protocol;  
(e) “Contracting Or ganisation” means a Contracting Party that is an intergovernmental 
organisation;  
(f) “Contracting Party” means a Contracting State or Contracting Organisation party to the 
Madrid Protocol;  
(g) “Contracting State” means a country party to the Madrid Protoco l; 
(h) “international application” means an application for international registration or for extension 
of the protection resulting from an international registration to any Contracting Party made under the 
Madrid Protocol;  
(i) “International Bureau” means  the International Bureau of the World Intellectual Property 
Organisation;  
(j) “international registration” means the registration of a trade mark in the register of the 
International Bureau effected under the Madrid Protocol;  
(k) “Madrid Agreement” means the Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration 
of Marks adopted at Madrid on the 14th day of April, 1891, as subsequently revised and amended;  
(l) “Madrid Protocol” means the Protocol relating to the Madrid  Agreement Concerning the 
Internat ional Registration of Marks adopted at  Madrid on the 27th day of June, 1989, as amended 
from time to time.  
36C. Trade Marks Registry to deal with international applications .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in sub -section ( 3) of section 5, an internation al application shall be dealt with by the head office 
of the Trade Marks Registry or  such branch office of the Registry, as the Central Government may, by 
notification  in the Official Gazette, specify.  
36D. International application originating from India .—(1) Where an  application for the 
registration of a trade mark has been made under section 18 or a  trade mark has been registered under 
section 23, the applicant or the registered  proprietor may make an international application on the form 
prescribed by the Common Regulations for international registration of that trade mark.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 40 of 2010, s.  5 (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  23 
 (2) A person holding an international registration may make an international  application on the form 
prescribed by the Common Regulations for extension of the  protection resulting fr om such registration to 
any other Contracting Party.  
(3) An international application under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall  designate the 
Contracting Parties where the protection resulting from the  international registration is required.  
(4) The R egistrar shall certify in the prescribed manner that the particulars  appearing in the 
international application correspond to the particulars appearing, at  the time of the certification, in the 
application under section 18 or the registration  under section  23, and shall indicate the date and number of 
that application or the  date and number of that registration as well as the date and number of the  
application from which that registration resulted, as the case may be, and shall  within the prescribed 
period,  forward the international application to the  International Bureau for registration, also indicating 
the date of the international  application.  
(5) Where at any time before the expiry of a period of five years of an  international registration, 
whether such  registration has been transferred to another  person or not, the application under section 18 
or the registration under section 23,  as the case may be, has been withdrawn or cancelled or has expired or 
has been  finally refused in respect of all or some of the goods or services listed in the  international 
registration, the protection resulting from such international  registration shall cease to have effect:  
Provided that where an appeal is made against the decision of registration and  an action requesting fo r 
withdrawal of application or an opposition to the application  has been initiated before the expiry of the 
period of five years of an international  registration, any final decision resulting into withdrawal, 
cancellation, expiration or  refusal shall be de emed to have taken place before the expiry of five years of 
the international registration.  
(6) The Registrar shall, during the period of five years beginning with the date  of international 
registration, transmit to the International Bureau every information  referred to in sub -section ( 5). 
(7) The Registrar shall notify the International Bureau the cancellation to be  effected to an 
international registration keeping in view the current status of the  basic application or the basic 
registration, as t he case may be.  
36E. International registrations where India has been designated .—(1) The  Registrar shall, after 
receipt of an advice from the International Bureau about any  international registration where India has 
been designated, keep a record of the  particulars of that international registration in the prescribed 
manner.  
(2) Where, after recording the particulars of any international registration  referred to in                  
sub-section ( 1), the Registrar is satisfied that in the circumstances of  the case the protection of trade mark 
in India should not be granted or such  protection should be granted subject to conditions or limitations or 
to conditions  additional to or different from the conditions or limitations subject to which the  international 
registration has been accepted, he may, after hearing the applicant if he  so desires, refuse grant of 
protection and inform the International Bureau in the  prescribed manner within eighteen months from the 
date on which the advice  referred to in sub -section  (1) was received.  
(3) Where the Registrar finds nothing in the particulars of an international  registration to refuse grant 
of protection under sub -section ( 2), he shall within the  prescribed period cause such international 
registration to be advertised i n the  prescribed manner.  
(4) The provisions of sections 9 to 21 (both inclusive), 63 and 74 shall apply  mutatis mutandis in 
relation to an international registration as if such international  registration was an application for 
registration of a trade mark under section 18.  
(5) When the protection of an international registration has not been opposed  and the time for notice 
of opposition has expired, the Registrar shall within a period  of eighteen months of the receipt of advice 
under sub -section ( 1) notify the International Bureau its acceptance of extension of protection of the trade 
mark  under such international registration and, in case the Registrar fails to notify the  International 
Bureau, it shall be deemed that the protection has been extended to the  trade mark.  
(6) Where a registered proprietor of a trade mark makes an international  registration of that trade 
mark and designates India, the international registration  from the date of the registration shall be deemed 24 
 to replace the registration held in  India without prejudice to any right acquired under such previously held 
registration  and the Registrar shall, upon request by the applicant, make necessary entry in the  register 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 6.  
(7) A holder of international re gistration of a trade mark who designates India  and who has not been 
extended protection in India shall have the same remedy  which is available to any person making an 
application for the registration of a trade  mark under section 18 and which has not resu lted in registration 
under section 23.  
(8) Where at any time before the expiry of a period of five years of an  international registration, 
whether such registration has been transferred to another  person or not, the related basic application or, as 
the cas e may be, the basic  registration in a Contracting Party other than India has been withdrawn or 
cancelled  or has expired or has been finally refused in respect of all or some of the goods or  services 
listed in the international registration, the protection resulting from such  international registration in India 
shall cease to have effect.  
36F. Effects of international registration s.—(1) From the date of the  international registration of a 
trade mark where India has been designated or the date  of the recording in the register of the International 
Bureau about the extension of  the protection resulting from an international registration of a trade mark to 
India,  the protection of the trade mark in India shall be the same as if the trade mark had  been reg istered 
in India.  
(2) The indication of classes of goods and services given by the applicant shall  not bind the Registrar 
with regard to the determination of the scope of the protection  of the trade mark.  
36G. Duration and renewal of international registra tion.—(1) The international  registration of a 
trade mark at the International Bureau shall be for a period of ten  years and may be renewed for a period 
of ten years from the expiry of the preceding  period.  
(2) Subject to payment of a surcharge prescribed b y the rules, a grace period of  six months shall be 
allowed for renewal of the international registration. ] 
CHAPTER V  
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION  
37. Power of registered propriet or to assign and give receipts .—The person for the time being 
entered in the register as proprietor of a trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and to any 
rights appearing from the register to be vested in any other person, have power to assign the trade mark, 
and to give effectual receipts for any con sideration fo r such assignment.  
38. Assignability and transmissibi lity of registered trade marks .—Notwithstanding anything in 
any other law to the contrary, a registered trade mark shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, be 
assignable and transmissible, wheth er with or without the goodwill of the business concerned and in 
respect either of all the goods or services in respect of which the trade mark is registered or of some o nly 
of those goods or services.  
39. Assignability and transmissibili ty of unregistered  trade marks .—An unregistered trade mark 
may be assigned or transmitted with or without the good will of the business concerned.  
40. Restriction on assignment or transmission where multiple exc lusive rights would be 
created .—(1) Notwithstanding anything in sections 38 and 39, a trade mark shall not be assignable or 
transmissible in a case in which as a result of the assignment or transmission there would in the 
circumstances subsist, whether under this Act or any other law, exclusive rights in more than one of the 
persons concern ed to the use, in relation to — 
(a) same goods or services;  
(b) same de scription of goods or services;  
(c) goods or services or description of goods or services which are associated with each other,  25 
 of trade marks  nearly resembling each other or of identical trade mark, if having regard to the similarity 
of the goods and services and to the similarity of the trade marks, the use of the trade marks in exercise of 
those rights would be likely  to deceive or cause conf usion:  
Provided that an assignment or transmission shall not be deemed to be invalid under this sub -section 
if the exclusive rights subsisting as a result thereof in the persons concerned respectively are, having 
regard to limitations imposed thereon, such  as not to be exercisable by two or more of those persons in 
relation to goods to be sold, or otherwise traded in, within India otherwise than for export therefrom, or in 
relation to goods to be exported to the same market outside India or in relation to s ervices for use at any 
place in Ind ia or any place outside India  in relation to services ava ilable for acceptance in India.  
(2) The proprietor of a registered trade mark who proposes to assign it may submit to the Registrar in 
the prescribed manner a statement of case setting out the circumstances and the Registrar may issue to 
him a certificate stating whether, having regard to the similarity of the goods or services and of the trade 
marks referred to in the case, the proposed assignment would or would not be invalid under                 
sub-section ( 1), and a certificate so issued shall, subject to appeal and unless it is shown  that the 
certificate was obtained by fraud or misrepresentation, be conclusive as to the validity or invalidity under 
sub-section ( 1) of the assignment in so far as such validity or invalidity depends upon the facts set out in 
the case, but, as regards a certificate in favour of validity, only if application for the registration under 
section 45 of the title of the person becoming entitled is made within six months from the date on w hich 
the certificate is issued.  
41. Restriction on assignment or transmiss ion when exclusive rights would be creat ed in 
different parts of India .—Notwithstanding anything in sections 38 and 39, a trade mark shall not be 
assignable or transmissible in a case in which as a result of the assignment or transmission there would in 
the circumstances subsist, whether un der this Act or any other law — 
(a) an exclusive right in one of the persons concerned, to the use of the trade mark limited to use 
in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, in any place in India, or in relat ion to services 
for use, or services available for accept ance in any place in India; and  
(b) an exclusive right in another of these persons concerned, to the use of a trade m ark nearly 
resembling the first -mentioned trade mark or of an identi cal trade mark  in relation to — 
(i) the sa me goods or services; or  
(ii) the same descr iption of goods or services; or  
(iii) services which are associated with those goods or goods of that description or goods 
which are associated with those services o r services of that d escription,  
limited to use in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise traded in, or services for use, or available for 
acceptanc e, in any other place in India:  
Provided that in any such case, on application in the prescribed manner by the proprietor of a  trade 
mark who proposes to assign it, or by a person who claims that a registered trade mark has been 
transmitted to him or to a predecessor in title of his since the commencement of this Act, the Registrar, if 
he is satisfied that in all the circumstance s the use of the trade mark in exercise of the said rights would 
not be contrary to the public interest  may approve the assignment or transmission, and an assignment or 
transmission so approved shall not, unless it is shown that the approval was obtained b y fraud or 
misrepresentation, be deemed to be invalid under this section or section 40 if application for the 
registration under section 45 of the title of the person becoming entitled is made within six months from 
the date on which the approval is given or, in the case of a transmiss ion, was made before that date.  
42. Conditions for assignment otherwise than in connection w ith the goodwill of a business .—
Where an assignment of a trade mark, whe ther registered or unregistered  is made otherwise than in 
conn ection with the goodwill of the business in which the mark has been or is used, the assignment shall 
not take effect unless the assignee, not later than the expiration of six months from the date on which the 
assignment is made or within such extended peri od, if any, not exceeding three months in the aggregate, 
as the Registrar may allow, applies to the Registrar for directions with respect to the advertisement of the 
assignment, and advertises it in such form and manner and within such period as the Regist rar may direct.  26 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, an assignment of a trade mark of the following 
description shall not be deemed to be an assignment made otherwise than in connection with the goodwill 
of the business in w hich the mark is used,  namely: — 
(a) an assignment of a trade mark in respect only of some of the goods or services for which the 
trade mark is registered accompanied by the transfer of the goodwill of the business concerned in 
those goods or services only; or  
(b) an assignment of a trade mark which is used in relation to goods exported from India or in 
relation to services for use outside India if the assignment is accompanied by the transfer of the 
goodwi ll of the export business only.  
43. Assignability and transmis sibilit y of certification trade marks .—A certification trade mark 
shall not be assignable or transmissible otherwise than with the consent of the Registrar, for which  
application shall be made in wr iting in the prescribed manner.  
44. Assignability and tra nsmissibi lity of associated trade marks .—Associated trade marks shall 
be assignable and transmissible only as a whole and not separately, but, subject to the provisions of this 
Act, they shall, for all other purposes, be deemed to have been reg istered as s eparate trade mark.  
1[45. Registration of  assignments and transmissions .—(1) Where a person becomes entitled by 
assignment or transmission to a registered trade mark, he shall apply in the prescribed manner to the 
Registrar to register his title, and the Registrar shall, on receipt of the application, register him as the 
proprietor of the trade mark in respect of the goods or services in respect of which the assignment or 
transmission has effect, and shall cause particulars of such assignment or transmissi on to be entered on 
the register.  
(2) The Registrar may require the applicant to furnish evidence or further evidence in proof of title 
only where there is a reasonable doubt about the veracity of any statement or any document furnished.  
(3) Where the vali dity of an assignment or transmission is in dispute between the parties, the 
Registrar may refuse to register the assignment or transmission until the rights of the parties have been 
determined by a competent court and in all other cases the Registrar shal l dispose of the application 
within the prescribed period.  
(4) Until an application under sub -section ( 1) has been filed, the assignment or transmission shall be 
ineffective against a person acquiring a conflicting interest in or under the registered trade  mark without 
the knowledge of assignment or transmission. ] 
CHAPTER VI  
USE OF TRADE MARKS AND REGISTERED USERS  
46. Proposed use of trade mar k by company to be formed, etc .—(1) No application for the 
registration of a trade mark in respect of any goods or services shall be refused nor shall permission for 
such registration be withheld, on the ground only that it appears that the applicant does not use or propose 
to use the trade mark if th e Registrar is satisfied that — 
(a) a company is about to be formed an d registered under the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956)  
and that the applicant intends to assign the trade mark to that company with a view to the use thereof 
in relation to those goods  or services by the company, or  
(b) the proprietor intends it to be used  by a person, as a registered user after the registration of the 
trade mark.  
(2) The provisions of section 47 shall have effect, in relation to a trade mark registered under the 
powers conferred by this sub -section, as if for the reference, in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of that 
section, to the intention on the part of an applicant for registration that a trade mark should be used by  
him there were substituted a reference to the intention on his part that it should be used by the compan y or 
registered use r concerned.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s.  6, for section 45  (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  27 
 (3) The tribunal may, in a case to which sub -section ( 1) applies, require the applicant to give security 
for the costs of any proceedings relating to any opposition or appeal, and in default of such security being 
duly given, may trea t the app lication as abandoned.  
(4) Where in a case to which sub -section ( 1) applies, a trade mark in respect of any goods or services 
is registered in the name of an applicant who, relies on intention to assign the trade mark to a company, 
then, unless within such  period as may be prescribed or within such further period not exceeding six 
months as the Registrar may, on application being made to him in the prescribed manner, allow, the 
company has been registered as the proprietor of the trade mark in respect of th ose goods or services, the 
registration shall cease to have effect in respect thereof at the expiration of that period and the Registrar 
shall amend the register accordingly.  
47. Removal from register and imposition of li mitations on ground of non -use.—(1) A registered 
trade mark may be taken off the register in respect  of  the  goods   or  services   in   respect  of  which it    is 
registered on application made in the prescribed manner to the Registrar or the Appellate Board by any 
person a ggrieved on the ground either — 
(a) that the trade mark was registered without any bona fide  intention on the part of the applicant 
for registration that it should be used in relation to those goods or services by him or, in a case to 
which the provisions of section 46 app ly, by the company concerned or the registered user, as the case 
may be, and that there has, in fact, been no bona fide  use of the trade mark in relation to those goods 
or services by any proprietor thereof for the time being up to a date three months befo re the date of 
the application; or  
(b) that up to a date three months before the date of the application, a continuous period of five 
years from the date on which the trade mark is actually  entered in the register or longer  had elapsed 
during which the tra de mark was registered and during which there was no bona fide  use thereof in 
relation to those goods or services by any proprie tor thereof for the time being:  
Provided that except where the applicant has been permitted under section 12 to register an identical 
or nearly resembling trade mark in respect of the goods or services in question, or where the tribunal is of 
opinion that he might properly be permitted so to register such a trade mark, the tribunal may refuse an 
application under clause ( a) or clause ( b) in relation to any goods or services, if it is shown that there has 
been, before the relevant date or during the relevant period, as the case may be, bona fide  use of the trade 
mark by any proprietor thereof for the time being in relation to — 
(i) goods or servi ces of the same description;  or 
(ii) goods or services associated with those goods or services of that description being goods or 
services, as the case may be, in respect of which  the trade mark is registered.  
(2) Where in relation to any g oods or services in respect of which a trade mark is registered — 
(a) the circumstances referred to in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) are shown to exist so far as 
regards non -use of the trade mark in relation to goods to be sold, or otherwise traded in a par ticular 
place in India (otherwise than for export from India), or in relation to goods to be exported to a 
particular market outside India;  or in relation to services for use or available for acceptance in a 
particular place in India or for use in a parti cular market outside India; and  
(b) a person has been permitted under section 12 to register an identical or nearly resembling 
trade mark in respect of those goods, under a registration extending to use in relation to goods to be 
so sold, or otherwise trade d in, or in relation to goods to be so exported, or in relation to services for 
use or available for acceptance in that place or for use in that country, or the tribunal is of opinion that 
he might properly be permitted so  to register such a trade mark,  
on application by that person in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, the 
tribunal may impose o n the registration of the first -mentioned trade mark such limitations as it thinks 
proper for securing that registration sha ll cease t o extend to such use.  
(3) An applicant shall not be entitled to rely for the purpose of clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) or for the 
purposes of sub -section ( 2) on any non -use of a trade mark which is shown to have been due to special 
circumstances in the trade, which includes restrictions on the use of the trade mark in India imposed by 28 
 any law or regulation and not to any intention to abandon or not to use the  trade mark in relation to the 
goods or services to  which the application relates.  
48. Registered user s.—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 49, a person other than the registered 
proprietor of a trade mark may be registered as a registered user thereof in respect of any or all of the 
goods or services in respect of whic h the trade mark is registered.  
(2) The permitted use of a trade mark shall be deemed to be used by the proprietor thereof, and shall 
be deemed not to be used by a person other tha n the proprietor, for the purposes of section 47 or for any 
other purpose for which such use is material u nder this Act or any other law.  
49. Registratio n as registered user .—(1) Where it is proposed that a person should be registered as 
a registered user of a trade mark, the registered proprietor and the proposed registered  user    shall  jointly  
apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner, and every such applic ation shall be 
accompanied by — 
(a) the agreement in writing or a duly authenticated copy thereof, entered into between the 
registered proprietor and the proposed registered user with respect to the permitted use of the trade 
mark; and  
(b) an affidavit made by the registered proprietor or by some person authorise d to the sati sfication 
of the Re gistrar to act on his behalf, — 
(i) giving particulars of the relationship, existing or proposed, between the registered 
proprietor and the proposed registered user, including particulars showing the degree of control 
by the proprietor ov er the permitted use which their relationship will confer and whether it is a 
term of their relationship that the proposed registered user shall be the sole registered user or that 
there shall be any other restriction as to persons for whose registration a s registered  users 
application may be made;  
(ii) stating the goods or services in respect of which registration is proposed;  
(iii) stating the conditions or restrictions, if any, proposed with respect to the characteristics 
of the goods or services, to the  mode or place of permitt ed use, or to any other matter;  
(iv) stating whether the permitted use is to be for a period or without limit of period, and, if 
for a pe riod, the duration thereof;  and 
(c) such further documents or other evidence as may be require d by the Reg istrar or as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) When the requirements of sub -section ( 1) have been complied with, the Registrar shall register the 
proposed registered user in respect of the goods or services as to which he is so satisfied.  
(3) The Registra r shall issue notice in the prescribed m anner of the registration of a  person as a 
registered user, to other registered users of the trade mark, if any. 
(4) The Registrar shall, if so requested by the applicant, take steps for securing that information giv en 
for the purposes of an application under this section (other than matters entered in the register) is no t 
disclosed to rivals in trade.  
50. Power of Registrar for variation or cancellation of r egistration as registered user .—(1) 
Without prejudice to the  provisions of section 57, the registration o f a person as registered user — 
(a) may be varied by the Registrar as regards the goods or services in respect of which it has 
effect on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of the registere d proprietor of the trade 
mark;  
(b) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of 
the registered proprietor or of the registered user or of any other reg istered user of the trade mark;  
(c) may be cancelled by the  Registrar on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of 
any person on any of t he following grounds, namely: — 29 
 (i) that the registered user has used the trade mark otherwise than in accordance with the 
agreement under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 49 or in such way as to cause or to be 
likely to  cause, deception or confusion;  
(ii) that the proprietor or the registered user misrepresented, or failed to disclose, some fact 
material to the application for registration which if accurately represented or disclosed would not 
have justified the regis tration of the registered user;  
(iii) that the circumstances have changed since the date of registration in such a way that at the 
date of such application for cancellation they would not have just ified regis tration of the registered 
user;  
(iv) that the registration ought not to have been effected having regard to rights vested in the 
applicant by virtue of a contract in the perform ance of which he is interested;  
(d) may be cancelled by the Registra r on his own motion or on the application in writing in the 
prescribed manner by any person, on the ground that any stipulation in the agreement between the 
registered proprietor and the registered user regarding the quality of the goods or services in rel ation to 
which the trade mark is to be used is either not being enforced  or is not being complied with;  
(e) may be cancelled by the Registrar in respect of any goods or services in relation to which the 
trade mark is no longer registered.  
(2) The Registrar  shall issue notice in the prescribed manner in respect of every application under this 
section to the registered proprietor and each registered user (not being th e applicant) of the trade mark.  
(3) The procedure for cancel ling a registration shall be such  as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before cancel ling of registration, the registered proprietor shall be given a reasona ble 
opportunity of being heard.  
51. Power of Registrar to call for information relating to agreement in respect of registered 
users .—(1) The Registrar may , at any time during the continuance of the registration of the registered 
user, by notice in writing, require the registered proprietor to confirm to him within one month that the 
agreement filed under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 49 continues to be in force.  
(2) If the registered proprietor fails to furnish the confirmation within one month as required under 
sub-section ( 1), the registered user shall cease to be the registered user on the day immediately after the 
expiry of  the said period and the R egistrar shall notify the same.  
52. Right of registered user to take proceedings against infringement .—(1) Subject to any 
agreement subsisting between the parties, a registered user may institute proceedings for infringement in 
his own name as if he were the registered proprietor, making the registered proprietor a defendant and the 
rights and obligations of such registered user in such case being concurrent with thos e of the registered 
proprietor.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything cont ained in any other law, a registered proprietor so added as defendant 
shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and  takes part in the proceedings.  
53. No right of permitted user to take p roceeding against infringement .—A person refer red to in 
sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( r) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 shall have no right to institute any pr oceeding 
for any infringement.  
54. Registered user not to have right  of assignment or transmission .—Nothing in this Act shall 
confer on a registered user of a trade mark any assignable or transmis sible right to the use thereof.  
Explanation I .—The right of a registered user of a trade mark shall not be deemed to have been 
assigned or transmitted within the meaning of this section in  the follo wing cases, namely: — 
(a) where the registered user being an individual enters into a partnership with any other person for 
carrying on the business concerned; but in any such case the firm may use the trade mark, if otherwise 
in force, only for so long as the registere d user is a member of the firm;  
(b) where the registered user being a firm subsequently undergoes a change in its constitution; but 
in any such case the reconstituted firm may use the trade mark, if otherwise in force, only for so long 30 
 as any partner of the original firm at the time of its registration as registered user, continues to be a 
partner of the reconstituted firm.  
Explanation II .—For the purposes of Explanation I , “firm” has the same meaning as in the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932).  
55. Use of one of associated or substantially identical trade marks equivalent to use of 
anoth er.—(1) Where under the provisions of this Act, use of a registered trade mark is required to be 
proved for any purpose, the tribunal may, if and, so far as it shall think right, accept use of a registered 
associated trade mark, or of the trade mark with additions or alterations not substantially affecting its 
identity, as an equivalent for  the use required to be proved.  
(2) The use of the whole of a  registered trade mark shall, for the purpose of this Act, be deemed to be 
also use of any trade mark being a part thereof and registered in accordance with sub -section ( 1) of 
section 15 in t he name of the same proprietor.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything in s ection 32, the use of part of the registered trade mark in                    
sub-section ( 2) shall not be conclusive as to its evidence of distinctiveness for any purpose under this Act.  
56. Use of trade mark for export trade and use when fo rm of trade co nnection changes .—(1) 
The application in India of trade mark to goods to be exported from India or in relation to services for use 
outside India and any other act done in India in relation to goods to be so exported or services so rendered 
outside India wh ich, if done in relation to goods to be sold or services provided or otherwise traded in 
within India would constitute use of a trade mark therein, shall be deemed to constitute use of the trade 
mark in relation to those goods or services for any purpose f or which such use is material u nder this Act 
or any other law.  
(2) The use of a registered trade mark in relation to goods or services between which and the person 
using the mark any form of connection in the course of trade subsists shall not be deemed to  be likely to 
cause deception or confusion on the ground only that the mark has been or is used in relation to goods or 
services between which and the said person or a predecessor in title of that person a different form of 
connection in the course of trad e subsisted or subsists.  
CHAPTER VII  
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER  
57. Power to cancel or vary registrati on and to rectify the register .—(1) On application made in 
the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar by any person aggrieved, the tribunal 
may make such order as it may think fit for cancel ling or varying the registration of a trade mark on the 
ground of any contravention, or failure to observe a condition entered on th e register in relation thereto.  
(2) Any per son aggrieved by the absence or omission from the register of any entry, or by any entry 
made in the register without sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly remaining on the register, or by any 
error or defect in any entry in the register, may apply in the prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or 
to the Registrar, and the tribunal may make such order for making, expunging or varying  the entry as it 
may think fit.  
(3) The tribunal may in any proceeding under this section decide any question that may be  necessary 
or expedient to decide in connection with the  rectification of the register.  
(4) The tribunal, of its own motion, may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner to the parties 
concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, mak e any order referred to in               
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2). 
(5) Any order of the Appellate Board rectifying the register shall direct that notice of the rectification 
shall be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who  shall upon receipt of such notice re ctify 
the register accordingly.  
  31 
 58. Correction of register .—(1) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner 
by the registered proprietor, — 
(a) correct any error in the name, address or description of the registered proprietor of a trade 
mark, or any other entry relati ng to the trade mark;  
(b) enter any change in the name, address or description of the person who is registered  as 
proprietor of a trade mark;  
(c) cancel the entry o f a trade mark on the  register;  
(d) strike out any goods or classes of goods or services from those in respect of wh ich a trade 
mark is registered,  
and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of registration, and for that 
purpose, may require the certificate of registration to be produced to hi m. 
(2) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner by a registered user of a trade 
mark, and after notice to the registered proprietor, correct any error, or enter any change, in the name,  
address or description of the registered user.  
59. Altera tion of registered trade marks .—(1) The registered proprietor of a trade mark may apply 
in the prescribed manner to the Registrar for leave to add to or alter the trade mark in any manner not 
substa ntially affecting the identity thereof, and the Registrar may refuse leave or may grant it on such 
terms and subject to such l imitations as he may think fit.  
(2) The Registrar may cause an application under this section to be advertised in the prescribed 
manner in any case where it appears to him that it is expedient so to do, and where he does so, if within 
the prescribed time from the date of the advertisement any person gives notice to the Registrar in the 
prescribed manner of opposition to the applicati on, the Registrar shall, after hearing the parties if so 
required, decide the matter.  
(3) Where leave is granted under this section, the trade mark as altered shall be advertised in the 
prescribed manner, unless the application has already been ad vertised under sub -section ( 2). 
60. Adaptation of entries in register to amended or substituted class ification of goods or 
services .—(1) The Registrar shall not make any amendment of the register which would have the effect 
of adding any goods or classes of goods o r services to those in respect of which a trade mark is registered 
(whether in one or more classes) immediately before the amendment is to be made or of antedating the 
registration of a trade mark in re spect of any goods or services:  
Provided that this sub -section , shall not apply when the Registrar is satisfied that compliance 
therewith would involve undue complexity and that the addition or antedating, as the case may be, would 
not affect any substantial quantity of goods or services and would not substantially pr ejudice the rights of 
any person.  
(2) A proposal so to amend the register shall be brought to the notice of the registered proprietor of 
the trade mark affected and advertised in the prescribed manner, and may be opposed before the Registrar 
by any person aggrieved on the ground that the proposed amendment contravenes the provisions of     
sub-section ( 1). 
CHAPTER VIII  
COLLECTIVE MARKS  
61. Special provisions for collectiv e marks .—(1) The provisions of this Act shall apply to collective 
marks subject to the provis ions contained in this Chapter.  
(2) In relation to a collective mark the reference in  clause ( zb) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 to 
distinguish ing the goods or services of one person from those of others shall be construe d as a reference 
to distinguishing the goods or services of members of an association of persons which is the proprietor of  
the mark from those of others.  
62. Collective mark not to be misleading as t o character or significance .—A collective mark shall 
not be registered if it is likely to deceive or cause confusion on the part of public in particular if it is likely 32 
 to be taken to be something other than a collective mark, and in such case the Registrar may require that a 
mark in respect of which applicatio n is made for registration comprise some indicatio n that it is a 
collective mark.  
63. Application to be accompanied by regulations gov erning use of collective marks .—(1) An 
application for registration of a collective mark shall be accompanied by the regul ations governing t he use 
of such collective mark.  
(2) The regulations referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall specify the persons authorise d to use the mark, 
the conditions of membership of the association and, the conditions of use of the mark, including any  
sanctions against misuse and such othe r matters as may be prescribed.  
64. Acceptance of applicatio n and regulations by Registrar .—If it appears to the Registrar that the 
requirements for registration are satisfied, he shall accept the application together with the regulations, 
either unconditionally or subject to such conditions including amendments of the said regulations, if any, 
as he may deem fit or refuse to accept it and if accepted shall notify the regulations.  
65. Regula tions to be open to inspection .—The regulations referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 
63 shall be open to public inspection in the same way as the regis ter as provided in section 148.  
66. Amendment of regulations .—Any amendment of regulations referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 63 shall not be effective unless the amended regulations are filed with the Registrar, and accepted 
and published by him in ac cordance with section 64. 
67. Infringement proceedings by registered  proprietor of collective mark .—In a suit for 
infringement instituted by the registered proprietor of a collective mark as plaintiff the court shall take 
into account any loss suffered or likely to be suffered by authorise d users and may give such directions as 
it thinks fit as to the extent to which the plaintiff shall hold the proceeds of any pecuniary remedy on 
behalf of such authorise d users.  
68. Additional grounds for removal of regist ration of collectiv e mark .—The registration of a 
collective mark may also be removed fr om the register on the ground — 
(a) that the manner in which the collective mark has been used by the proprietor or authorise d 
user has caused it to become liable to misl ead the public a s a collective mark; or  
(b) that the proprietor has failed to observe, or to secure the observance of the regulations  
governing the use of the mark.  
Explanation I .—For the purposes of this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, “ authorise d 
user” means a member of an association authorise d to use the registered coll ective mark of the 
association.  
Explanation II .—For the purposes of this Act, use of a collective mark by an authorise d user referred 
to in Explanation I  shall be deemed  to be the use by the  registered proprietor thereof.  
CHAPTER IX  
CERTIFICATION TRADE MARKS  
69. Certain provisions of this Act not applicabl e to certification trade marks .—The following 
provisions of this Act shall not apply to certification  trade marks, that is to say, — 
(a) clauses ( a) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(b) Sections 18, 20 and 21, except as exp ressly applied by this Chapter;  
(c) Sections 28, 29, 30, 41, 42, 47, 48, 49, 50, 52, 54 and  sub-section ( 2) of section 56;  
(d) Chapter XII, except section 107.  
70. Registratio n of certification trade marks .—A mark shall not be registrable as a certification 
trade mark in the name of a person who carries on a trade in goods of the kind certified or a trade of the 
provision of services of the kind certified.  33 
 71. Application s for registratio n of certification trade marks .—(1) An application for the 
registration of a mark as a certification trade mark shall be made to the Registrar in the prescribed manner 
by the person proposed to be registered as the proprietor thereof, and accompanied by a draft for the 
regulations to be deposited unde r section 74.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of section 70, the provisions of sections 18, 19 and 22 shall apply in 
relation to an application under this section a s they apply in relation to an application under section 18, 
subject to the modification that references therein to acceptance of an application shall be con strued as 
references to authoris ation to proceed with an application.  
(3) In dealing under the said  provisions with an application under this section, the tribunal shall have 
regard to the like considerations, so far as relevant, as if the application were applications under section 
18 and to any other considerations relevant to applications under this section, including the desirability of 
securing that a certification trade mark shall comprise some indication that it  is a certification trade mark.  
72. Consideration of application  for registration by Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall consider 
the application made under section 71 with regard to t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) whether the applicant is competent to certify the goods in respect of whic h the mark is to be 
registered;  
(b) whether the draft of the regulations to be filed un der sectio n 74 is satisfactory;  
(c) whether in all the circumstances the registration applied for would be to the public advantage,  
and may either — 
(i) refuse the application; or  
(ii) accept the application and approve the said draft of the regulations either without modification 
and unconditionally or subject to any conditions or limitations, or to any amendments or 
modifications of the application or of the regulations, which he thinks requisite having reg ard to any 
of the said matters.  
(2) Except in the case  of acceptance and approval without modification and unconditionally, the 
Registrar shall not decide any matter under sub -section ( 1) without giving the applicant  an opportunity of 
being heard.  
73. Opposition to registratio n of certification trade marks .—When an application has been 
accepted, the Registrar shall, as soon as may be thereafter, cause the application as accepted to be 
advertised in the prescribed manner, and the provisions of section 21 shall apply in relation to the 
registration of the mark a s they apply in relation to a n application under section 18.  
74. Filing of regulations governing use  of a certification trade mark .—(1) There shall be filed at 
the Trade Marks Registry in respect of every mark registered as a certification trade mark regul ations for 
governing the use thereof, which shall include provisions as to the cases in which the proprietor is to 
certify goods or services and to authorise  the use of the certification trade mark, and may contain any 
other provisions which the Registrar may by general or special order, require or permit to be inserted 
therein (including provisions conferring a right of appeal to the Registrar against any refusal of the 
proprietor to certify goods or to authorise  the use of the certification trade mark in accordance with the 
regulations); and regulations so filed shall be open to inspection in like manner as the regis ter as provided 
in section 148.  
(2) The regulations so filed may, on the application of the registered proprieto r, be altered by the 
Registrar . 
(3) The Registrar may cause such application to be advertised in any case where it appears to him 
expedient so to do, and where he does so, if within the time specified in the advertisement any person 
gives notice of opposition to the application, the Re gistrar shall not decide the matter without giving the 
parties  an opportunity of being heard.  
75. Infringement of certification trade mark s.—The right conferred by section 78 is infringed by 
any person who, not being the registered proprietor of the certif ication trade mark or a person authorise d 
by him in that behalf under the regulations filed under section 74, using i t in accordance therewith, uses  in 
the course of trade, a mark, which is identical with, or deceptively similar to the certification trade mark 34 
 in relation to any goods or services in respect of which it is registered, and in such manner as to render the 
use of the mark likely to be tak en as being a use as a trade mark.  
76. Acts not constituting infringemen t of certification trade marks .—(1) Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the following acts do not constitute an infringement of the right to the use 
of a regist ered certifi cation trade mark — 
(a) where a certification trade mark is registered subject to any conditions or limitations entered 
on the register, the use of any such mark in any mode, in relation to goods to be sold or otherwise 
traded in any place, or in relation t o goods to be exported to any market or in relation to services for 
use or available for acceptance in any place, country or territory or in any other circumstances, to 
which having regard to any such limitations, the registration does not extend;  
(b) the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods or services certified by the proprietor 
of the mark if, as to those goods or services or a bulk of which they form part, the proprietor or 
another  in accordance with his authoris ation under the relevan t regulations has applied the mark and 
has not subsequently removed or obliterated it, or the proprietor has at any time expressly or 
impliedly co nsented to the use of the mark;  
(c) the use of a certification trade mark in relation to goods or services ada pted to form part of, or 
to be accessory to, other goods in relation to which the mark has been used without infringement of 
the right given as aforesaid or might for the time being be so used, if the use of the mark is reasonably 
necessary in order to ind icate that the goods or services are so adapted and neither the purpose nor the 
effect of the use of the mark is to indicate otherwise than in accordance with the fact that the goods or 
services a re certified by the proprietor.  
(2) Clause ( b) of sub -sectio n (1) shall not apply to the case of use consisting of the application of a 
certification trade mark to goods or services, notwithstanding that they are such goods or services as are 
mentioned in that clause if such application is contrary to the regulati ons referred to in that clause.  
(3) Where a certification trade mark is one of two or more trade marks registered under this Act, 
which are identical or nearly resemble each other, the use of any of those trade marks in exercise of the 
right to the use of t hat trade mark given by registration, shall not be deemed to be an infringement of the 
right so given to the use of any other of those trade marks.  
77. Cancellation or varying of registratio n of certification trade marks .—The Registrar may, on 
the application in the prescribed manner of any person aggrieved and after giving the proprietor an 
opportunity of opposing the application, make such order as he thinks fit for expunging or varying any 
entry in the register to a certification trade mark, or f or varying the regulations, on any of t he following 
grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the proprietor is no longer competent, in the case of any of the goods or services in 
respect of which the mark is registered, to certify those goods or s ervices;  
(b) that the p roprietor has failed to observe any provisions of the regulati ons to be observed on his 
part; 
(c) that it is no longer to the public advantage that the  mark should remain registered;  
(d) that it is requisite for the public advantage that if the mark remain s registered, th e regulations 
should be varied.  
78. Rights conferred by registratio n of certification trade marks .—(1) Subject to the provisions 
of sections 34, 35 and 76, the registration of a person as a proprietor of certification trade mark in r espect 
of any goods or services  shall, if valid, give to that person the exclusive right to the use of the mark in 
relation to those goods or services.  
(2) The exclusive right to the use of a certification trade mark given under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
subject t o any conditions and limitations to whi ch the registration is subject.  
 
[CHAPTER X .—SPECIAL PROVISIONS FOR TEXTILE GOODS .] Omitted by the Trade Marks 
(Amendment ) Act, 2010 (40 of 2010), s. 7 (w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  
[79. Textile goods.]  Omitted by s.  7, ibid. (w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  35 
 [80. Restriction on registration of textile goods.] Omitted by  the Trade Marks (Amendment ) Act, 
2010 (40 of 2010) , s. 7 (w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  
[81. Stamping of piece goods, cotton yarn and thread.] Omitted by s.  7, ibid. (w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  
[82. Determination of character of textile goods by sampling.]  Omitted by s.  7, ibid.                
(w.e.f.  8-7-2013).  
CHAPTER XI  
APPELLATE BOARD  
83. Es tablishment of Appellate Board .—The Central Government shall, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, establish an Appellate Board to be known as the Intellectual Property Appellate Board to 
exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority confer red on it by or under this Act 1[and under the 
Copyright Act, 1957  (14 of 1957) .] 
84. Composition of Appellate Board .—(1) The Appellate Board shall consist of a 2[Chair person] , 
3[Vice-Chair person ] and such number of other Members, as the Central Government may deem fit and, 
subject to the other provisions of this Act, the jurisdiction, powers and authority of the A ppellate Board 
may b e exercised by Benches thereof.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial Member and one 
Technical Member and shall sit at such place as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, specify.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2), the 2[Chair person] — 
(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial Member or Technical Member of 
the Bench to which he is appointed, discharge the functions of the Judicial Member or, as the case 
may be, the Techni cal Member, of any other Bench;  
(b) may transfer a Member f rom one Bench to another Bench;  
(c) may authorise  the 3[Vice -Chair person ], the Judicial Member or the Technical Member 
appointed t o one Bench to discharge also the functions of the Judicial Member or the Technical 
Member, as the  case may be, of another Bench.  
(4) Where any Benches are constituted, the Central Government may, from time to time, by 
notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the business of the Appellate Board amongst the 
Benches and specify the matters which m ay be dealt with by each Bench.  
(5) If any question arises as to whether any matter falls within the purview of the business allocated to 
a Bench, th e decision of the 2[Chair person]  shall be final.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the expression “matter” inclu des 
an appeal under section 91.  
(6) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on 
which they differ, and make a reference to the 2[Chair person]  who shall either hear the point or points 
himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members and 
such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have 
heard the case, incl uding those who first heard it.  
85. Qualifications for appointment as 2[Chair person] , 3[Vice -Chair person] , or other 
Members .—(1) A person shall not be qualified  for appointm ent as the 2[Chair person]  unless he — 
(a) is, or has be en, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) has, for at least two years, held  the office of a 3[Vice -Chairperson] . 
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as  the 3[Vice -Chair person] , unless he — 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s.161  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs.  by s. 161, ibid., for “Chaiman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by s. 161, ibid., for “Vice -Chaiman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  36 
 (a) has, for at least two years, held the office of a Judicial M ember or a Technical Member; or  
(b) has been a Member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that S ervice 
or any highe r post for at least five years.  
(3) A pe rson shall not be qualified for appointment as  a Judicial Member, unless he — 
(a) has been  a member of the Indian Legal Service and has he ld the post in Grade I of that S ervice 
for at least three years; or  
(b) has, for at least ten years , held a civil judicial office.  
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member, unless he — 
(a) has, for at least ten years, exercised functions of a tribunal under this Act or under the Trade 
and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958  (43 of 1958) , or bot h, and has held a post not lower than the post 
of a Joint Regist rar for at least five years; or  
(b) has, for at least ten years, been a n advocate of a proven specialis ed experience in trade mark 
law. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), the 1[Chair person] , 2[Vice -Chairman ] and every other 
Member shall be appoi nted by the President of India.  
(6) No appointment of a person as the  1[Chair person]  shall be made except after consultation w ith the 
Chief Justice of India.  
86. Term  of office of 1[Chair person] , 2[Vice-Chair person]  and other Members .—The 
1[Chair person] , 2[Vice -Chair person]  or other Members shall hold office as such for a term of five years 
from the date on which he enters upon hi s office or until he attains, — 
(a) in the case of 1[Chairperson]  and 2[Vice -Chairperson] , the age of sixty -five years; and  
(b) in the case of a Member, the age of sixty -two years,  
whichever is earlier.  
87. 2[Vice -Chair person]  or senior -most Member to act as 1[Chair person]  or discharge his 
func tions in certain circumstances .—(1) In the event of  or any vacancy in the office of the 
1[Chair person]  by reasons of his death, resignation or otherwise, the 2[Vice -Chair person]  and in his 
absence the senior -most Member shall act as 1[Chair person]  until the date on which a new 1[Chair person] , 
appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to fill such v acancy, enters upon his office.  
(2) When the 1[Chairperson]  is unable to discharge his functions owing to his absence, illness or any 
other  cause, the 2[Vice -Chair person]  and in his absence the senior -most Member shall discharge the 
functions of the 1[Chair person ] until the date on which  the 1[Chair person]  resumes his duty.  
88. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of 1[Chairperson] , 2[Vice-
Chair person]  and other Members .—(1) The  salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits), of the 1[Chair person] , 
2[Vice -Chair person]  and other members shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding  anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a person who, immediately before the date 
of assuming office as the 1[Chair person] , 2[Vice -Chair person]  or other Member was in service of 
Government, shall be deemed to have retired from service on the date on which he enters upon office as 
the 1[Chair person] , 2[Vice -Chair person]  or othe r Member.  
89. Resignation and removal .—(1) The 1[Chair person ], 2[Vice -Chair person ] or any other Member 
may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Preside nt of India, resign his office:  
Provided that the 1[Chair person ], 2[Vice -Chair person ] or any other Member shall, unless he is 
permitted by the President of India to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017,  s. 161,  for “Chaiman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 161, ibid., for “Vice -Chaiman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
 37 
 of three months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor 
enters upon his office or until the expiry of his term o f office, whichever is earlier.  
(2) The 1[Chair person ], 2[Vice -Chair person ] or any other Member shall not be removed from his 
office except by an order made by the President of India on the ground of proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after an inquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which the 1[Chair person ], 2[Vice -
Chair person] or other Member had been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable 
opportunity of being hea rd in respect of those charges.  
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of 
misbehaviour or inca pacity of the 1[Chair person ], 2[Vice -Chair person ] or other Member referred to in                 
sub-section ( 2).  
3[89A. Qualifications, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and 
Member. —Notwithstanding anything in this Act, the qualifications, appointment, term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson,           
Vice -Chairperson and other Members of the Appellate  Board appointed after the commencement of Part 
XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of section 
184 of that Act:  
Provided that the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and other Members appointed before the 
commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall continue to be 
governed by the provisions of this Act, and the rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section 184 
of the Finance Act, 2017, had not come into force.]  
90. Staff of Appellate Board .—(1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and 
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Appellate Board in the discharge of 
its functions and provide the Appellate Board with such officers and other  employees as it may think fit.  
(2) The salaries and allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of the 
Appellate Board shall be  such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The officers and other employees of the Appellate  Board shall discharge their functions under the 
general superintendence of the 1[Chair person]  in the manner as may be prescribed.  
91. Appeals to Appellate Board .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar 
under this Act, or the rule s made thereunder may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Board within three 
months from the date on which the order or decision sought to be appealed against is communicated to 
such person preferring the appeal.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is pre ferred after the expiry of the period specified under          
sub-section ( 1):  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period specified therefor, if the 
appellant satisfies the Appellate Board that he had sufficient cause for not p referring the appeal within the 
specified period.  
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Board shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the 
prescribed manner and shall be accompanied by a copy of the order or decision appealed against and by 
such fees as may be prescribed.  
92. Procedure  and powers of Appellate Board .—(1) The Appellate Board shall not be bound by 
the procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  but shall be guided by 
principles of natural justice and subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made the reunder, the 
Appellate Board shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of places and times 
of its hearing.  
(2) The A ppellate Board shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are v ested in a civil c ourt under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while 
trying a suit in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017,  s. 161, for “Chaiman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 161, ibid., for “Vice -Chaiman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Ins. by s.161 , ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  38 
 (a) receiving evidence;  
(b) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses;  
(c) requisitioning  any public record; and  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Any proceeding before the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code               
(45 of 1860) , and the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) .  
93. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc. —No court or  other authority shall have or, be entitled to , 
exercise  any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 91.  
94. Bar to appear before Appellate Board .—On ceasing to hold office, the 1[Chair person] ,                    
2[Vice -Chair person]  or other Members shall not appear before the Appellate Board or the Registrar.  
95. Conditions as to making of interim orders .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provisions of this Act or in any other l aw for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of 
injunction or stay or any other manner) shall be made on,  or in any proceedings relating to, an appeal 
unless —   
(a) copies of such appeal and of all documents in support of the plea for such interim order are 
furnished to the party against whom such appeal is made or proposed to be made; and  
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter.  
96. Power  of 1[Chair person ] to transfer cases from one Bench to another. —On the application of 
any of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be 
heard, or on his own motion without such notice, the 1[Chair person] may transfer any case pending before 
one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench.  
97. Procedure for application for rectification, etc. , before Appellate Board. —(1) An application 
for rectification of the register made to the Appellate Board under section 57 shall be in such form as may 
be prescribed.  
(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating to a registered trade 
mark under this A ct shall be communicated to the Registrar by the Board and the Registrar shall give 
effect to the order of the Board and shall, when so directed, amend the entries in, or rectify, the register in 
accordance with such order.  
98. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings .—(1) The Registrar shall have the right to appear 
and be heard — 
(a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the relief sought includes 
alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to t he practice of the Trade 
Marks Registry is raised;  
(b) in any appeal to the Board from an order of the Registrar on an application for registration of 
a trade mark — 
(i) which  is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the Registrar or is accepted 
by him subject to any amendments, modifications, conditions or limitations, or  
(ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers that his appearance is necessary in 
the public interest,  
and the Registrar shall appear in any case if so directed by the Board.  
(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Registrar may, in lieu of appearing, submit a 
statement in writing signed by him, giving such particular s as he thinks proper of the proceedings before 
him relating to the matter in issue or of the grounds of any decision given by him affecting it, or of the 
practice of the Trade Marks Registry in like cases, or of other matters relevant to the issues and wi thin his 
knowledge as Registrar, and such statement shall be evidence in the proceeding.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 161, for “Chaiman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s. 161, ibid., for “Vice -Chaiman” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
 39 
 99. Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Appellate Board .—In all proceedings under this Act 
before the Appellate Board the costs of the Registrar shall be in the discretion of the Board, but the 
Registrar shall not be ordered to pay the costs of any of the parties.  
100. Transfer of pending proceedings to Appellate Board .—All cases of appeals against any order 
or decision of the Registrar and all cases pertaining t o rectification of register, pending before any High 
Court, shall be transferred to the Appellate Board from the date as notified by the Central Government in 
the Official Gazette and the Appellate Board may proceed with the matter either de novo  or from t he stage 
it was so transferred.  
CHAPTER XII  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
101. Meaning of applying trade marks and trade descriptions .—(1) A person shall be deemed to 
apply a trade mark or mark or trade description to goods or services who — 
(a) applies it to the goods themselves or uses it in relation to services; or  
(b) applies it to any package in or with which the goods are sold, or exposed for sale, or  had in 
possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture; or  
(c) places, enc loses or annexes any goods which are sold, or exposed for sale , or had in 
possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or manufacture, in or with any package or other thing 
to which a trade mark or mark or trade description has been applied; or  
(d) use s a trade mark or mark or trade description in any manner reasonably likely to lead to the 
belief that the goods or services in connection with which it is used are designated or described by 
that trade mark or mark or trade description; or  
(e) in relatio n to the goods or services uses a trade mark or trade description in any sign, 
advertisement, invoice, catalogue, business letter, business paper, price list or other commercial 
document and goods are delivered or services are rendered to a person in pursu ance of a request or 
order made by reference to the trade mark or trade description as so used.  
(2) A trade mark or mark or trade description shall be deemed to be applied to goods whether it is 
woven in, impressed on, or otherwise worked into, or annexed  or affixed to, the goods or to any package 
or other thing.  
102. Falsifying and falsely applying trade marks .—(1) A person shall be deemed to falsify a trade 
mark who, either ,— 
(a) without  the assent of the proprietor of the trade mark makes that trade mark or a deceptively 
similar mark; or  
(b) falsifies any genuine trade mark, whether by alteration, addition, effacement or otherwise.  
(2) A person shall be deemed to falsely apply to goods  or services a trade mark who, without the 
assent of the proprietor of the trade mark ,—  
(a) applies such trade mark or a deceptively similar mark to goods or services or any package 
containing goods;  
(b) uses any package bearing a mark which is identical  with or deceptively similar to the trade 
mark of such proprietor, for the purpose of packing, filling or wrapping therein any goods other than 
the genuine goods of the proprietor of the trade mark.  
(3) Any trade mark falsified as mentioned in sub -section  (1) or falsely applied as mentioned in      
sub-section ( 2), is in this Act referred to as a false trade mark.  
(4) In any prosecution for falsifying a trade mark or falsely applying a trade mark to goods or 
services, the burden of proving the assent of t he proprietor shall lie on the accused.  
103. Penalty for applying false trade marks, trade descriptions, etc .—Any person who —  
(a) falsifies any trade mark; or  40 
 (b) falsely applies to goods or services any trade mark; or  
(c) makes, disposes of, or has in  his possession, any die, block, machine, plate or other instrument 
for the purpose of falsifying or of being used f or falsifying, a trade mark; or  
(d) applies any false trade description to goods or services; or  
(e) applies to any goods to which an indic ation of the country or place in which they were made 
or produced or the name and address of the manufacturer or person for whom the goods are 
manufactured is required to be applied under section 139, a false indication of such country, place, 
name or addr ess; or  
(f) tampers with, alters or effaces an indication of origin which has been applied to any goods to 
which it is required to be applied under section 139; or  
(g) causes any of the things above mentioned in this section to be done,  
shall, unless he  proves that he acted, without intent to defraud, be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to three years and with fine which 
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may extend t o two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reas ons to be mentioned in the judg ment, 
impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of le ss than fifty thousand 
rupees.  
104. Penalty for selling g oods or providing services to which false trade mark or false trade 
description is applied .—Any person who sells, lets for hire  or exposes for sale, or hires or has in his 
possession for sale, goods or things, or provides or hires services, to which any fa lse trade mark or false 
trade description is applied or which, being required under section 139 to have applied to them an 
indication of the country or place in which they were made or produced or the name and address of the 
manufacturer, or person for who m the goods are manufactured or services provided, as the case may be, 
are without the indications so required, shall, unless he proves ,— 
(a) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing an offence against this 
section, he had at the ti me of commission of the alleged offence no reason to suspect the genuineness 
of the trade mark or trade description or that any offence had been committed in respect of the goods 
or services; or  
(b) that, on demand by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he ga ve all the information in his power 
with respect to the person from whom he obtained such goods or things or services; or  
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,  
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than six months but w hich may 
extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may 
extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in th e judg ment, 
impose a sentence of im prisonment for a term of less than six months or a fine of less than fifty thousand 
rupees.  
105. Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction .—Whoever having already been 
convicted of an offence under section 103 or section 104 is again convicted of any such offence shall be 
punishable for the second and for every subsequent offence, with imprisonment for a term which shall not 
be less than one y ear but which may extend to three years and with fine which shall not be less than one 
lakh rupees but which may extend to two lakh rupees:  
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special rea son to be mentioned in the judgm ent, impose 
a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than one year or a fine of less than one lakh rupees:  
Provided further that for the purposes of this section, no cognizance shall be taken of any conviction 
made b efore the commencement of this Act.  
106. Penalty for removing piece goods, etc., contrary to section 81 .—If any person removes or 
attempts to remove or causes or attempts to cause to be removed for sale from any premises referred to in 
section 81 or sells or exposes for sale or has in his po ssession for sale or for any purpose of trade or 41 
 manufacture piece goods or cotton yarn or cotton thread which is not marked as required by that section, 
every such piece and every such bundle of yarn and all such thread and everything used for the packing  
thereof shall be forfeited to Government and such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend 
to one thousand rupees.  
107. Penalty for falsely representing a trade mark as registered .—(1) No person shall make any 
representation — 
(a) with respec t to a mark, not being a registered trade mark, to the effect that it is a registered 
trade mark; or  
(b) with respect to a part of a registered trade mark, not being a part separately registered as a 
trade mark, to the effect that it is separately registe red as a trade mark; or  
(c) to the effect that a registered trade mark is registered in respect of any goods or services in 
respect of which it is not in fact registered; or  
(d) to the effect that registration of a trade mark gives an exclusive right to the use thereof in any 
circumstances in which, having regard to limitation entered on the register, the registration does not in 
fact give that right.  
(2) If any person contravenes any of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable with 
impr isonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.  
(3) For the purposes of this section, the use in India in relation to a trade mark of the word 
“registered” , or of any other expression, symbol or sign referring whether expressly or impliedly to 
registration, shall be deemed to import a reference to regist ration in the register, except —  
(a) where that word or other expression, symbol or sign is used in direct association with other 
words delineated in characters at least as large as those in which that word or other expression, 
symbol or sign is delineated and indicating that the reference is to registration as a trade mark under 
the law of a country outside In dia being a country under the law of which the registration r eferred to 
is in fact in force; or  
(b) where that other expression, symbol or sign is of itself such as to indicate that the reference is 
to such registration as is mentioned in clause ( a); or  
(c) where that word is used in relation to a mark registered as a trade mark under the law of a 
country outside India and in relation solely to goods to be exported to that country or in relation to 
services for use in that country.  
108. Penalty for impro perly describing a place of business as connected with the Trade Marks 
Office .—If any person uses on his place of business, or on any document issued by him, or otherwise, 
words which would reasonably lead to the belief that his place of business is, or is  officially connected 
with, the Trade Marks Office, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine, or with both.  
109. Penalty for falsification of entries in the register .—If any person makes, or causes to  be 
made, a false entry in the register, or a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in the register, 
or produces or tenders or causes to be produced or tendered, in evidence any such writing, knowing the 
entry or writing to be false, he shall  be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both.  
110. No offence in certain cases .—The provisions of sections 102, 103, 104 and 105 shall, in 
relation to a registered trade mark or proprietor of such mark, be subject to the rights created or 
recognise d by this Act and no act or omission shall be deemed to be an offence under the aforesai d 
sections if ,— 
(a) the alleged offence relates to a registered trade mark and the act or omiss ion is permitted 
under this Act;  and  
(b) the alleged offence relates to a registered or an unregistered trade mark and the act or 
omission is permitted under an y other law for the time being in force.  42 
 111. Forfeiture of goods .—(1) Where a person is convicted of an offence under section 103 or 
section 104 or section 105 or is acquitted of an offence under section 103 or section 104 on proof that he 
acted without intent to defraud, or under section 104 on proof of the matters specified in clause ( a),  
clause ( b) or clause ( c) of that section, the court convicting or acquitting him may direct the forfeiture to 
Government of all goods and things by means of, or in re lation to, which the offence has been committed, 
or but for such proof as aforesaid would have been committed.  
(2) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction and an appeal lies against the conviction, an appeal 
shall lie against the forfeiture also.  
(3) When a forfeiture is directed on acquittal and the goods or things to which the direction relates are 
of value exceeding fifty rupees, an appeal against the forfeiture may be preferred, within thirty days from 
the date of the direction, to the court to which in appealable cases appeals lie from sentences of the court 
which directed the forfeiture.  
(4) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction, the court, before whom the person is convicted, may 
order any forfeited articles to be destroyed or otherwi se disposed of as the court thinks fit.  
112. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business .—Where a person 
accused of an offence under section 103 proves —  
(a) that in the ordinary course of his business he is employed on behalf of other persons to apply 
trade marks or trade descriptions, or as the case may be, to make dies, blocks, machines, plates, or 
other instruments for making, or being used in making, trade marks; and  
(b) that in the case which is the subject of the charge he was so employed, and was not interested 
in the goods or other thing by way of profit or commission dependent on the sale of such goods or 
providing of services, as the case may be; and  
(c) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing t he offence charged, he had, 
at the time of the commission of the alleged offence, no reason to suspect the genuineness of the trade 
mark or trade description; and  
(d) that, on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in h is 
power with respect to the persons on whose behalf the trade mark or trade description was applied,  
he shall be acquitted.  
113. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused .—(1) Where the 
offence charged under section 103 or sec tion 104 or section 105 is in relation to a registered trade mark 
and the accused pleads that the registration of the trade mark is invalid, the following procedure shall be 
followed: — 
(a) If the court is satisfied that such defence is prima facie  tenable,  it shall not proceed with the 
charge but shall adjourn the proceeding for three months from the date on which the plea of the 
accused is recorded to enable the accused to file an application before the Appellate Board under this 
Act, for the rectification  of the register on the ground that the registration is invalid.  
(b) If the accused proves to the court that he has made such application within the time so limited 
or within such further time as the court may for sufficient cause allow, the further proce edings in the 
prosecution shall stand stayed till the disposal of such application for rectification.  
(c) If within a period of three months or within such extended time as may be allowed by the 
court the accused fails to apply to the Appellate Board for rectification of the register, the court shall 
proceed with the case as if the registration were valid.  
(2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred to in sub -section ( 1), any 
application for the rectification of the register con cerning the trade mark in question on the ground of 
invalidity of the registration thereof has already been properly made to and is pending before the tribunal, 
the court shall stay the further proceedings in the prosecution pending the disposal of the app lication 
aforesaid and shall determine the charge against the accused in conformity with the result of the 
application for rectification in so far as the complainant relies upon the registration of his mark.  43 
 114. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as every person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty o f the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge  or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been commit ted with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be d eemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and  
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
115. Cognizance of certain offences and the powers of police officer for search and seizure .—(1) 
No court shall take cognizance of an offence under section 107 or section 108 or section 109  except on 
complaint in writing made by the Registrar or any officer authorise d by him in writing:  
Provided that in relation to clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 107, a court shall take cognizance 
of an offence on the basis of a certificate issued by the Registrar to the effect that a registered trade mark 
has been represented as registered in respect of any goods or services in respect of which it is not in fact 
registered.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or Judicial Mag istrate of the first class shall 
try an offence under this Act.  
(3) The offences under section 103 or section 104 or section 105 shall be cognizable.  
(4) Any police officer not below the rank of deputy superintendent of police or equivalent, may, if he 
is satisfied that any of the offences referred to in sub -section ( 3) has been, is being, or is likely to be, 
committed, search and seize without warrant the goods, die, block, machine, plate, other instruments or 
things involved in committing the offence, wherever found, and all the articles so seized shall, as soon as 
practicable, be produced before a Judicial Magistrate of the first class or Metropolitan Magistrate, as the 
case may be:  
Provided that the police officer, before making any search and seizure, shall obtain the opinion of the 
Registrar on facts involved in t he offence relating to trade mark and shall abide by the opinion so 
obtained.  
(5) Any person having an interest in any article seized under sub -section ( 4), may, within fifteen days 
of such seizure, make an application to the Judicial Magistrate of the fi rst class or Metropolitan 
Magistrate, as the case may be, for such article being restored to him and the Magistrate, after hearing the 
applicant and the prosecution, shall make such order on the application as he may deem fit.  
116. Evidence of origin of g oods imported by sea .—In the case of goods brought into India by sea, 
evidence of the port of shipment shall, in a prosecution for an offence under this Act or under clause ( b) 
of section 112 of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) relating to confiscation o f goods under clause ( d) of 
section 111 and notified by the Central Government under clause ( n) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11 of 
the said Act for the protection of trade marks relating to import of goods, be prima  facie  evidence of the 
place or countr y in which the goods a re made or produced.  
117. Costs of defence or prosecution .—In any prosecution under this Act, the court may order such 
costs to be paid by the accused to the complainant, or by the complainant to the accused, as the court 
deems reasona ble having regard to all the circumstances of the case and the conduct of the parties and the 
costs so awarded shall be recoverable as if they were a fine.  44 
 118. Limitation of prosecution .—No prosecution for an offence under this Act or under clause ( b) 
of section 112 of the Customs Act,  1962  (52 of 1962) , relating to confiscation of goods under clause ( d) 
of section 111 and notified by the Central Government under clause ( n) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11 of 
the said Act for the protection of trade marks , relating to import of goods shall be commenced after 
expiration of three years next after the commission of the offence charged, or two years after the 
discovery thereof by the prosecu tor, whichever expiration first -happens.  
119. Information as to commi ssion of offence .—An officer of the Government whose duty it is to 
take part in the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter shall not be compelled in any court to say 
whence he got any information as to the commission of any offence against this Act.   
120. Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out of India .—If any person, being within 
India, abets the commission, without India, of any act which, if committed in India, would, under this 
Act, be an offence, he may be tried for such abetment in an y place in India in which he may be found, and 
be punished therefor with the punishment to which he would be liable if he had himself committed in that 
place the act which he abetted.  
121. Instructions of Central Government as to permissible variation to be observed by criminal 
courts .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, issue instructions for the 
limits of variation, as regards number, quantity, measure, gauge or weight which are to be recognise d by 
criminal courts as perm issible in the case of any goods.  
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
122. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
any person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act.  
123. Certain persons to be public servants .—Every person appointed under this Act and every  
Member of the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .  
124. Stay of proceedings where the validity of registration of the trade mark is questioned, 
etc.—(1) Where in an y suit for infringement of a trade mark —  
(a) the defendant pleads that registration of the plaintiff’s trade mark is invalid; or  
(b) the defendant raises a defence under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 30 and the 
plaintiff pleads the invalidity of registration of the defendant’s trade mark,  
the court trying the suit (hereinafter referred to as the court), shall ,—  
(i) if any proceedings for rectification of the register in relation to the plaintiff’s or defendant’s 
trade mark are pending before the Registrar or the Appellate Board, stay the suit pending the final 
disposal of such proceedings;  
(ii) if no such proceedings are pending and the court is satisfied that the plea regarding the 
invalidity of th e registration of the plantiff’ s or defendant’s trade mark is prima facie  tenable, raise an 
issue regarding the same and adjourn the case for a period of three months from t he date of the 
framing of the issue in order to enable the party concerned to apply to the Appellate Board for 
rectification of the register.  
(2) If the party concerned proves to the court that he has made any such application as is referred to in 
clause (b) (ii) of sub -section ( 1) within the time specified therein or within such extended time as the 
court may for sufficient cause allow, the trial of the suit shall stand stayed until the final disposal of the 
rectification proceedings.  
(3) If no such appl ication as aforesaid has been made within the time so specified or within such 
extended time as the court may allow, the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark 
concerned shall be deemed to have been abandoned and the court shall pro ceed with the suit in regard to 
the other issues in the case.  45 
 (4) The final order made in any rectification proceedings referred to in sub -section ( 1) or               
sub-section ( 2) shall be binding upon the parties and the court shall dispose of the su it conformably to 
such order in so far as it relates to the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark.  
(5) The stay of a suit for the infringement of a trade mark under this section shall not preclude the 
court from making any interlocutory order (including any order granting an injunction, directing account 
to be kept, appointing a receiver or attaching any property), during the period of the stay of the suit.  
125. Application for rectification of register to be made to Appellate Board in certain     
cases .—(1) Where in a suit for infringement of a registered trade mark the validity of the registration of 
the plaintiff’s trade mark is questioned by the defendant or where in any such suit the defendant raises a 
defence under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 2) of section 30 and the plaintiff questions the validity of the 
registration of the defendant’s trade mark, t he issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark 
concerned shall be determined only on an application for the rectification of the register and, 
notwithstanding anything contained in section 47 or section 57, such application shall be made  to the 
Appellate Board and not the Registrar.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), where an application for rectification of the register is 
made to the Registrar under section 47 or section 57, the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, refer the  
application at any stage of the proceedings to the Appellate Board.  
126. Implied warranty on sale of marked goods .—Where a mark or a trade mark or trade 
description has been applied to the goods on sale or in the contract for sale of any goods or in rela tion to 
any service, the seller shall be deemed to warrant that the mark is a genuine mark and not falsely applied, 
or that the trade description is not a false trade description within the meaning of this Act unless the 
contrary is expressed in writing si gned by or on behalf of the seller and delivered at the time of the sale of 
goods or providing of services on contract to and accepted by the buyer.  
127. Powers of Registrar .—In all proceedings under this Act before the Registrar ,— 
(a) the Registrar shall  have all the powers of a civil court for the purposes of receiving evidence, 
administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the discovery and production 
of documents and issuing commissions for the examination of wi tnesses;   
(b) the Registrar may, subject to any rules made in this behalf under section 157, make such 
orders as to costs as he considers reasonable, and any such order shall be executable as a decree of a 
civil court:  
Provided that the Registrar shall have no power to a ward costs to or against any party on an 
appeal to him against a refusal of the proprietor of a certification trade mark to certify goods or 
provision of services or to authorise  the use of the mark;  
(c) the Registrar may, on an application made in the prescribed manner, review his own decision.  
128. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar .—Subject to the provisions of section 131, the 
Registrar shall not exercise any discretionary or other power vested to him by this Act or the rules made 
thereunder adversely to a person applying for the exercise of that power without (if so required by that  
person within the prescribed time) giving to the person an opportunity of being heard.  
129. Evidence before Registrar .—In any proceeding under this Act before the Registrar, evidence 
shall be given by affidavit:  
Provided that the Registrar may, if he th inks fit, take oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, such 
evidence by affidavit.  
130. Death of party to a proceeding .—If a person who is a party to a proceeding under this Act (not 
being a proceeding before the Appellate Board or a court) dies pend ing the proceeding, the Registrar may, 
on request, and on proof to his satisfaction of the transmission of the interest of the deceased person, 
substitute in the proceeding his successor in interest in h is place, or, if the Registrar is of opinion that the  
interest of the deceased person is sufficiently represented by the surviving parties, permit the proceeding 
to continue without the substitution of his successor in interest.  46 
 131. Extension of time .—(1) If the Registrar is satisfied, on application made to him in the 
prescribed manner and accompanied by the prescribed fee, that there is sufficient cause for extending the 
time for doing any act (not being a time expressly provided in this Act), whether the time so specified has 
expired or not, he may, subj ect to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, extend the time and 
inform the parties accordingly.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to require the Registrar to hear the parties before 
disposing of an application for extension of time, and no appeal shall lie from any order of the Registrar 
under this section.  
132. Abandonment .—Where, in the opinion of the Registrar, an applicant is in default in the 
prosecution of an application filed under this Act or any Act relating to trade marks in force prior to the 
commencement of this Ac t, the Registrar may, by notice  require the applicant to remedy the default 
within a time s pecified and after giving him, if so , desired, an opportunity of being heard, treat the 
application as abandoned, unless the default is remedied within the time specified in the notice.  
133. Preliminary advice by the Registrar as to distinctiveness .—(1) The Registrar may, on 
application made to him in the prescribed manner by any person who proposes to apply for the 
registration of a trade mark, give advice as to whether the trade mark appears to him prima facie  to be 
distinctive.  
(2) If, on an applicatio n for the registration of a trade mark as to which the Registrar has given advice 
as aforesaid in the affirmative made within three months after the advice was given, the Registrar, after 
further investigation or consideration, gives notice , to the applica nt of objection on the ground that the 
trade mark is not distinctive, the applicant shall be entitled, on giving notice of withdrawal of the 
application within the prescribed period, to have repaid to him any fee paid on the filing of the 
application.  
134. Suit for infringement, etc. , to be instituted before District Court .—(1) No suit — 
(a) for the infringement of a registered trade mark; or  
(b) relating to any right in a registered trade mark; or  
(c) for passing off arising out of the use by the defendant of any trade mark which is identical 
with or deceptively similar to the plaintiff’s trade mark, whether registered or unregistered,  
shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having j urisdiction to try the suit.  
(2) For the purpose of clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 1), a “District Court having jurisdiction” 
shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  or any other 
law for the time bei ng in force, include a District Court within the local limits of whose jurisdiction, at the 
time of the institution of the suit or other proceeding, the person instituting the suit or proceeding, or, 
where there are more than one such persons any of them, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on 
business or personally works for gain.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sub -section ( 2), “person” includes the registered proprietor and 
the registered user.  
135. Relief in suits for infringement or for pass ing off .—(1) The relief which a court may grant in 
any suit for infringement or for passing off referred to in section 134 includes injunction (subject to such 
terms, if any, as the court thinks fit) and at the option of the plaintiff, either damages or an  account of 
profits, together with or wit hout any order for the delivery -up of the infringing labels and marks for 
destruction or erasure.  
(2) The order of injunction under sub -section ( 1) may include an ex parte  injunction or any 
interlocutory order for any of the following matters, namely :— 
 (a) for discovery of documents;  
(b) preserving of infringing goods, documents or other evidence which are related to the            
subject -matter of the suit;  47 
 (c) restraining  the defendant from disposing of or dealing with his assets in a manner which may 
adversely affect plaintiff’s ability to recover damages, costs or other pecuniary remedies which may 
be finally awarded to the plaintiff.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contai ned in sub -section ( 1), the court shall not grant relief by way of 
damages (other than nominal damages) or on account of profits in any case — 
(a) where in a suit for infringement of a trade mark, the infringement complained of is in relation 
to a certifica tion tr ade mark or collective mark; or  
(b) where in a suit for infringement the defendant satisfies the court — 
(i) that at the time he commenced to use the trade mark complained of in the suit , he was 
unaware and had no reasonable ground for believing that the trade mark of the plaintiff was on 
the register or that the plaintiff was a registered user usi ng by way of permitted use; and  
(ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature of  the plaintiff’s right in the trade 
mark, he forthwith ceased to use the trade mark in relation to goods or services in respect  of 
which it was registered; or  
(c) where in a suit for passing off, the defendant satisfies the court — 
(i) that at the time he c ommenced to use the trade mark complained of in the suit , he was 
unaware and had no reasonable ground for believing that the trade mark fo r the plaintiff was in 
use; and  
(ii) that when he became aware of the existence and nature of the plaintiff’s trade ma rk he 
forthwith ceased to use the trade mark complained  of. 
136. Registered user to be impleaded in certain proceedings .—(1) In every proceeding under 
chapter VII or under section 91, every registered user of a trade mark using by way of permitted use, who  
is not himself an applicant in respec t of any proceeding under that C hapter or section, shall be made a 
party to the proceeding.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a registered user so made a party to the 
proceeding shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and t akes part in the 
proceeding.  
137. Evidence of entries in register, etc. , and things done by the Registrar .—(1) A copy of any 
entry in the register or of any document referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 148 purporting to be 
certified by the Registrar and sealed with the seal of the Trade Marks Registry shall be admitted in 
evidence in all courts and in all proceedings without further proof or production of the original.  
(2) A certificate purporti ng to be under the hand of the Registrar as to any entry, matter or thing that 
he is authorise d by this Act or the rules to make or do shall be prima facie  evidence of the entry having 
been made, and of the contents thereof, or of the matter or thing s havi ng been done or not done.  
138. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register, etc .—The Registrar or any 
officer of the Trade Marks Registry shall not, in any legal proceedings to which he is not a party, be 
compellable to produce the reg ister or any other document in his custody, the contents of which can be 
proved by the production of a certified copy issued under this Act or to appear as a witness to prove the 
matters therein recorded unless by order of th e court made for special cause.  
139. Power to require goods to show indication of origin .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, require that goods of any class specified in the notification which are 
made or prod uced beyond the limits of India  and imported into India, or , which are made or produced 
within the limits of India, shall, from such date as may be appointed by the notification not being less than 
three months from its issue, have applied to them an indication of the country or place i n which they were 
made or produced, or of the name and address of the manufacturer or the person for wh om the goods were 
manufactured.  
(2) The notification may specify the manner in which s uch indication shall be applied  that is to say, 
whether to goods th emselves or in any other manner, and the times or occasions on which the presence of 48 
 the indication shall be necessary, that is to say, whether on importation only, or also at the time of sale, 
whether by wholesale or retail or both.  
(3) No notification under this section shall be issued, unless application is made for its issue by 
persons or associations substantially representing the interests of dealers in, or manufacturers, producers, 
or users of, the goods concerned, or unless the Central Government is otherwise convinced that it is 
necessary in the public interest to issue the notification, with or without such inquiry, as the Central 
Government may consider necessary.  
(4) The provisions of section 23 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) shall apply to the 
issue of a notification under this section as they apply to the making of a rule or bye -law the making of 
which is subject to the con dition of previous publication.  
(5) A notification under this section shall not apply to goods made or prod uced beyond the limits of 
India and imported into India, if in respect of those goods, the Commissioner of Customs is satisfied at 
the time of importation that they are intended for  exportation whether after tran shipment in or tran sit 
through India or othe rwise.  
140. Power to require information of imported goods bearing false trade marks .—(1) The 
proprietor or a licensee of a registered trade mark may give notice in writing to the Collector of Customs 
to prohibit the importation of any goods if the import of the said goods constitute infringement under 
clause ( c) of sub -section ( 6) of section 29.  
(2) Where goods, which are prohibited to be imported into India by notification of the Central 
Government under clause ( n) of sub -section ( 2) of section 11 of the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962) , for 
the protection of trade marks, and are liable to confiscation on importation under that Act, are imported 
into India, the Commissioner of Customs if, upon representation made to him, he has reason to believe 
that the tra de mark complained of is used as a false trade mark, may require the importer of the goods, or 
his agent, to produce any documents in his possession relating to the goods and to furnish information as 
to the name and address of the person by whom the goods  were consigned to India and the name and 
address of the person to who m the goods were sent in India.  
(3) The importer or his agent shall, within fourteen days, comply with the requirement as aforesaid, 
and if he fails to do so, he shall be punishable with  fine which may  extend to five hundred rupees.  
(4) Any information obtained from the importer of the goods or his agent under this section may be 
communicated by the Commissioner of Customs to the registered proprietor or registered user of the trade 
mark which is alleged to have b een used as a false trade mark.  
141. Certificate of validity .—If in any legal proceeding for rectification of the register before the 
Appellate Board a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor of the tra de mark on 
the issue as to the validity of the registration of the trade mark, the Appellate Board may grant a 
certificate to that effect, and if such a certificate is granted, then, in any subsequent legal proceeding in 
which the said validity comes into question the said proprietor on obtaining a final order or judg ment in 
his favour affirming validity of the registration of the trade mark shall, unle ss the said final order or 
judgment for sufficient reason directs otherwise , be entitled to his full cost  charges and expenses as 
between  legal practitioner and client.  
142. Groundless threats of legal proceedings .—(1) Where a person, by means of circulars, 
advertisements or otherwise, threatens a person with an action or proceeding for infringement of a trade  
mark which is regi stered, or alleged by the first -mentioned person to be registered, or with some other 
like proceeding, a person aggrieved may, whether the person making the threats is or is not the registered 
proprietor or the registered user of the tra de mark,  bring a suit against the first -mentioned person and may 
obtain a declaration to the effect that the threats are unjustifiable, and an injunction against the 
continuance of the threats and may recover such damages (if any) as he has sustained, unle ss the                 
first-mentioned person satisfies the court that the trade mark is registered and that the acts in respect of 
which the proceedings were threatened, constitute, or, if done, would constitute, an infringement of the 
trade mark.  49 
 (2) The  last preceding sub -section does not apply if the registered proprietor of the trade mark, or a 
registered user acting in pursuance of sub -section ( 1) of section 52 with due diligence commences and 
prosecutes an action against the person threatened for infringement of the trade mark.  
(3) Nothing in this section shall render a legal practitioner or a registered trade marks agent liable to 
an action under this section in respect of an act done by him in his professional c apacity on behalf of a 
client.  
(4) A s uit under sub -section ( 1) shall not be instituted in any cour t inferior to a District Court.  
143. Address for service .—An address for service stated in an application or notice of opposition 
shall for the purposes of the application or notice of opposition  be deemed to be the address of the 
applicant or opponent, as the case may be, and all documents in relation to the application or notice of 
opposition may be served by leaving them at or sending them by post to the address for service of the 
applicant o r opponent, as the case may be.  
144. Trade usage s, etc. , to be taken into consideration .—In any proceeding relating to a trade 
mark, the tribunal shall admit evidence of the usage s of the trade concerned and of any relevant trade 
mark or trade name or get up legitimately used by other persons.  
145. Agents .—Where, by or under this Act, any act, other than the making of an affidavit, is required 
to be done before the Registrar by any person, the act may, subject to the rules made in this behalf, be 
done instead  of by that person himself, by a person duly authorise d in the prescribed manner, who is — 
(a) a legal practitioner, or  
(b) a person registered in the prescribed ma nner as a trade marks agent, or  
(c) a person in the sole and regul ar employment of the principal.  
146. Marks registered by an agent or representative without authority .—If an agent or a 
representative of the proprietor of a registere d trade mark, without authority  uses or attempts to register or 
registers the mark in his own name, the propri etor shall be entitled to oppose the registration applied for 
or secure its cancellation or rectification of the register so as to bring him as the registered proprietor of 
the said ma rk by assignment in his favour:  
Provided that such action shall be taken  within three years of the registered proprietor of the trade 
mark becoming aware of the conduct of the agen t or representative.  
147. Indexes .—There shall be kept under the direction and  supervision of the Registrar — 
(a) an i ndex of registered trade marks;  
(b) an index of trade marks in respect of which application s for registration are pending;  
(c) an index of the names of the proprietors  of registered trade marks; and  
(d) an index of  the names of registered users.  
148. Documents open to public inspection .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 4) of 
section 49 ,— 
(a) the register and any document upon which any entry in the register is based;  
(b) every notice of opposition to t he registration of a trade mark  application for rectification 
before the Registrar, counter -statement thereto, and any affidavit or document filed by the parties in 
any pr oceedings before the Registrar;  
(c) all regulations deposited under section 63 or section 74, and all applications under section 66 
or section 7 7 for varying such regulations;  
(d) the indexe s mentioned in section 147; and  
(e) such other documents as the Central Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, 
specify,  50 
 shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be open to public inspecti on at the Trade Marks 
Registry:  
Provided that when such register is maintained wholly or partly on computer, the inspection of such 
register under this section shall be made b y inspecting the computer print out of the relevant entry in the 
register so maintaine d on computer.  
(2) Any person may, on an application to the Registrar and on payment of such fees as may be 
prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register or any document referred to in                
sub-section ( 1). 
149. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament .—The Central Government shall cause 
to be placed before both Houses of Pa rliament once a year a report re specting the execution by or u nder 
the Registrar of this Act.  
150. Fees and surcharge .—(1) There shall be paid in respect of 1[applications, international 
applications ] and registration and other matters under this Act such fees and surcharge as may be 
prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Registrar, the Registrar shall not do 
that a ct until the fee has been paid.  
(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the Trade Marks Registry, the 
document shall be deemed not to have been filed at the Regist ry until the fee has  been paid.  
151. Savings in respect of certain matters in Chapter XII .—Nothi ng in Chapter XII shall — 
(a) exempt any person from any suit or other proceeding which might, but for anything in that 
Chap ter, be brought against him; or  
(b) entitle any person to  refuse to make a complete discovery, or to answer any question or 
interrogatory in any suit or other proceeding, but such discovery or answer shall not be admissible in 
evidence against such person in any such prosecution for an offence under that Chapter  or against 
clause ( h) of section 112 of the Customs Act, 1962  (52 of 1962)  relating to confiscation of goods 
under clause ( d) of section 111 of that Act and notified by the Central Government under clause ( n) of 
sub-section ( 2) of section 11 thereof for the protection of trade marks relating to import of goods; or  
(c) be construed so as to render liable to any prosecution or punishment any servant of a master 
resident in India who in good faith acts in obedience to the instruct ions of such master, and, on 
demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, has given full information as to his master and as to 
the instructions which h e has received from his master.  
152. Declaration as to ownership of trade mark not registrable under t he Registration           
Act, 1908 .—Notwithstanding anything contain ed in the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908 ), no 
document declaring or purporting to declare the ownership or title of a person to a trade mark other than a 
registered trade mark shall b e registered under that A ct. 
153. Government  to be bound .—The provisions of this Act shal l be binding on the Government.  
154. Special provisions relating to applications for registration from citizens of convention 
countries .—(1) With a view to the fulfil ment of a treaty, convention or arrangement with any country or 
country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental 
Organi sation outside India which affords to citizens of India similar privileges as granted to its  own 
citizens, the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such country or 
group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental Organi sation to be a convention country 
or group of countries or union of countries o r Inter -Governmental Organi sation, as the case may be, for 
the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Where a person has made an application for the registration of a trade mark in a convention 
country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental 
Organi sation and that person, or his legal representative  or assignee, makes an application for the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 8, for “applications” (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  51 
 registration of the trade mark in India within six months after the date on which the application was made 
in the convention country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or 
Inter-Governmental Organi sation s, the trade mark shall, if registered under this Act, be registered as of 
the date on which the application was made in the convention country or country which is a member of a 
group of countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental Organi sation and that date shall be 
deemed for the purposes of this Act to be the date of registration.  
(3) Where applications have been made for the registration of a trade mark in two or more conv ention 
countries or country  which are members of group of countries or union of countries or                                
Inter -Governmental Organi sation, the period of six months referred to in the last preceding sub -section 
shall be reckoned from the date on which the earlier or  earliest of those  applications was made.  
(4) Nothing in this Act shall entitle the proprietor of a trade mark to recover damages for infringement 
which took place prior to the date of application f or registration under this Act.  
155. Provision as to recip rocity .—Where any country or country which is a member of a group of 
countries or union of countries or Inter -Governmental Organi sation specified by the Central Government 
in this behalf b y notification in the Official Gazette does not accord to citizens o f India the same rights in 
respect of the registration and protection of trade marks as it accords to its own nationals, no national of 
such country or country which is a member of a group of countries or union of countries or Inter -
Governmental Organi sation, as the case may be, shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with any other 
person ,— 
(a) to apply for the registration of , or be registered as t he proprietor of, a trade mark;  
(b) to be registered as the assignee of the proprietor  of a registered trade mark; or  
(c) to apply for registration or be registered as a registered user of  a trade mark under section 49.  
156. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving 
effect to the provisions o f this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be 
necessa ry for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid b efore each 
House of Parliament.  
157. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette and subject to the conditions of previous publication, make rules to carry out the provisions of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provid e for all or any of the following matters, namely :— 
(i) the matters to be included in the Register of Trade Marks under sub -section ( 1) of section 6, 
and the safeguards to be observed in the maintenance of records on computer floppies or diskettes or 
in an y other electronic form under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(ii) the manner of publication of alphabetical index of classification of goods and services under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 8;  
(iii) the manner in which the Registrar may not ify a word as an international non-proprietary 
name under section 13;  
(iv) the manner of making an application for dissolution of an association under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 16;  
(v) the manner of making an application for registration of a trade mark u nder sub -section ( 1) of 
section 18;  
(vi) the manner of advertising of an application for registration under sub -section ( 1), and the 
manner of notifying corrections or amendments under sub -section ( 2), of section 20;  52 
 1[(vii) the manner of giving a notice o f opposition and the fee payable for such notice under      
sub-section ( 1) and sending counter -statement under sub-section  (2) and submission of evidence and 
the time therefor under sub -section ( 4) of section 21;]  
(viii) the form of certificate of registration under sub -section ( 2), and the manner of giving notice 
to the applicant under sub -section ( 3) of section 23;  
(ix) the forms of applicat ion for renewal and restoration  the time within which such application is 
to be made  and fee and surcharge if any payable with each application, under section 25 and the time 
within which the Registrar shall send a notice and the manner of such notice under                                  
sub-section ( 3) of that section;  
2[(ixa) the time  within which the international application is to be forwarded to the International 
Bureau and the manner of certifying the particulars by the Registrar under sub -section ( 4) of section 
36D;  
(ixb) the manner of keeping a record of particulars of an interna tional registration under          
sub-section ( 1) of section 36E;  
(ixc) the manner of informing the International Bureau under sub -section ( 2) of section 36E;  
(ixd) the manner of advertising the international registration and the time within which the 
international registration shall be advertised under sub -section  (3) of section 39E ;] 
(x) the manner of submitting statement of cases under sub -section ( 2) of section 40;  
(xi) the manner of making an application by the proprietor of  a trade mark under section  41; 
(xii) the manner of making an application for assignment or transmission of a certificati on trade 
mark under section 43;  
(xiii) the manner of making an application to the Registrar to register title under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 45;  
2[(xiiia) the period within which the Registrar shall dispose of an application under                          
sub-section ( 3) of section 45;]  
(xiv) the manner in which and the period within which an application is to be made under        
sub-section ( 4) of sectio n 46;  
(xv) the manner of making an application under sub -section ( 2) of s ection 47;  
(xvi) the manner of making an application, documents and other evidence to accompany such 
application under sub -section ( 1) and the manner in which notice is to be issued u nder sub -section ( 3) 
of section 49;  
(xvii) the manner of making an application under sub -section ( 1), the manner of issuing a notice 
under sub -section ( 2) and the procedure for cancel ling a registration under sub -section ( 3) of      
section 50;  
(xviii) the  manner of making applications under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the manner of giving 
notice under sub -section ( 4) and the manner of service of notice of rectification under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 57;  
(xix) the manner of making a n application under secti on 58;  
(xx) the manner of making an application under sub -section ( 1), the manner of advertising an 
application, time and manner of notice by which application may be opposed under sub -sections ( 2) 
and ( 3) of section 59;  
(xxi) the manner of advertisement u nder sub -section ( 2) of section 60;  
(xxii) the other matters to be specified in the regulations under sub -section ( 2) of section 63;  
(xxiii) the manner of making an application under  sub-section ( 1) of section 71;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 40 of 2010, s. 9, for clause ( vii) (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  53 
 (xxiv) the manner of advertising a n applic ation under section 73;  
(xxv) the manner of making an application und er section 77;  
1*   *   *  *   * 
(xxix) the salaries and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the 
2[Chair person] , 3[Vice -Chair person]  and other Members under sub -section ( 1) of section 88;  
(xxx) the procedure for investigation of misbehavior or incapacity of the 1[Chair person] ,                        
3[Vice -Chair person]  and other Members under sub -section ( 3) of section 89;  
(xxxi) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and other 
employees of the Appellate Board under sub -section ( 2), and the manner in which the officers and 
other employees of the Appellate Board shall discharge their functions under sub-section ( 3) of 
section 90;  
(xxxii ) the form of making an appeal, the manner of verification and the fee payable under       
sub-section ( 3) of section 91;  
(xxxiii ) the form in which and the particulars to be included in the application to the Appellate  
Board under sub -section ( 1) of section 97;  
(xxxiv ) the manner of making an application for review under clause ( c) of section 127;  
(xxxv) the time within which an application is to be made to the Registrar for exercising his 
discret ionary power under sect ion 128;  
(xxxvi ) the manner of making an application and the fee payable therefor under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 131;  
(xxxvii ) the manner of making an application under sub -section ( 1) and the period for withdrawal 
of such application under sub -section ( 2) of section 133;  
(xxxviii ) the manner of authoris ing any p erson to act and the manner of registration as a trad e 
mark agent under section 145;  
(xxxix ) the conditions for inspection of documents under sub -section ( 1) and the fee payable for 
obtaining a ce rtified copy of any entry in the register under sub -section ( 2) of section 148;  
(xl) the fees and surcharge payable for making applications and registration and o ther matters 
under section 150;  
(xli) any other matter which is requi red to be or may be presc ribed.  
(3) The power to make rules conferred by this section shall include the power to give retrospective 
effect in respect of the matters referred to in clauses ( xxix) and ( xxxi) of sub -section ( 2) from a date not 
earlier than the date of commencement of  this Act, but no retrospective effect shall be given to any such 
rule so as to prejudicially affect the interests of any person to wh om sub -rule may be applicable.  
(4) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprised in one session or in two or more successive session s, and if, before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the s ession or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case ma y be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under 
that rule.  
158. Amendments. —The enactment specified in the Schedule shall be amended i n the manner 
specified therein.  
159. Repeal and savings. —(1) The Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) is hereb y 
repealed.  
                                                           
1. Cls. ( xxvi), (xxvii ) and ( xxviii ) omitted by Act 40 of 2010, s. 9 (w.e.f. 8 -7-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 161, for “Chairman”(w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by s. 161, ibid., for “Vice -Chairman”(w.e..f 26 -5-2017).  54 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1987) , with 
respect to repeals, any notific ation, rule, order,  requirement , registration, certificate, notice, decision, 
determinatio n, direction, approval, authoris ation, consent, application, request or thing made, issued, 
given or done under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) shall, if in force  at the 
commencement of this Act, continue to be in force and have effect as if made, issued, given or done under 
the corres ponding provisions of this Act.  
(3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to any application for registration of a trade mark pendi ng at 
the commencement of this Act and to any proceedings consequent thereon and to any registration granted  
in pursuance thereof.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 100 and notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provision of this Act, any l egal proceeding pending in any court at the commencement of this Act may be 
continued in that court as if t his Act had not been passed.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where a particular use of a registered trade mark 
is not an infringe ment of a trade mark registered before the commencement of this Act, then, the 
continued use of that mark shall not be an infringement under this Act.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the date of expiration of registration of a 
trade mark registered before the commencement of this Act shall be the date immediately after the period 
of seven years for whic h it was registered or renewed:  
Provided that the registration of a defensive trade mark referred to in section 47 of the Trade and 
Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) shall cease to have effect on the date immediately after the 
expiry of five years of such commencement or after the expiry of the period for which it was registered or  
renewed, whichever is earlier.  
  55 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 158)  
AMENDMENTS  
 
Year  Act No.  Short title  Amendment  
1956  1 The Companies 
Act, 1956  (I) In Section 20, for sub -section ( 2), the following       
sub-sections shall be substituted, namely: — 
“(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing 
power, a name which is identical with, or too nearly 
resembles, — 
(i) the name by which a company in existence has 
been previously registered, or  
(ii) a registered trade mark, or a trade mark which is 
subject of an application for registration , of any 
other person under the Trade Marks Act, 1999,  
may be deemed to be undesirable by the Central 
Government within the meaning of sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The C entral Government may, before deeming a name 
as undesirable under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 2), 
consult the Registrar of Trade Marks.”.  
(II) In section 22, in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) for the portion beginning with “if, through” and 
ending with “the first -mentioned company –” the 
following shall be substituted, namely: — 
“If, through inadvertence or o therwise, a company on 
its first registration or on its registration by a new 
name, is registered by a name which, — 
(i) in the opinion of the Central Government, is 
identical with, or too nearly resembles, the name 
by which a company in existence has been 
previously registered, whether under this Act or 
any pr evious companies law, the first -mentioned 
company, or  
(ii) on an application by a registered proprietor of a 
trade mark, is in the opinion of the Central 
Government identical with, or too nearly 
resemb les, a registered trade mark of such 
proprietor under the Trade Marks Act, 1999, 
such company, —”; 
(ii) the following proviso shall be added, namely: — 
“Provided that no application under clause ( ii) 
made by a registered proprietor of a trade mark 
after five  years of coming to notice of 
registration of the company shall be considered 
by the Central Government.”.  
 
