--------------------------The Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE BIHAR REORGANISATION ACT, 2000  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
PART I I 
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF BIHAR  
3. Formation of Jharkhand State.  
4. State of Bihar and territorial divisions thereof.  
5. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution.  
6. Saving powers of State Government s. 
 
 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
7. Amendment of the Fo urth Schedule to the Constitution . 
8. Allocation of sitting members.  
The House of the People  
9. Representation in the House of the People.  
10. Delimitation  of Parliamentary and Assembly C onstituencies.  
11. Provision as to sitting members.  
 The Legislative Assembly  
12. Provisions as to Legislative Assemblies.  
13. Allocation of sitting members.  
14. Duration of Legislative  Assemblies.  
15. Speaker and Deputy Speaker.  
16. Rules of procedure.  
The Legislative Council of Bihar  
17. Legislative Council of Bihar.  
18. Council constituencies.  
19. Provision as to sitting members.  
20. Chairman and Deputy Chairman.  
Delimitation of constituencies  
21. Delimitation of constituencies.  
22. Power of the Election Commission t o maintain Delimitation Orders up-to-date.  
  2 
 Schedule d Castes and Scheduled Tribes  
SECTIONS  
23. Amendment of the Scheduled Castes Order.  
24. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order.  
 
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
25. High Court for Jharkhand.  
26. Judges of High Court.  
27. Jurisdiction of High Court.  
28. Special provision relating to Bar Council and Advocates.  
29. Practice and procedure in  common  High Court.  
30. Custody of seal of High Court.  
31. Form of writs and other processes.  
32. Powers of Judges.  
33. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.  
34. Transfer to proceedings from High Court at Patna to High Court of Jharkhand.  
35. Right to appear or to act in proceedings trans ferred to High Court of Jharkhand.  
36. Interpretation.  
37. Saving.  
 
PART V  
AUTHORISATION O F EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
38. Authorisation of expenditure of Jharkhand  State . 
39. Reports relating to accounts of Bihar State.  
40. Distribution of revenue.  
 
PART V I 
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
41. Application of Part.  
42. Land and goods.  
43. Treasury and bank balances.  
44. Arrears of taxes.  
45. Right to recover loans and advances.  
46. Investments and credits in certain funds.  
47. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings.  
48. Public Debt . 
49. Floating Debt.  
50. Refund of taxes collected in excess.  
51. Deposits, etc.  
52. Provident fund.  
53. Pension s. 
54. Contracts.  
55. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.  
56. Liability as guarantor.  
57. Items in suspense.  
58. Residuary provision.  
59. Appo rtionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.  
60. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
61. Certain expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund.  3 
 PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
SECTIONS  
62. Provisions as to Bihar State Electricity Board, State Warehousing Corporation and State Road 
Transport Corporation.  
63. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and supply of 
water.  
64. Provision s as to Bihar State Financial  Corporation.  
65. Provisions as to certain companies.  
66. General provision as  to statutory corporations.  
67. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits.  
68. Special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases.  
69. Special provision as to income -tax. 
70. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions.  
 
PART VII I 
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
71. Provisions relating to All -India Services.  
72. Provisions relating to services in Bihar and Jharkhand.  
73. Other provisions relating to services.  
74. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post.  
75. Advisory Committees.  
76. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
77. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission.  
 
PART IX  
MANGEMENT AND DEVELOPMET OF WATER  RESOURCES  
78. Water Resources Development and its Management.  
79. Constitution and functions of Management Board.  
80. Staff of  the Management Board.  
81. Jurisdiction of the Board.  
82. Power to make regulation s. 
 
PART X  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
83. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956.  
84. Territorial extent of laws.  
85. Power to adapt laws.  
86. Power to construe laws.  
87. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions.  
88. Legal proceedings.  
89. Transfer of pending proceedi ngs. 
90. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases.  
91. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws.  
  4 
 SECTIONS  
92. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE . 
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.  
THE  EIGHTH  SCHEDULE.  
THE NINTH SCHEDULE.  
THE TENTH SCHEDULE.  
 
 
 
 5 
  THE BIHAR REORGANISATION ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 30 OF 2000  
[25th August , 2000.]  
An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Bihar and f or matters connected 
therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Bihar Reorganisation Act, 2000.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) ―appointed day1‖ means the day which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint;  
(b) ―article ‖ means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) ―assembly constituency ‖, ―council constituency ‖ and ―parliamentary constituency ‖ have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);  
(d) ―Election Commission ‖ means the Election Commission appointed by t he President under 
article 324;  
(e) ―existing State of Bihar ‖ means the State of Bihar as existing  immedi ately before the 
appointed day;  
(f) ―law‖ includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, order, bye -law, rule, scheme, notification 
or other instrument having, immediately before the appointed day, the force of law in the whole or in 
any part of the  existing State of Bihar;  
(g) ―notified order ‖ means an order pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(h) ―population ratio ‖, in relation to the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, means the ratio of 
645.30:218.44;  
(i) ―sitting member ‖, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of the existing 
State of Bihar, means a person who immediately before the appointed day, is a member of that 
House;  
(j) ―successor State ‖, in relation to the existing State of Bihar, means the State of Bihar or 
Jharkhand;  
(k) ―transferred territory ‖ means the territory which on the appointed day is transferred from the 
existing State of B ihar to the State of Jharkhand;  
(l) ―treasur y‖ includes a sub -treasury; and  
(m) any reference to a distri ct, tahsil or other territorial division of the existing State of Bihar 
shall be construed as a reference to the area comprised within that territorial division  on the appointed 
day. 
PART II  
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF BIHAR  
3. Formation of Jharkhand St ate.—On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new 
State to be known as the State of Jharkhand comprising the following territories of the existing State of 
Bihar, n amely: — 
Bokaro, Chatra, Deog arh, Dhanbad, Dumka, Garhwa, Giridih, Godda, Gumla, Hazaribagh, 
Kodarma, Lohardaga, Pakur, Palamau, Ranchi, Sahebganj, Singhbhum (East) and Singhbhum (West) 
districts,  
and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part of the existing State of Bihar.  
                                                           
1. 15th November, 2000, vide notification No. S.O. 829(E), dated 14th September, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3( ii). 6 
 4. State of Bihar and territorial divisions thereof .—On and from the appointed day, the State of 
Bihar shall comprise the territories of the existing State of Bihar other than those specified in sec tion 3.  
5. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constit ution. —On and from the appointed day, in the 
First Schedule to the Constitution, und er the heading ―I. THE STATES ‖,— 
(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Bihar, the foll owing shal l be added at 
the end, namely: — 
―and the territor ies specified in section 3 of the B ihar Reorganisation Act, 2000 ‖; 
(b) after entry 27, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: — 
―28. Jharkhand: The territories specified in section 3 of the B ihar Reorganisation Act, 2000. ‖. 
6. Saving powers of State  Governments .—Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be 
deemed to affect the power of the Government of Bihar or Jharkhand to alter, after the appointed day, the 
name, area or bounda ries of any district or other territorial division in the State.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
7. Amendment of the Fourt h Schedule to the Constitution. —On and from the appointed day, in 
the Fourth Schedule to t he Constitution, in the Table, — 
(a) entries 4 to 29 shall be renumbered a s entries 5 to 30 respectively;  
(b) in entry 3, for the figures ―22‖  the figur es ―16‖  shall be substituted;  
(c) after entry 3, the following e ntry shall be inserted, namely: — 
 ―4. Jharkhand..................................... . 6‖. 
8. Allocation of sitting member s.—(1) On and from the appointed day, the twenty -two sitting 
members of the Council of States representing the existing State of Bihar shall be deemed to have been 
elected to fill the seats allotted to the States of Bihar and Jh arkhand, as specified in the First Schedule to 
this Act.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  
The House of the People  
9. Representation in the House of the People .—On and from the appointed day, there shall be 
allocated 40 seats to the successor State of Bihar, and 14 to the successor State of Jharkhand, in the House 
of the People and in t he First Schedule to the Represe ntation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950 ), under 
heading ―I. STATES: ‖,— 
(a) for entry 4, the following entry  shall be substituted, namely: — 
―4. Bihar   53  7       5   40   7   ..‖; 
(b) entries 10 to 25 shall be renumbered as entries 11 to 26 respectively;  
(c) after entry 9, the following e ntry shall be inserted, namely: — 
―10. Jharkhand  ..   ..   ..  14   1  5‖. 
10. Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies .—On and from the appointed 
day, the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, shall stand amended as 
directed in the Second Schedule to this Act.  
11. P rovision as to sitting members. —(1) Every sitting member of the House of the People 
representing a constituency which, on the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 10, stands 
allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, to the successor State of Bihar or Jharkhand, shall be 
deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by th at constituency as so allotted.  
  7 
 (2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  
The Legislative Assembly  
12. Provisions as t o Legislative Assemblies. —(1) The number of seats as on the appointed day in 
the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand shall be two hundred and forty -three and 
eighty -one respectively.  
(2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950), under heading 
―I. Sta tes‖,— 
(a) for entry 4, the following entry  shall be substituted, namely: — 
―4. Bihar   318   45   29  243   39  .. ―; 
(b) entries 11 to 27 shall be renumbered as  entries 12 to 28 respectively;  
(c) after entry 10, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: — 
―11.   Jharkhand   ..  ..  ..  81  9  28‖.  
13. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the 
existing State of Bihar elected to fill a seat in that Assembly from a constituency which on the appointed 
day by virtue of the provisions of section 10 stands allotted, with or without alteration of boundaries, to 
the State of Jharkhand shall, on and from  that day, cease to be a member of the Legislative Assembly of 
Bihar and shall be deemed to have been elected to fill a seat in  the Legislative Assembly of Jha rkhand 
from th at constituency as so allotted.  
(2) All other sitting members of the Legislative As sembly of the existing State of Bihar shall continue 
to be members of the Legislative Assembly of that State and any such sitting member  representing a 
constituency the extent, or the name and extent of which  are altered by virtue of the provisions of section 
10 shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Bihar by t hat constituency as so 
altered . 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Le gislative 
Assemblies of Bihar and Jharkhand shall be deemed to be duly co nstituted on the appointed day.  
(4) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bihar nominated to that 
Assembly under article 333 to represent the Anglo -Indian community shall be deemed to have been 
nominated to represent the  said community in the Legislati ve Assembly of Jharkhand under that article . 
14. Duration of Legislative Assemblies .—The period of five years referred to in clause ( 1) of              
article 172 shall, in the case of Legislative Assembly of the State of Bihar or Jharkhand be deemed to 
have commenced on the date on which it actually commenced in the case of Legislative Assembly of the 
existing State of Bihar.  
15. Speaker and Deputy Speak er.—(1) The persons who immediately before the appointed day are 
the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Bihar shall continue 
to be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of th at Assembly on and from that day.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative Assembly of Jharkhand shall choose 
two members of that Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker thereof and until they are 
so chosen, the duties of the office of Speaker shall be performed by such member of the Assembly as the 
Governor may appoint for the purpo se. 
16. Rules of p rocedure .—The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
Assembly of Bihar as in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until ru les are made under 
clause ( 1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduc t of business of the Legislative Assembly of 
Jharkhand, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the Speaker thereof.  
The Legislative Council of Bihar  
17. Legislative Council of Bihar .—On and from the day on which all the members specified in the 
Third Schedule retire, there shall be seventy -five seats in the Legislative Council of Bihar, and in the 
Third Schedule to the Representa tion of the Pe ople Act, 1950 (43  of 1950), for the existing entry 2, the 
following entr y shall be substituted, namely: — 
―2. Bihar  75  24   6  6   27   12‖.  8 
 18. Council constituencies .—On and from the appointed day, the Delimitation of Council 
Constituencies (Bihar) Order, 1951 shall stand amended as directed in the Fourth Schedule.  
19. P rovision as to sitting members .—Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17, all sitting 
member s of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Bihar, shall continue to be members of that 
Council till they retire on the expiration of thei r present term of office.  
20. Chairman and Deputy Chairman .—The person who immediately before the appointed  day is 
the Chairman or Deputy Chairman of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Bihar shall continue 
to be the Chairman or Deputy  Chairman, as the case may be, on and from that day of that Council.  
Delimitation of constituencies.  
21. Delimitation of constituencies .—(1) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of           
section 12, the Election Commission shall determine in t he manner hereinafter provided — 
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand respectively, having regard to the 
relevant provisions of the Constitution;  
(b) the assembly constitue ncies into which each State referred to in clause ( a) shall be divided, 
the extent of each of such constituencies and in which of them seats shall be reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes o r for the Scheduled Tribes; and  
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries a nd description of the extent of the parliamentary 
constituencies in each successor States that  may be necessary or expedient.  
(2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1), the Election 
Commission shall have regard to  the following provisions, namely: — 
(a) all the constituencies shall be si ngle-member constituencies;  
(b) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas, and in 
delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features, ex isting boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communication and conveniences to the public ; and  
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their population to the total 
population is the larg est. 
(3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functions 
under sub -section ( 1), associate with itself as associate members, five persons as the Central Government 
may by order specify, being persons who are members of the Legislative Assembly of the State or of the 
House of the People representing the State:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any decis ion of the 
Election Commission.  
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled 
as far as practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The Election Commiss ion shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof in the Official Gazette and 
in such other manner as the Commission may consi der fit, together with a notice inviting objections 
and suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals wi ll 
be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been receive d by i t before the date so 
specified;  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the 
date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
order or orders to  be published in the Official Gazett e, 
and upon such publication, the order or orders shall have the full force of law and shall not be c alled in 
question in any court.  9 
 (6) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to assembly constituencies 
shall be laid before the Legislative  Assembly of the concerned State.  
(7) The delimitation of constituencies in the States of Bihar and Jharkhand shall be determined on 
the basis of the published figures of the census taken in the year 1971.   
22. Power of the Election Commission to maintain Delimitation Orders up -to-date. —(1) The 
Election Commission may, from time to time, by notific ation in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 21 or any err or arising therein 
from inadvertent slip or omission;  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned in any such order or orders 
is or are altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such 
order up -to-date.  
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is issued, before the concerned Legislative Assembly.  
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes  
23. Amendment of the Sch eduled Castes Order .—On and from the appointed day, the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Fifth Schedule.  
24. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order .—On and from the appointed day, the Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Sixth Schedule.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
25. High Court of Jharkhand .—(1) On and from the appointed day, there shall be a separate High 
Court for the State of Jharkhand (hereinafter referred to as the High Court of Jharkhand) and the High 
Court at Patna shall become the High Court for the State of Bihar (hereinafter referred to as the High 
Court at Patna).  
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Jharkhand shall be at such place as the Pres ident m ay, by 
notified order, appoint.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division courts of the High 
Court of Jharkhand may sit at such other place or places in the State of Jharkhand other than its principal 
seat as  the Chief Justice may, with the appr oval of the Governor of Jharkhand, appoint.  
26. Judges of High Court .—(1) Such of the Judges of the High Court at Patna holding office 
immediately before the appointed day as may be determined by the President shall on that day cease to be 
Judges of the High Court at Patna and become Judges of the High Court of Jharkhand.  
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) become Judges of the High Court of Jharkhand shall, 
except in the case where any such person is appointed to be the Chief Justice of that High Court, rank in 
that Court accor ding to the priority of their re spective appointment as Judges of the High Court of Patna.  
27. Jurisdiction of High Court. —The High Court of Jharkhand shall have, in respect of a ny part of 
the territories included in the State of Jharkhand, all such jurisdiction, powers and authorities as, under the 
law in force immediately before the appointe d day, are exercisable in respect of that part of the said 
territor ies by the High Court at Patna.  
28. Special provision relating to Bar Council and Advocates. —(1) On and from the appointed day, 
in the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), in section 3, in sub -section ( 1), in clause ( a), after the words 
―Jammu and Kashmir ‖, the word ―Jharkhand ‖ shall be inserted.  
(2) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate on the roll of the Bar 
Council of the existing State of Bihar may give his option in writing, within one year from the appointed 
day to the Bar Counci l of such existin g State, to tra nsfer his name on the roll of the Bar Council of 
Jharkhand and notwithstanding anything contained in the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961) and the rules 
made thereunder, on such option so given his name shall be deemed to have been transferre d on the rol l 
of the Bar Council of Jharkhand with effect from the date of the option so given for the purposes of the 
said Act  and the rules made thereunder.  10 
 (3) The person other than the advocates who are entitled immediately befor e the appoi nted day, to  
practis e in the High Court at Patna or any subordinate court thereof shall, on and after the appointed day, 
be recognised as such persons entitled also t o practise in the High Court of Jharkhand or any subordinate 
court thereof, as the case may be.  
(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Jharkhand shall be regulated in accordance with the 
like principles as, immediately before the appointed day, are in force with respect to the right of audie nce 
in the High Court at Patna.  
29. Practice and procedu re in common High Court. —Subject to the provisions of this Part, the law 
in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High Court at 
Patna shall, with the necessary modifications, appl y in relation to the High Court of Jharkhand, and 
accordingly, the High Court of Jharkhand shall have all such powers to make rules and orders with 
respect to practice and procedure as immediately before the appointed day exercisable by the High Court 
at Patna: 
Provided that any ru les or orders which are in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to practice and procedure in the High Court at Patna shall, until varied or revoked by rules or 
orders made by the High Court of Jharkhand, apply with the necessary modifica tions in relation to 
practice and procedure in the High Court of Jharkhand as if made by that court.  
30. Custody of seal of High Court. —The law in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court at Patn a shall with the necessary modifications, apply 
with respect to the custody of the seal of the High court of Jharkhand.  
31. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and speci al processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court at Patna 
shall, with the necessary modifi caitons, apply with re spect to the form of writs and other processes used, 
issued or awarded by the High Court of Jharkhand.  
32. Powers of Judges. —The law in fo rce immediately before the appointed day relating to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court at Patna with respect to 
all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers sh all, with the necessary modification,  apply in 
relation to the High Court of Jharkhand.  
33. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court. —The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court at Patna and the Judges and 
division courts thereof shall, wit h the necessary modification, ap ply in relation to the High Court of 
Jharkhand.  
34. Transfer of proceedings from High Court at Pa tna to High Court of Jharkhand. —(1) Except 
as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Patna shall, as from t he appointed day, have no jurisdiction in 
respec t of the transferred territory.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Patna immediately before the appointed day as are 
certified, whether before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of the Hig h Court, having regard to the 
places of accrual of the cause of action and both other  circumstances, to be proceedings which are ought 
to be heard and decided by the High Court of Jharkhand shall as soon as may be after such certification, 
be transferred t o the High Court of Jharkhand.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section or in section 27, but 
save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Patna shall have, and the High Court of Jharkhand shall 
not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the 
Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any relief 
in respect of any order passed by the High Court at Patna  before the appointed day:  
Provided that if after such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Patna, it appears to 
the Chief Justice of the High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of Jharkhand, he 
shall order that the y shall be so transferred , and such proceedings shall thereu pon be transferred 
accordingly.  
(4) Any order m ade by the High Court at Patna — 
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceeding to the High Court of Jharkhand by virtue of            
sub-section ( 2), or 11 
 (b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Patna retains jurisdiction by virtue 
of sub -section ( 3) shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order or the High Court at Patna, 
but also as an orde r made by the High Court of  Jharkhand.  
35. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to High Court of Jharkhand .—Any 
person, who immediately before the appointed day, is an advocate entitled to practice or an attorney 
entitled to act, in the High Court at Patna and so aut horised to appear or to act in any proceedings 
transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Jharkhand under section 34 shall have the right to 
appear or to act, as the case may be, in the High Court of Jharkhand in relation to those proceedings.  
36. Interpretation. —For the purposes of section 34 — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has disposed of all issues 
between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings 
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, application for  
review, petitions for revision a nd petition for writs;  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
court thereof, and reference to order made by a court or the Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or mad e by that court of Judge.  
37. Saving .—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court  of Jharkhand of any 
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made 
on or after the appointed day with respect to th at High Court by any Legislature or other authority having  
power to make such pro vision.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
38. Authorisation of expenditure of Jharkhand State .—The Governor of Bihar may, at any time 
before the appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the Sta te of 
Jharkhand as he deems necessary for any period not more than six m onths beginning with the appointed 
day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of Jharkhand:   
Provided that the Governor of Jharkhand may, af ter the appointed day, authorise such further 
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Jharkhand for any period 
not extending beyond the said period of six months.  
39. Reports relat ing to accounts of Bihar State. —(1) The  reports of the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India referred to in clause ( 2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the existing State of 
Bihar in respect of  any period prior to the appoint ed day shall be submitted to the Governor of each of the 
successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand who shall cause them to be laid before  the Legislature of that 
State.  
(2) The President, after considering the views of the State Legislatures of the successor States, may 
by order — 
(a) declare any expenditure incurr ed out of the Consolidated Fund of Bihar on any service in 
respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial year or in respect of any earlier 
financial year in excess o f the amount granted for that se rvice and for that year as disclose d in the 
reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) to have been duly authorised; and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said report s.  
40. Distribution of revenue. —The President shall, by order, determine the share of States of Bihar 
and Jharkhand in the total amount payable to the existing State of Bihar on the recommendation of the 
Finance Commission constituted under article 280 of t he Constitution, in such manner as he thinks fit.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
41. Application of Part. —(1) The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment 
of the assets and liabilities of the existing State of Bihar immedi ately before the appointed day.  12 
 (2) The successor States shall be entit led to receive benefits arising out of the decisions taken by the 
predecessor State and the successor States shall be liable to bear the financial liabilities arising out of the 
decisions taken by the existing State of Bihar.  
(3) The apportionment of asset s and liabilities would be subject to such financial adjustment as may 
be necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable apportionment of the assets and liabilities amongst 
the su ccessor States.  
(4) Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall be settled through mutual 
agreement, failing which by order, by the Central Government on the advice of the Comptroll er and 
Auditor -General of India  
42. Land and goods. —(1) Subject to other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles and 
other goods belonging to the  existing State of Bihar shall, — 
(a) if within the transferred territory, pas s to the State of Jharkhand; or  
(b) in any other case, remain the property of the State of Bihar:  
Provided that where the Central Government is of opinion that any goods or class of goods should be 
distributed between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, otherwise that according to the situation of the 
goods, the Central Government may issue such direct ions as it thinks fit for a just and equitable 
distribution of the goods and the goods shall pass to th e successor States accordingly.  
(2) Stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in particular institutions, workshops or 
undertakings or on particular works under const ruction, shall pass to the successor States in whose 
territories such institutions, workshops, und ertakings or works are located.  
(3) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads of Departments having jurisdiction over the 
whole of the existing State of Bihar shall be divided as may be agreed upon between the successor States, 
or in default of such agreement, as the Cent ral Government may by order direct for a just and equitab le 
distribution of such stores.  
(4) Any other unissued stores of any cl ass in the existing State of Bihar shall be divided between the 
successor States in proportion to the total stores of that class purchased in the period of three years prior 
to the appointed day, for the territories of the existing State of Bihar included respectively i n each of the 
successor States:  
Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in respect of any class of stores or where 
the value of any class of such stores does not exceed rupees ten thousand, that class of stores shall be 
divided between the successor States ac cording t o the population ratio.  
(5) In this section, the expression ―land‖ includes immovable property of every kind and any rights in 
or over such property, and the expression ―goods ‖ does not include coins, bank notes and currency notes.  
43. Treasury and bank balances .—The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the State of 
Bihar and the credit balances of the State with Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India or any other 
bank immediately before the appointed day shall b e divided between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand 
according to the population ratio:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash balances from any 
treasury to any other treasury and the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the credit balance of 
the two States in the books of the Reserve Ban k of India on the appointed day:  
Provided further that if the State of Jharkhand has no account on the appointed day with the Reserve 
Bank of India, the adjustment shall be made in such manner as the Central Go vernment may, by order, 
direct.  
44. Arrears of taxes. —The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on property, including arrears 
of land revenue, shall belong to the successor State in  which the property is situated, and the right to 
recover arrears of any other tax or duty shall b e long to the successor State in whose territories the place 
of assessment of that tax or duty is  included on the appointed day.  
  13 
 45. Right  to recover loans and advances. —(1) The right of the existing State of Bihar to recover 
any loans or advances made before the appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist or other 
person in an area within that State shall belong to th e successor State in which th at area is included on 
that day.  
(2) The right of the existing State of Bihar to recover any loans or advances made before the 
appointed day to any person or institution outside that State shal l belong to the State of Bihar:  
Provided that any sum recovered  in respect of any such loan or advance shall be divided between the 
States of Bihar and Jharkhand acc ording to the population ratio.  
46. Investments and credits in certain funds .—(1) The securities held in respect of the investments 
made from Cash Balance s Investment Account or from any Fund in the Public Account of the existing 
State of Bihar as specif ied in the Seventh Schedule shal l be apportioned in the ratio of popu lation of the 
successor States:  
Provided that the securities held in investments made f rom the Calamity Relief Fund of the existing 
State of Bihar shall be divided in the ratio of the area of the territories occupied by the successor States:  
Provided further that the balance in the Reserve Funds in the Public Account of Bihar created wholly 
out of appropriations from the Consolidated Fund of the existing State of Bihar, to the extent the balances 
have not been invested outside Government acc ount, shall not be carried forward to similar Reserve 
Funds in the Public Account of, successor States.  
(2) The investments of the existing State of Bihar immediately before the appointed day, in any 
special fund, the objects of which are confined to a local area, shall belong to the State in which that area 
is included on the appointed day.  
(3) The investm ents of the existing State of Bihar immediately before the appointed day in any 
private, commercial or industrial undertaking, in so far as such investments have not been made or are 
deemed not to have been m ade from the cash balance invest ment account, sh all pass to the State in which 
the principal seat of business  of the undertaking is located.  
(4) Where any body  corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act for the 
existing State of Bihar or any part thereof has, by virtue of the  provisions of Part II, becomes an          
inter-State body corporate, the investments in, or loans or advances to, any such body corporate by the 
existing State of Bihar made before the appointed day shall, save as otherwise expressly provided by  or 
under this Act, be divid ed between th e States of Bihar and Jharkhand  in the same proportion in which the 
assets of the body corporate are divided under the provisions of this Part.  
47. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings. —(1) The assets and liab ilities relating to any 
commercial or industrial undertaking of the existing State of Bihar shall pass to the State in wh ich the 
undertaking is located.  
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the existing State of Bihar for any such 
commerc ial or industrial undertaking, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund 
shall pass to the State  in which the undertaking is loc ated.  
48. Public Debt. —(1) All liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account of the existing  
State of Bihar outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall be apportioned in the ratio of 
population of the succes sor States unless a different mo de of apportionment is provided under the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) The individual items of lia bilities to be allocated to the successor States and the amount of 
contribution required to be made by one successor State to another shall be such as may be ordered by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Comptro ller and Auditor -General  of Indi a: 
Provided that till such orders are issued, the liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account 
of the existing State of Bihar shall continue to be the liabilities o f the successor State of Bihar.  
(3) The liability on account of loans raised fro m any source and re -lent by the existing State of Bihar 
to such entities as may be specified by the Central Government and whose area of operation is confined to 
either of the successor States shall devolve on the respective States as specified in sub -section (4). 14 
 (4) The public debt of the existing State of Bihar attributable to loan taken from any source for the 
express purpose of re -lending the same to a specific institution and outstanding immediately before the 
appointed day shall — 
(a) if re -lent to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any local area, be the debt of 
the State in which the local area is in cluded on the appointed day; or  
(b) if re -lent to the Bihar State Electricity Board, the Bihar State Road Transport Corporation, or  
the Bihar Housing Board or any other institution which becomes an inter -State institution on the 
appointed day, be divided between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand in the same proportion in which 
the assets of such body corporate or institution are divid ed under the prov isions of Part VII of this 
Act. 
(5) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained by the existing State of Bihar for 
repayment of any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect of investments made from that fund shall 
be divided between the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand in the same proportion in which the total 
public debt is divided between the  two States under this section.  
(6) In this section, the expression ―Government security ‖ means a security created and issued by a 
State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified in, or 
prescribed under clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Publ ic Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944).  
49. Floating Debt .—The liability of the existing State of  Bihar in respect of any floating loan to 
provide short -term finance to any commercial undertaking shall be the liability of the State in whose 
territor ies the undertaking is located.  
50. Refund of taxes collected in excess .—The liability of the existing S tate of Bihar to refund any 
tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor 
State in whose  territories the property is sit uated, and the liability of the existing State of Bihar to refund 
any oth er tax or duty collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor State in whose territories 
the place of assessment o f that tax or duty is included.  
51. Deposits, etc .—(1) The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any civil depos it or 
loan fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area the deposit 
has been made.  
(2) The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of any charitable or other endowment shall, 
as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area the institution entitled to the benefit 
of the e ndowment is located or of the St ate to which the objects of the endowment under the terms 
thereof, are confined.  
52. Provident fund. —The liability of the exis ting State of Bihar in respect of the provident fund 
account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, be the liability of 
the State to whi ch that Government servant is per manently allotted.  
53. Pensions. —The liabilit y of the existing State of Bihar in respect of pensions and other retirement 
benefits shall pass to, or be apportioned between, the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand in 
accordance with the provisions contained in the Eight h Schedule to this Act.  
54. Contracts. —(1) Where, before the appointed day, the existing State of Bihar has made any 
contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract shall be deemed 
to have been made in the exercise of the executive po wer— 
(a) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from the appointed day, exclusive purposes of either 
of the successor States o f Bihar and Jharkhand; and  
(b) any ot her case, of the State of Bihar,   
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may a ccrue under any such contract shall, to the 
extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the existing State of Bihar, be rights or 
liabilities of the State of Jharkhand or the St ate of Bihar, as the case may be:  
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( b), the initial allocation of rights and 
liabilities made by this sub -section shall be subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon 
between the successor States of Bihar and Jharkh and or in default of such ag reement, as the Central 
Government may, by order, direct.  15 
 (2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in the liabilities which have 
accrued o r may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connec tion with any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effe ct subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligations; and bank 
balances and securities shall, notwithstanding that the partake of the nature of contract ual rights, be dealt 
with under those provisions.  
55. Liability in respect of actionable wrong. —Where, immediately before the appointed day, the 
existing State of Bihar is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong other than breach of 
contract, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories which, as from that day, are the 
territories of either of the successor States of Bihar or Jharkhand, be a liabili ty of that successor State; 
and 
(b) in any other  case, be initially a liability of the State of Bihar, but subject to such financial 
adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand or, in default of such 
agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, dir ect.  
56. Liabilit y as guarantor .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of 
Bihar is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co -operative society or other person, 
that liability of  the existing State of Bihar shall — 
(a) if the area of operations of such society or persons is limited to the territories which, as from 
that day, are the territories of either of the States of Bihar or Jharkhand, be a liabili ty of that successor 
State; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially a li ability of the State of Bihar, subject to such financial 
adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand or, in default of such 
agreements, as the Central Government may, by order, direct . 
57. Items in suspense .—If any item in su spense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  
58. Residuary provision .—The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the existing State of 
Bihar not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the State of Bihar in the first 
instance, subject to such financial adjustment a may be agreed upon between the States of Bihar and 
Jharkhand or,  in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.  
59. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement .—Where the successor States of Bihar and 
Jharkhand agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liabilit y should be apportioned 
between them in a manner other than that provided for i n the foregoing provisions of this Part, 
notwithstanding anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be 
apportioned in the manner agreed u pon.  
60. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases .—Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the successor States of Bihar and Jharkhand 
becomes entitled to any property  or obtains any benefits or  beco mes subject to any liability, and the 
Central Government is of opinion, on a reference made within a period of three years from the appointed 
day by either of the States, that it is just and equitable that property or those benefits should be transfer red 
to, or shared with, the other successor State, or that a contribution towards that liability should be made 
by the other successor State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner between the 
two States, or the other State shall m ake to the State subject to the liability such contribution in respect 
thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the two State Go vernments, by order, 
determine.  16 
 61. Certain expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund. —All sums payable either by the 
State of Bihar or by the State of Jharkhand to the other States or by the Central Government to either of 
those States, by virtue of  the provisions of this Act, sha ll be charged on the Consolidated Fund of the 
State by which such sums  are payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India.  
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
62. Provisions as to Bihar State Electricity Board, State Warehousing Corporation and State 
Road Transport Corporation .—(1) The following bodies corporate constituted for the ex isting State of 
Bihar, namely: — 
(a) the State Electricity Board constituted under the Electricity  Supply Act, 1948 (54 of 1948);  
(b) the State Warehousing Corporation established under the Warehousing Corpo rations Act , 
1962 (58 of 1962);  
(c) the State Road Transport Corporation established under the Road Transport Act, 1950                  
(64 of 1950),  
shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which they were 
functioning  immediately before that day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such directions as 
may, from time to time, be issued by the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the Board  or 
the Corporation shall include a direction that the Act under which the Board or the Corporation was 
constituted shall, in its application to that Board o r Corporation, have effect subject to such exceptions 
and modifications as the  Central Government t hinks fit.  
(3) The Board or the Corporation referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall cease to function as from, and 
shall be deemed to be dissolved on such date as the Central Government may, by order, appoint; and upon 
such dissolution,  its assets, rights and  liabiliti es shall be apportioned between the successor States of 
Bihar and Jharkhand in such manner as may be agreed upon between them within one year of the 
dissolution of the Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, or if no agreement is reached, i n such 
manner as the Central Gover nment may, by order, determine:  
Provided that any liabilities of the said Board relating to the unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the 
Board by any public sector coal company shall be provisionally apportioned between the  State Electricity 
Boards constituted respectively in the success or States of the existing State of Bihar or after the date 
appointed for the dissolution of the Board under this sub -section in such manner as may be agreed upon 
between the Governments of th e successor States within one month of such dissolution or if no agreement 
is reached, in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, determine subject to reconciliation 
and finalisation of the liabilities which shall be completed within three mon ths from the date of such 
dissolution by the mutual agreement between the successor States or failing such agreement by the 
direc tion of the Central Government:  
Provided further that an interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the Cash Credit inte rest shall 
be paid on outstanding unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the Board by the public sector coal company 
till the liqui dation of such dues by the conce rned State Electricity  Board constituted in the successor 
States on or after the date appointed for the dissolution of the Board under this sub -section.  
(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of the State of Bihar, or, as the case may be, the Government of the State of Jharkhand from 
constituting, at any time on or after the appointed day, Stat e Electricity Board or a State Warehousing 
Corporation or a Road Transport Corporation for the State under the provisions of the Act relating to such 
Board or Corporation; and if such a Board or Corporation is so constituted in either of the States before 
the dissolution of the Board or the Corporation r eferred to in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Government enabling the new Board or the 
new Corporation to take over from the existing Board or Corporation all or any of it s undertakings, 
assets, rights and liabilities in that State, and  
  17 
 (b) upon the dissolution of the existing Board or Corporation, — 
(i) any assets, rights and liabilities which would otherwise have passed to that State by or 
under the provisions of sub-section ( 3) shall pass to the new Board or the new Corporation 
instead of to that State;  
(ii) any employee who would otherwise have been transferred to or re -employed by that State 
under sub -section ( 3), read with clause ( i) of sub -section ( 5), shall be transferred to or                      
re-employed by the new Board or the new Corporation instead of to or by th at State.  
(5) An agreement entered into between the successor States under sub -section ( 3) and an order made 
by the Central Government under  that sub -section or under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) may provide for 
the transfer or re -employment of any employee of th e Board or the Corporation referred to in               
sub-section ( 1),— 
(i) to or by the successor States, in the case of an agree ment under sub -section ( 4) or an ord er 
made under that sub -section;  
(ii) to or by the new Board or the new Corporation constituted under sub -section ( 4), in the 
case of an order made under clause ( a) of that sub -section,  
and, subject to the provisions of section 65, also for the terms and conditions of service applicable to such 
employees after such transfer or re -employment.  
63. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and 
supply of water. —If it appears to the Centr al Government that the arrangement in regard to the 
generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water for any ar ea or in regard to the execution of 
any project for such generation or supply has been or is likely to be modified to the disadvanta ge of that 
area by reason of the fact that it is, by virtue of the provisions of Part II of this Act, outside the State i n 
which the power stations and other installations for the generation and supply of such power, or the 
catchment area, reservoirs and o ther works for the supply of water, as the case may be, are located, the 
Central Governme nt may give such directions as it  deems proper to the State Government or other 
authority concerned for the maintenance, so far as practicab le, of the previous arrange ment.  
64. Provisions as to Bi har State Financial Corporation .—(1) The Bihar State Financial 
Corporation established under the State Financial Corporation Act, 1951 (63 of 1951) shall, on and from 
the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which it was functioning immediately 
before that day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such directions as may, from time to time, 
be issued by the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the 
Corporation may include a direction that the said Act, in its application to the Corporation, shall have 
effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as ma y be speci fied in the direction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Board of Directors 
of the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and shall, if so required by 
the Central Gove rnment, co nvene at any time afte r the appointed day a meeting for the consideration of a 
scheme for the reconstitution or reorganisation or dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation, 
including proposals regarding the formation of new Corporation , and the t ransfer thereto of th e assets, 
rights and liabilities of the existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at the general meeting 
by a resolution passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the scheme shall be submitted 
to the Cen tral Government for its sanct ion. 
(4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either without modifications or with 
modifications which are approved at a general meeting, the Central Government shall certify the scheme, 
and upon such certifica tion, the scheme shall, notwi thstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
law for the time being in force, be binding on the corporations affected by the scheme as well as the 
shareholders and creditors thereof.  
(5) If the scheme is not so approved  or sanctioned, the Central Government may refer the scheme to 
such Judge of the High Court at Patna and Jharkhand as may be nominated in this behalf by the Chief 
Justice thereof, and the decision of the Judge in regar d to the scheme shall be final and shall be binding on 
the corporations affected by the scheme as well as the shar eholders and creditors thereof.  18 
 (6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of the  States of Bihar and Jharkhand from constituting, at any time on or after the appointed 
day, a State Financial Corporation for that State under the State Financial Corporations                                      
Act, 1951 (63 of 1951).  
65. Provisions as  to certain companies. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this Part, each of the companies specified in the Ninth Schedule to this Act shall, on and 
from the appointed day  and until otherwise provided fo r in any law, or i n any agreement among the 
successor States, or in any direction issued by the Central Government, continue to function in the areas 
in which it was functioning immediately before that day; and the Central Government may, from time to 
time, issue such direc tions in relation to such functioning as it may deem fit, notwithstanding anything to 
the contrary contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1  of 1956), or in any other law.  
(2) Any directions issued under sub -section ( 1) in respect of a company referred to in that                         
sub-section, may include directions — 
(a) regarding the division of the interests and shares of existing state of Bihar in the comp any 
among the successor States;  
(b) requiring the recons titution of the Board of Directors of the company so as to give adequate 
representatio n to both the successor States.  
66. General provision as to statutory corporations .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by 
the foregoing provisions of this Part, where anybody  corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act 
or Provincial Act f or the existing State of Bihar or  any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of            
Part II of this Act, become an inter -State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, on and from the 
appointed day, continue to function and operate in those areas  in respect of which it was func tioning and 
operating immediately before that day, subject to such directions as may from time to time be issued by 
the Central Government, until other provision is made by law in resp ect of the said body corporate.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect o f any such 
body corporate shall include a direction that any law by which the said body corporate is governed shall, 
in its application t o that body corporate, have effe ct subject to such exceptions and modifications as may  
be specified in the direction.  
67. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 88 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988)  a permit 
granted by the State Transport Authority of the existing St ate of Bihar or any Regional Transport 
Authority in that State shall, if such permit was, immediately before the appointed day, valid and effective 
in any area in the transferred territory, be deemed to continue to be valid  and effective in that area after  
that day subject to the provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in that area; and it shall not be 
necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by the State Transport Authority of Jharkhand or any 
Regiona l Transport Authority therein fo r the purpose of vali dating it for use in such area:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the successor State Government or 
Governments concerned add to, amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the Authority b y 
which the permit was granted.  
(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied after the appointed day in 
respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in any of the successor States under any such permit, if 
such vehicle was, immediately before tha t day, exempt from the payment of any such toll, entrance fees 
or other charges for its operation s in the transferred territory:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Government or 
Governments con cerned, authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges, as the case 
may be.  
68. Special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases. —Where on 
account of the reorganisation of the existing State of Bihar under thi s Act, any body  corporate constituted 
under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co -operative society registered under any law 
relating to co -operative societies or any commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is reconstituted 
or reorg anised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other  body corporate, co -operative   19 
 society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitution, reorganisation, 
amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such bo dy corporate or in any such co -operative 
society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re -employe d by any other body corporate, or in any other            
co-operative society or undertaking, then notwithstanding anything contained in section 25F, 25FF or 
25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947)  such transfer or re -employment shall not entitle 
in to any compensation und er that section:  
Provided that — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer or                 
re-employment are not less favorable  to the workman than those applicable to him immediately 
before  the transfer or re -employment;  
(b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co -operative society or the undertaking 
where the wor kman transferred or re -employed is, by agreement or otherwise, legally liable to pay to 
the workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensatio n under section 25F, 25FF or 25FFF of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) on the basis that his ser vice has been continuous and 
has not been interrupted by  the transfer or re -employment.  
69. Special provision as to income -tax.—Where the assets, rights and liabilities of any body 
corporate carrying on business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies 
corporate which after the transfer carry on the same busin ess, the losses or profits or gains sustained by 
the body corporate first mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried 
forward and se t off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Income -tax Act,                      
1961 (43 of 1961) shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accordance with the 
rules to be made by the Central Government in this behal f and, upon such apportionment, the share of 
loss allotted to each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of 
Chapter VI of the said Act, as if the transferee body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a busine ss 
carried on by it in the years in whi ch these losses were sustained.  
70. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions .—(1) The Government of State of Bihar 
or Jharkhand, as the case may be, shall, in respect of the institutions specified in the Tenth Schedule to 
this Act, located in that State, continue to prov ide facilities to the people of the other State which shall 
not, in any respect, be less favourable  to such people than what were being provided to them before the 
appointed day, for su ch period and upon such terms and condi tions as may be agreed upon betw een the 
two State Governments before the 1st day of December, 2001 or if no agreement is reached by the said 
date as may be fixed by order of the Central G overnment.  
(2) The Central Gov ernment may, at any time before the 1st day of December, 2001 by notification in 
the Official Gazette, specify in the Tenth Schedule any other institution existing on the appointed day in 
the States of Bihar and Jharkhand and on the issue of such notificat ion, the Schedule shall be deemed to 
be amended by the inclusion o f the said institution therein.  
PART VIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
71. Provisions relating to All -India Services .—(1) In this section , the expression ―State cadre ‖— 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian 
Administrati ve Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;  
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Police 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; and  
(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Fore st 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966.  
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service, Indian Police Service and Indian 
Forest Service for the existing Stat e of Bihar, there shall, on and from the appointed day, be two separate 
cadres , one for the State of Bihar and the other for the State of Jharkhand in respect of each of these 
services.  
(3) The initial strength and composition of the State cadres referred  to in sub -section ( 2) shall be such 
as the Central Government may, by order, dete rmine before the appointed day.  
(4) The members of each of the said service borne on the Bihar cadre thereof immediately before the 
appointed day shall be allocated to the St ate cadres of the same service constituted under sub -section ( 2) 
in such manner and with effect from such date o r dates as the Central Government may, by order, specify.  20 
 (5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on or after the appointed day, of 
the All -India Service Act, 1951 (61 of 1951)  or the rules made thereunder.  
72. Provisions relating to services in Bihar and Jharkhand —(1) Every person who immediately 
before the appointed day is serving in connection with the affairs of t he existing State of Bihar shall, on 
and from that day provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Bihar 
unless he is required, by general or special order of the Central Government to serve provisionally in 
connection wi th the aff airs of the State of Jharkhand:  
Provided that no direction shall be issued under this section after the expiry of a period of o ne year 
from the appointed day.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government shall, by general  or special 
order, determine the successor State to which every person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be finally 
allotted for serv ice and the date with effect fro m which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to 
have taken effect.  
(3) Every pe rson who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) to a successor State 
shall, if he is not already serving therein be made available for serving in the successor State from such 
date as may be  agreed upon between the Governm ents concerne d or in default of such agreement, as may 
be determ ined by the Central Government.  
73. Other provisions relating to services .—(1) Nothing in section 72 shall be deemed to affect on or 
after the appointed day the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the Constitution in 
relation to determ ination of the conditions of ser vice of persons serving in connection with the aff airs of 
the Union or any State:  
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day in t he case of 
any person deemed to have been allocated to the State of Bihar or to the State of Jharkhand under              
section 72 shall not be varied to his disadvantage ex cept with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.  
(2) All services prior  to the appo inted day rendered by a person — 
(a) if he is deemed to have been allocated to any State under section 72, shall be deemed to have 
been rendered in connection with the affairs of that State;  
(b) if he is deemed to have been allocated to the Union in connection with the administration of 
the Jharkhand shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of the Union,  
for the purposes of the rules regula ting his conditions of service.  
(3) The provisions of section 72, shall not apply in relation to members of any All -India Service.  
74. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post. —Every person who, immediately before 
the appointed day is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the affa irs 
of the existing State of Bihar in any area which o n that day falls within any of the successor States shall 
continue to hold the same post or office in that successor State, and shall be deemed, on and from that 
day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or any other appr opriate 
authority in, that successor State:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority, on and from 
the appointed day, from passing in relation to such person  any order affecting the continuance in such 
post or office.  
75. Advisory Committees. —The Central Government may by order establish one or more Advisory 
Committees for the purpos e of assisting it in regard to — 
(a) the discharge of any of its  functions und er this Part; and  
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
Part and the proper consideration of any repres entations made by such persons.  
76. Power of Central Government to give directions. —The Central Government may give such 
directions to the State Government of Bihar and the State Government of Jharkhand as may appear to it to 
be necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the foregoin g provisions of this Part and the State 
Government sh all comply with such directions.  21 
 77. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission. —(1) The Public Service Commission for 
the existing State of Bihar shall, on and from the appointed day, be the Public Service Com mission for the 
State of Bihar.  
(2) The persons holding office immediately before the appointed day as Chairman or other member of 
the Public Service Commission for the existing State of Bihar shall, as from the appointed day, be the 
Chairman or, as the case may be, the other member of the Publi c Service Com mission for the State of 
Bihar.  
(3) Every person who becomes Chairman or other member of the Public Service Commission for the 
State of Bihar on the appointed day under sub -section ( 2), shall — 
(a) be entitled to receive from the Government of the State of Bihar conditions of service not less 
favourable  than those to which he was entitled under th e provisions applicable to him;  
(b) subject to the proviso to clause ( 2) of article 316, hold office or continue to hold office until 
the expiration of  his term of office as determined under the provisions applicable to him immedi ately 
before the appointed day.  
(4) The report of the Bihar Public Service Commission as to the work done by the Commission in 
respect of any period prior to the appointed day s hall be presented under clause ( 2) of article 323 to the 
Governors of the States of Bihar and Jharkhand, and the Governor of the State of Bihar shall, on receipt 
of such report, cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum explaining as far as possible,  as 
respects the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such                
non-acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of the State of Bihar and it shall not be necessary to 
cause such report or any such m emorandum to be laid before the Legislative Asse mbly of the State of 
Jharkhand.  
PART IX  
MANAGEMENT AND DEV ELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCES  
78. Water Resources Development and its Management. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in this Act but subject to the provisions of section 79, all rights and liabilities of the existing State of 
Bihar in relation to water res ource projects in relation to, — 
(i) Ganga and its tributaries; and  
(ii) Sone and its tributaries,  
shall, on the appointed day be the rights and liabilities of the successor States in such proportion as may 
be fixed and subject to such adjustments as may be made, by agreement entered into by the said States 
after consult ation with the Central Governmen t, or, if no such agreement is entered into wit hin two years 
of the appointed day, then the Central Government may, by order, determine within one year having 
regard to the purposes of the project:  
Provided that the order so made by the Central Government may be varied by any subsequent 
agreement enter ed into by the successor States after consultation with th e Central Government.  
(2) An agreement or order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, where an extension or further 
development of any of the projects referred to in that sub -section after the appoi nted day is undertaken, be 
the rights and liabilities of the successor States in relation to such ex tension or further development.  
(3) The rights and liabilities referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall include, — 
(a) the right to receive and utilise the water available for distribution as a result of the projects; 
and 
(b) the right to receive and utilise the power generated as a result of the projects,  
but shall not include the rights and liabilities under any contract entered into before the appointe d day by 
the Government of the existing State of Bihar with any person or a uthority other than Government.  
79. Constitution and functions of Management Board. —(1) The Central Government shall 
constitute a Board to be called the Ganga and Sone Management Bo ard (hereinafter referred to as the 
Board) for administration, construction, maintenance and operation of projects referred to in                
sub-section  (1) of section 78 for any or for a combination of following purposes, namely: — 
(i) Irrigation;  22 
 (ii) Rural and Urban Water Supply;  
(iii) Hydro Power generation;  
(iv) Navigation;  
(v) Industries; and  
(vi) for any other purpose which the Central Government may, by notification in  the Official 
Gazette, specify.  
(2) The Board shall consist of — 
(a) a whole -time Chairman and two whole -time members to be appointed by the Central 
Government;  
(b) a representative each of the Government of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand 
and Madhya Pradesh to be nominated  by the respective Governments;  
(c) two  representatives of the Central Government to b e nominated by that Government.  
(3) The functi ons of the Board shall include — 
(a) the regulation of supply of water from the projects referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 78 
to States of Uttar Pradesh, Bi har, Jharkhand and Madhya Prade sh having regard to — 
(i) any agreement entered into or arrangement made covering the Governments of existing 
State of Bihar and the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jh arkhand and Madhya Pradesh, and  
(ii) the agreement or the o rder referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 78;  
(b) the regulation of supply of power generated at the projects referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 78, to any Electricity Board or other authority incharge of the distribu tion of power having 
regard  to— 
(i) any agreement entered into or arrangement made covering the Governments of existing 
State of Bihar and the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jh arkhand and Madhya Pradesh, and  
(ii) the agreement or the order referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 78; 
(c) the examination of the requirement of funds for various projects in terms of the programme 
laid down for such projects and to advise the apportionment of the expenditure to the participating 
States keeping in view the agr eement on the sharing of co st; 
(d) to decide the withdrawal of water from the reservoirs during the construction period for 
irrigation and power purposes with a view to securing  better use of available water;  
(e) the responsibility of devising programme of resettlement for persons displaced as a result of 
Irriga tion Projects;  
(f) construction of such of the remaining or new works connected with the development of the 
water resource project relating to the rivers or their tributaries as the Central Government may specify 
by notificat ion in the Official Gazette; an d 
(g) such other functions as the Central Government may after consultation with the Governments 
of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh entrust to it.  
80. Staff of the Management Board .—(1) The B oard may employ such staff, as it may consider 
necessary for the efficient discharge o f its functions under this Act:  
Provided that every person who immediately before the constitution of the said Board was 
engaged in the construction, maintenance or opera tion of the works relating to the projects referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 78 shall continue to be so empl oyed under the Board in connection with 
the said works on the same terms and conditions of the service as were applicable to him before such  
constitution until the Central Governme nt by order, directs otherwise:  
  23 
 Provided further that the said Board may at any time in consultation with the State Governments 
or the Electricity Board concerned and with prior approval of the Central Government r etain any such 
person for service under that State Government or Board.  
(2) The Government of the States of Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh shall 
at all times provide the necessary funds to the Board to meet all expenses (including the s alaries and 
allowances of the staff) required for the discharge of its functions and such amounts shall be 
apportioned among the States concerned in such proportion as the Central Government may having 
regard to the benefits to each of the said States spe cify. 
(3) The Board shall be under the control of the Central Government and shall comply with such 
directions, as may from time to time, be given to it by that Government.  
(4) The Board may, with the approval of the Central Government delegate such of its powers, 
functions and duties as it may deem fit to the Chairman of the said Board or to any of ficer 
subordinate to the Board.  
(5) The Central Government may, for the purpose of enabling the Board to function efficiently, 
issue such directions to the State Governments concerned, or any other authority, and the State 
Governments, or the other author ity shall comply with such direc tions.  
81. Jurisdiction of the Board. —(1) The Board shall, ordinarily exercise jurisdiction in regard to 
any of the projects referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 78 over headwork (barrages, dams, 
reservoir, regulating constru ction), part of canal network an d transmission lines necessary to deliver 
water or  power to the States concerned.  
(2) If any question arises as to whet her the Board has jurisdiction under sub -section ( 1) over any 
project referred thereto, the same shall be referred to the Central Government for decision thereon.  
82. Power to make regulations. —The Board may, with the prior approval of the Central 
Governme nt by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and 
orders m ade thereunder, to provide for — 
(a) regulating the time and place of meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed 
for the transaction of business at  such meetings;  
(b) delegation of powers and duties to the Chairman or any officer of the Board;  
(c) the appointment and regulation of the conditions of service of the officers and other staff 
of the Board; and  
(d) any other matter for which regulations ar e considered necessary by the Board.  
PART X  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
83. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 .—On and from the appointed day, in section 15 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956, in clause ( c), for the word  ―Bihar ‖, the words ―Bihar and Jharkhand ‖ shall be 
substituted.  
84. Territorial extent of laws. —The provisions of Part II of this Act shall not be deemed to have 
effected any change in the territories to which any law in force immediately before the appointed day 
extends or applies, an d territorial references in any such law to the State of Bihar shall, until otherwise 
provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority be construed as meaning the territories 
within the existing State of Bihar before the appointed day.  
85. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of 
Bihar or Jharkhand of any law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, before 
the expiration of two years from that day, by order, make s uch adaptations and modifications of the law, 
whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and thereupon every such law 
shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made  until altered, repealed or amen ded 
by a competent Legislatur e or other competent authority.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression ―appropriate Government ‖ means as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government, and as respects any other law 
in its application to a State, the State Government.  24 
 86. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or insuf ficient provision has been 
made under section 85 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application 
in relation to the State of Bihar or Jharkhand, construe the law in such manner, without affecting the 
substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or  autho rity. 
87. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory func tions .—The Government of the 
State of Jharkhand, as respects the transferred territory may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify the authority, o fficer or person who, on or afte r the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise 
such functions exercisable under any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification 
and such law shal l have effect accordingly.  
88. Legal proceedings .—Where immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Bihar is 
a party to any legal proce edings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities subject to apportionment 
between the States of Bihar and Jharkhand unde r this Act, the State  of Bihar or Jharkhand which succeeds 
to, or acquires a share in, that property or those rights or liabil ities by virtue of any provision of this Act 
shall be deemed to be substituted for the existing State of Bihar or added as a part to those proceedings, 
and the procee dings may continue accordingly.  
89. Transfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending immediately before the 
appointed day before a court (other than the High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which 
on that day falls within the State of Bihar shall, if it i s a proceeding relating exclusively to the territory, 
which as from that day is the territory of Jharkhand State, stand transferred to the corresponding court, 
tribunal, auth ority or officer of that State.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High Court at Patna and the decision of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section — 
(a) ―proceeding ‖ include s any suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) ―corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ‖ in the State of Jh arkhand means — 
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the proceeding would 
have laid if it had been instituted after the appointed day; or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority, or officer in that State, as may be 
determined after the appointed day by the Government of that State or the Central Government, 
as the case may be, or before the appointed day by the Government of the existing State of Bihar 
to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.  
90. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases .—Any person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordina te courts in the existing State of 
Bihar shall, for a period of one year from that day continue to be entitled to practise in those courts, 
notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those courts has 
been trans ferred to the State of Jharkhand.  
91. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
92. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpos e of removing the difficul ty: 
Provid ed that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of thre e years from the 
appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
 25 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 8)  
(i) Of the seven sitting members whose term of office will expire on 9th April, 2002, namely, 
1[Obaidullah Khan ], 1[Ven Dhamma  Viriyo] , Shri Nagendra Nath Ojha, Shri Prem Chand Gupta,                  
Shri Ranjan Prasad Yadav, Shri 1[Shatrughan  Prasad  Sinha ] and Shri Ram Deo Bhandari,               
1[Obaidullah Khan ] and 1[Ven Dhamma  Viriyo ], shall be deemed to have been elected to fill two of the 
seats allotted to the State of Jharkhand and the other five sitting members shall be deemed to have been 
elected to fill five of the seats allotted to the State of Bihar.  
(ii)  Of the seven sitting  members whose  term of office will expire on 7th July, 2004, namely,            
Shri Shibu Soren, Shri Gaya Singh, Shri Parmeshwar Kumar Agrawala, Shri Anil Kumar,  Dr R.K.  Yadav 
Ravi, Shri Kapil Sibal, Smt. Saroj Dubey, Shri Shibu Soren and Shri Parmeshwar Kumar  Agrawala shall 
be deemed to have been elected to fill two of the seats allotted to the State of Jharkhand and the other five 
sitting member s shall be deemed to have  been elected to fill five of the seats allotted to the State of Bihar.  
(iii) Of the eight sitting members whose term of office will expire on 2nd April, 2006, namely,                
Shri S.S. Ahluwalia, Smt. Kum K um Rai, Shri Fa guni Ram, Shri Mahendra Prasad, Shri Ravi Shankar 
Prasad, Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh, Shri Ram Kumar Anand and Shri Vijay Singh Yadav, Shri S.S. 
Ahluwalia and Shri Ram Kumar Anand , shall be deemed to have been elected to fill two of the seats 
allotted to the State of Jharkhand and the other six sitting members shall be deemed to have been elected 
to fill six of the seats allotted to the State of Bihar.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 675(E) (w. e. f. 19 -8-2003).  26 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 10)  
In the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order,  1976, — 
(i) in Schedule I — 
(a) for serial number 3 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely: — 
1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
―3 Bihar  53 7 5 40 7 ..‖; 
(b) after serial number 21, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely: — 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
―21A Jharkhand  .. .. 14 1 5..‖; 
(ii) in Schedule II, — 
(a) for serial number 3 and the entries relating thereto, the following shall be substituted, namely: — 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
―3 Bihar  318 45 29 243 39 ..‖; 
 (b) after serial number 21, the following serial number and entries shall be inserted, namely: — 
 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 
―21A Jharkhand  .. .. 81 9 28‖; 
(iii) in Schedule V ,— 
(a) in Part A —Parliamentary Constituencies, — 
(A) serial numbers 26 to 28, 44 to 54 and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted;  
(B)  against serial number 29, — 
(1) the entry ―158 Deoghar (SC) ‖ shall be omitted ; 
(2) after entry ―176-Kataria ‖, the entry ―177-Chakai ‖ shall be inserted ; 
(C) against serial number 30, the entry ―164-Mahagama ‖ shall be o mitted;  
(D) against serial number 30, for the figures and words  1[ ―171-Sultanganj ‖ and ―173-Dhuraiya ‖ 
the figures, words and letters ―171-Sultanganj (SC) ‖ and ―173-Dhuraiya (SC) ‖ shall be substituted ]; 
(E) against serial number 40, after  entry ―241-Goh‖, the entry ―251-Imamganj (SC) ‖ shall be 
inserted;  
(F) against serial number 42, for entry ―256-Atri‖, the entry ―255-Fatehpur (SC), 256 - Atri‖ shall 
be substituted;  
(G) against serial number 43,  after entry ―253-Bodhgaya (SC) ‖, the entry ―254-Barachatti ( SC)‖ 
shall be inserted;  
(b) in Part B —Assembly Constituency, serial number s 147 to 164, 262 to 324 and the entries 
relating thereto shall be omitted.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 675(E)  (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  27 
 (iv) after Schedule XXII, the following Schedule shall be inserted, namely: — 
 
―SCHEDULE XXIIA  
JHARKHAND  
Part A. —PARLI AMENTARY  CONSTITUENCIES  
 
Serial No.  Name and extent of constituencies  
1. Rajmahal (ST). —l-Rajmahal, 1[2-Borio (S T)], 3-Barhait (ST), 4 -Litipara (S T), 5 -Pakaur,                        
6-Maheshpur (S T). 
2. Dumka  (ST). —7-Sikaripara (ST), 8 -Nala, 9 -Jamtara, 14 -Sarath, 10 -Dumka ( ST), 11 - Jama (S T). 
3. Godda .—13-Madhupur, 15 -Deoghar (SC), 12 -Jarmundi, 16 -Poreyahat, 17 -Godda,18 -Mahagama.  
4. Chatra.—27-Chatra (SC), 26 -Simaria (SC), 74 -Latehar (SC), 75 -Panki, 73 -Manika  (ST). 
5. Kodarma .—19-Kodarma, 20 -Barkatha, 28 -Dhanwar, 29 -Bagodar, 30 -Jamua (S C), 31-Gandey.  
6. Giridih .—32-Giridih, 33 -Dumri, 34 -Gomia, 35 -Bermo, 42 - Tundi, 43 -Baghmara.  
7. Dhanbad .—36-Bokaro, 38 -Sindri, 39 -Nirsa, 40 -Dhanbad, 41 -Jharia, 37 -Chandankiyari (SC).  
8. Ranchi. —50-Ichagarh, 61 -Silli, 62 -Khijri (S T), 63-Ranchi; 64 -Hatia, 65 -Kanke (S C). 
9. Jamshedpur. —1[44-Bahragora ], 45 -Ghatsila (S T), 46 -Potka (ST), 47 -Jugsalai (S C),                             
48-Jamshedpur -East, 49 -Jamshedpur -West.  
10. Singhbhum  (ST) .—51-Seraikela (S T), 52-Chaibasa (ST), 53 -Majhgaon (S T),                                       
54-Jaganathpur ( ST), 55 -Manoh arpur (ST), 1[56-Chakradharpur (S T)]. 
11. Khunti (ST) .—57-Kharsawar (ST), 58-Tamar (ST), 59 -Torpa (ST), 60 -Khunti (ST), 71 -Kolebira 
(ST), 70 - Simdega (ST).  
12. Lohardaga (ST). —66-Mandar ( ST), 67 -Sisai (ST), 68 -Gumla (S T), 69 -Bishunpur  (ST),                  
1[72-Loharda ga (ST)]. 
13. Palam au (SC). —76-Daltonganj, 80 -Garhwa, 81-Bhawanathpur, 77 -Bishrampur,                       
78-Chhatarpur (S C), 79 -Hussainabad.  
14.   Hazaribagh .—21-Barhi, 22 -Barkagaon, 23 -Ramgarh, 24 -Mandu, 25 -Hazaribagh.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 675(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  
 28 
  
PART B.—ASSEMBLY  CONSTITUENCIES  
Serial No. Name and extent of constituencies  
SAHE BGANJ DISTICT  
1. Rajmahal .—Rajmahal and Sahebganj  Polic e Stations in Rajmahal Sub -division.  
2. Borio (ST) .—Borio and Taljhari Police Stations in Rajmahal sub -division;  and Boarijor Police 
Station  (excl uding G.Ps. Rajabhita, Kero, Ka irasol, Bara Telo and Barapipra) in God da sub -division.  
3. Barhait (ST). —Barhait and Ranga Police Stations in Rajmahal sub -division; and Sundarpahari 
Police Station and G.Ps. Rajabhita, Kera, Kairasol, Bara Telo and Barapipra in Boa rijar Police Station in 
Godda  sub-division.  
PAKAUR DISTRICT  
4. Litipara (ST) .—Litipara, Amrapara  and Hiranpur Police Stations in Pakaur sub -division; and 
Gopikandar  Police Station in Dumka Sadar sub -division.  
5. Pakaur .—Pakaur Police Station in Pakaur sub -division; and Barharwa Police Station in Rajmahal 
sub-division.  
6. Mahaeshpur (ST) .—Maheshpur a nd Pakuria Police station in Pakaur sub -division.  
DUMKA DISTRICT  
7. Sikaripara (ST) .—Sikaripara, Raneshwar and kathikund Police Stations in Dumka Sadar                  
sub-division.  
8. Nal a.—Nala and Kundahit Police Stations in Jamtara sub -division.  
9. Ja mtara .—Jamtara Police Stations (excluding G.Ps. Karmata nr, Sahajpur,  Pindari, Lakh anpur, 
Rataniya, Rampurbhitra and Kajra) and Narayanpur Police Station in Jamtara sub -division.  
10. Dumka (ST). —Dumka Town, Dumka Mufassil and Masalia Police Station s in Dumka Sadar            
sub-division.  
11. Jama (ST) .—Jama and Ramgarh Police Station s in Dumka Sadar sub -division.  
12.Jarmundi. — Jarmundi Police Station in Dumka Sadar sub -division; and Sarawan Police Station 
in Deoghar sub -division.  
DEOGHAR DISTRICT  
13. Madhupur. —Madhupur and Karon Police Stations and G.Ps . Kusmil, Chanddih, Pathra and 
Basbariya in Jasid ih Police Station in Deoghar sub -division.  
14. Sarath.  —Sarath and Palojori Police Stations in Deoghar sub -division;  and G.Ps.  Karmatanr, 
Sahajpur, Pindari, Lakhanpur, Rataniya, Rampurbhit ra and Kajra in Jamtara Police Station in Jamtara     
sub-division.  
15. Deogh ar (SC) .—Deoghar Town and Mohanp ur Police Stations and Jasidih Police Station 
(excluding G.Ps. Kusm il, Chanddih, Pathra and Basbariya) in D eoghar sub -division . 
GODDA DISTRICT  
16. Poreyahat. —Poreyahat Police Station and G.Ps. Burhikura, Dammajhilua, Sandmara, Nonbatta, 
Makhni, Pathra nad Punsiya in Godda Police Station in Godda sub -division; and Saraiyahat Police Stati on 
in Dumka Sadar s ub-division.  
17. Godda. —Godda Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Burhikura, dammajhilua, Sandmara, Nonbatta, 
Makhni, Pat hra and Punsiya) and Pathargama Police Station in Godda sub -division.  
18. Mahagama .—Mahagama  and Meherma Police Stations in Godda sub -divis ion. 29 
 Serial No.  Name and extent of constituencies  
KODARMA DISTRICT  
19. Kodarma .— Kodarma  and 1[Satgawan ] Police  Stations i n Kodarma  sub-division.  
HAZARIBAGH DISTRICT  
20. Barkatha .— Barkatha  and Jainagar Police S tations i n Kodarma s ub-division; 2***; and Ichak 
Police Station in  Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division.  
21. Barhi .—Barhi Police Station in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division; and Chauparan  Police Station in 
Kodarma sub -division . 
22. Barkagaon .—Barakgaon Police Station and G.Ps. Terpa, Patratu, Koto, Palani,1[Haphua ], 
1[Harih arpur], Gegda, Deoria, Bargama, Pali, Salgo, Sanki, Jabo, Chaingara,  Chikor, Lapanga, Ghutua, 
Barkakana and Sidhwar -Kalan in Ramgarh Police Station  in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division.  
23. Ramgarh. —Ramga rh Police Station (excluding G.P s. Terpa , Patratu, Koto, Palani,1[Hap hua], 
1[Harih arpur ], Gegda, Deoria, Bargama, Pali, Salgo, Sanki, Jabo, 1[Chaingara] , Chikor, Lapanga, G hutua, 
Barkakana and Sidhwar -Kalan) and Gola Police  Station  in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division.  
24. Mandu.—Mandu and Bishungarh Police Stations in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division . 
25. Hazaribagh .—Hazaribagh Police Station in Hazaribagh Sadar sub -division.  
CHATRA DISTRICT  
26. Simaria (SC) .—Simaria, Itkhori and Tandwa Police Stations in Chatra sub -division . 
27. Chatra (SC) .—Chatra, Pratappur and Hunterganj Police Stations in Chatra sub -divison.  
GIRIDIH DISTRICT  
28. Dhanwar .—Dhanwar and Gawan Police Stations in Giridih Sadar sub -division.  
29. Bagodar .— Bagoda r and Birn i Police Stations in Giridih Sadar sub -division.  
30 Jamua ( SC).—Jamua and Deori Police Stations in Giridih Sadar sub -division.  
31. Gandey .—Gandey and Bengabad Police Stations and G.Ps. Leda, Semaria, Badgunda, Palmo, 
Sathib ad, Senadoni, Dhanaidih, Guro,  Jitpur, Telodih, Ranidih  and Karharbari in Giridih Mufassil Police 
Station in Giridih Sadar sub -division.  
32. Giridih .—Giridih Town Police Station and Giridih Mufassil Police Station  (excluding G.Ps. 
Leda, Semaria, Badgunda, Palmo, Sathibad Senadoni, Dhanaidih,  Guro, Jitpur, Telodih, Ran idih and 
Karharbari) and Pir tanr Police Station in Giridih  Sadar sub -division.  
33. Dumri .—Dum ri Police Station in Giridih Sadar sub -division; and Nawadih Police  Station in 
Bermo sub -division.  
BOKARO DISTRICT  
34. Gomia .—Gomia Police Station and Petarbar Police Station (excluding G.Ps.  Champi,  Rohar, 
Chando, Pichhri, Angwali and Chalkari) in Bermo sub -division.  
35. Bermo .—Jaridih  and Bermo Police Stations and G .Ps. Champ i, Rohar, Chando,  Pichhri, Angwali 
and Chalkari in Petarbar Police Station in Bermo sub -division.  
36. Bokaro .—Chas Police Station (excluding G.Ps, Bijulia, Alkusa, Buribinor, Khamarbendi , 
Dudhigajar, Kura Dabartupara,  Jaitara, Pundru and Sardaha) in Baghmara sub -division.  
37. Chandankiyari (SC). —Chandankiyari Police Station and G.Ps . Bijulia, Al kusa, Buribinor, 
Khamrbendi, Dhundhigajar, Kura, Dabartup ara, Jaitara, Pundu and Sardaha  in Chas Police Station in  
Baghmara sub -divison.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 675(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  
2. The words ―and Ichak Police Stations in Kodarma sub -division‖ omitted, ibid. (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  
 30 
 Serial No.  Name and extent constituencies  
DHANBAD DISTRICT  
38. Sindri. —Sindri, Baliapur and Gobindpur Police Station in Dhanbad Sadar sub-division.  
39. Nirsa. —Nirsa and Chirkunda Police Stations in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division . 
40. Dhanbad. —Dhandad, Putki and Kenduadih Police Stations in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division.  
41. Jharia.  —Jharia and Jorapokhar Police Stations in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division.  
42. Tundi. —Tundi Police Sta tion in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division; Topchanchi Police Station and 
G.Ps. Dharkiro, Daluldih, Rajganj, Bagdaha, Dhawachita, Nagar kalan and Ramkanalichandur in Katras 
Police Station in Baghmara sub -division.  
43. Baghmara .—Baghmara Police Station and Katras Kalan Police (excluding G.Ps. Dharkiro,  
Daludih, Rajganj, Bagdaha, Dha wachita, Nagri Kalan and Ramkanalichandur) in Baghmara                       
sub-division; and Jogta Police Station in Dhanbad Sadar sub -division.  
(EAST ) SINGHBHUM DISTRICT  
44. Baharagora. —Baharagora and Chakulia Police Station s in Dhalbhum sub -division.  
45. Ghatsila (ST). —Ghatsila Police Station,  1[Musabani ] Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Palasbani, 
Asta Koyali, Nunia, Kumarasoi, Barakanjiya, Boma ro B angoriya and Damud ih) in Dhalbhum                     
sub-divison.  
46. Potka (ST). —Potka Police Station, G.Ps.  Palasbani, Asta Koyali, Nunia , Kumarasol, 
Barakanjiya, Bomar o Bangoriya and Damudih in 1[Musabani ] Police Station, Bagbera town and G.Ps.                      
Karadih –Purihasa, Haragarg hutu, Bagbera and village 1167 -Kitadih in Jugsalai Police Station in 
Dhalbhum  sub-division.  
47. Jugsalai (SC). —Jugsalai Police Station (excluding Bagbera town an d G.Ps. Karandih -Purihasa, 
Hargarghutu, Bagbera and village 1167 -Kitadih) Golmuri and Patamda Police Station in Dhalbhum            
sub-division.  
48. Jamshedpur East. —Census wards 20 and 23 to 40 in Jamshedpur Notified Area Committee in 
Dhalbhum sub -divisio n. 
49. Jamshedpur W est. —Jamshedpur Notified Area Committee (excluding census wards 20 and           
23 to 40) in Dha lbhum sub -division.  
(WEST ) SINGHBHUM DISTRICT  
50. Ichagarh .—Ichagarh, Chandil and Nimdi h Police Station s in Seraikella s ub-division.  
51. Seraikella (ST).  —Seraikella municipality and G.Ps. Govindpur, Pandra, Manik Bazar,  Tangani, 
Pathanmara, Jordiha, Gurgudia and Badakakda in Seraikella Police Station, Rajnagar Police Station 
(excluding village 98 -Dighi) and Adityapur Police Station in Sera ikella sub -division.  
52. Chaibasa (ST). —Chaibasa Sadar and Jhinkpani Police Stations and Chaibasa  Mufassil Police 
Station (excluding G. Ps. Bhoya, Keadchalam, Domra -Parnia, Lota,  Thakuragutu, Dopai -Gamhariya, 
Sarda, Ma tkamhatu, Khuntpani, Chiru and  Rajabasa ) in Chaibasa Sadar sub -division . 
53.  Majhgaon (ST). —Majhgaon and Manjhari Police Stations in Chaibasa Sadar sub -division.  
54. Jaganathpur (ST). —Naomundi and Gua Police Stations and G.Ps. Kurtabera,  Urkiya, 
Makaramda, Thalkobad, (Part I) and Chhotanagra (Part I ) in M anoharpur  Police Station in Chaibasa 
Sadar sub -division . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 675(E) (w. e. f. 19 -8-2003).  31 
 Serial No.  Name and extent of constituencies  
55. Manoharpur (ST). —Manoharpur Police Station [excluding G.  Ps. Kurtabera, Urkiya,  Makaramda, 
Thalkobad (Part I) and Chhotanagra (Part I)] and G.Ps. Beralumin,  Jojoda, Serengda, Orenga, Jhilrua, 
Goilkera, Kuira, Kadamdiha, Dalaikela, Sonua -Jorapokhar, Porahat, Sogoisai, Gudri Jarakel, Asantaliya, 
Dalki -Gobindpur , Bhalurangi, Harimara, Tunian Gajpur, Bandu, Poronger, Koloeda, Kulda, Bari, Lonj o, 
Bera Kayam, Mamail, Piring, Komrora, 1[Komrora -Dariyo], Dura -Jante and Banskata and Chakradharpur 
Police Station in Chaibasa  Sadar   sub-division.  
56. Chakradharpur (ST) .—-Chakradharpur Police Station (excluding G.Ps. Beralumin,  Jojoda, 
Serengda, Orenga,  Jhilrua, Goilkera, Kuira, Kadamdiha, Dalaikela, Sonua -Jorapokhar, Porahat, Sogoisai, 
Gudri Jarakel, Asantaliya, Dalki -Gobindpur,  Bhalurangi, Harimara, Tunian Gajpur, Bandu, Poronger, 
Koloeda, Kulda, Bari,  Lonjo, Bera Kayam, m amail, Piring, Komrora, Komrora -Dariyo,  Dura -Jante and  
Banskata)  in Chaibasa Sadar sub -division.  
57. Kharsawan (ST). —Kharsawan and Kuchai Police Stations and Seraikella Police  Station 
(excluding Ser aikella municipality and G.Ps. Govindpur, Para, Manik Bazar,  Tangrani, Pathanmara,  
Jordiha Gurugudia and Badakakda) and village 98 -Dighi  in Rajnagar Police Station in Seraikella                  
sub-division; and G.Ps. Bhoya Keadchalam,  Domra -Pamia, Lota, Thakurgutu, Dopai -Gamhariya, Sarda, 
Matkamhatu -Khuntpani, Chiru and Rajabasa in Ch aibasa Mufassil Police Station in Chaibasa  Sadar               
sub-division.  
RANCHI DISTRICT  
58. Tamar (ST). —Tamar, Erki and Bundu Police Stations in Khunti sub -divisions.  
59. Torpa (ST) .—Torpa  and Rania Police Stations and G.Ps. G umru, Cobindpur, Tilmi,  Lapa, 
Jariagarh, Urikel and Hutub and Karra Police Station in Khunti sub -division;  and Bano Police Station in 
Simdega sub -divison.  
60. Khunti (ST). —Khunti and Murhu Police Stations and Karra Police Station ( excluding G.Ps. 
Gumru, Gobindpur , Tilmi, Lapa, J ariagarh, Urikel and Hutub) in K hunti sub -divison.  
61. Silli.—Silli Police Station, G .Ps. Barwadag, Tati,  Jonha, Kashidih, Merha,  Ambajharia and 
Kontatoli and Angara Police Station in Ranchi Sadar sub -division;  and Sonahatu Police Station in Khunti 
sub-division.  
62. Khijri (ST) .—Ormanjhi, 1[Namkum ] and Hatia Police Stations and Angara Police  Station 
(excluding G .Ps. Barwadag, Tati, J onha, Kashidih  
63. Ranchi .—Ranchi municipality in Ranchi Kotwali Police Station in Ranchi Sadar  sub-division.  
64. Hatia.—Jaganathpur, Ratu and Doranda Police Stations and Ranchi Kotwali  Police Station 
(excluding Ranchi municipality) in Ranchi Sadar s ub-division.  
65. Kanke (SC) .—Kanke, Ranchi Sadar, Burmu and Khelari Police Stations in Ranchi  Sadar            
sub-division . 
66. Mandar (ST) .—Bero, Mandar and Lapung Police Stations, in Ranchi Sadar sub -division . 
GUMLA DISTRICT  
67. Sisai (ST). —Sisai, Kamdara and Basia  Police Stations in Gumla sub -division.  
68. Gumla (ST). —Gumla Municipality, G.Ps. Hurhuria, Ghatagaon, Asani, Chandali,  Telgaon, Pugu, 
Bangaru, Karaundi, Dumardih and Murkunda in Gumla Police  Station and Raidih, Chainpur and Dumri 
Police Stations in Gumla sub -division.  
69. Bishunpur (ST) .—-Bishunpur and Ghaghra Police Stations and Gumla Police  Station (excluding 
Gumla municipality and G.Ps. Hurhuria, Ghatagaon, Asani,  Chandali, Telgaon, Pugu, Bangaru, Karaundi, 
Dumardih and Murkunda) in Gumla  sub-division; and Senha Police Station in Lohardaga sub -division . 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 675(E)  (w. e. f. 19 -8-2003) . 
 32 
 Serial No.  Name and extent of constituencies  
70. Simdega (ST).—Simdega and Kurdeg Police Stations in Simdega sub -division; and Palkot Police 
Station in Gumla sub -division.  
71. Kolebira (ST ).—Kolebira, Thethaitangar and Bolba Police Stations in Simdega  sub-division.  
LOHARDAGA  DISTRICT  
72. Lohardaga( ST). —Lohardaga K uru and Kisko Police S tations  in Lohardaga  sub-division.  
PALAMAU DISTRICT  
73. Manika (ST). —Latehar Police Station (excluding Latehar (N.A.C.) and G.Ps.  Pochra , Luti, 
Kaima, Kura, Bishunpur, Mungar, Nindir, Laharpur and Zalim),  Barwadih, Garoo and Mahuadanr Police 
Stations in Latehar sub -division.  
74. Latehar (SC) —Latehar (N.A.C.), G.Ps. Pochra, Luti, Kaima, Kura, Bishunpur,  Mungar, Nindir, 
Laharpur and Zalim in Latehar Police Station, Chandwa and  Balumath Police Station in Latehar                   
sub-division.  
75. Panki .—Pank i, Lesliganaj and Manatu Police Station i n Palamu  Sadar sub-division.  
76. Daltonganj .—Daltonganj and Chainpur Police Station in Palam au Sadar sub -division;  and 
Bhandaria Police Station in Garhwa sub -division . 
77. Bishrampur. —Bishrampur Police Station in Palam au Sadar sub -division; and  Majhiaon Police 
Station in Garhwa sub -division.  
78. Chhatarpur (SC) .—Chhatarpur and Patan Police Station in Palam au Sadar sub -division.  
79. Hussainabad .—Hussainabad and Hariharganj Police Station  in Palamau Sadar  sub-division.  
GARHWA DISTRICT  
80. Garhwa .—Garhwa P olice  Station  (excluding G.Ps.  Jarhi Balekhar Raro, S onehara  and Dandai) 
and Ranka Police Station in Garhwa sub -division.  
81. Bhawa nathpur .—Bhawan athpur a nd Nagar Untari Police Station and  G.Ps. J arhi, Balekhar, 
Raro, Sonehara and Dandai in Garhwa Police Station in Garhwa sub -division.  
 
 
 
  33 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 17)  
SITTING MEMBERS WHO SHALL CONTINUE TO BE MEMBERS OF THE  
BIHAR  LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL TILL THEIR RESPECTIVE  
PRESENT TERMS OF OFFICE  
(i) Mem bers representing any of the eleven Constituencies specified in item ( 1) of the                  
1[Fourth  Schedule ]. 
(ii) The  following members elected by the members of the Bihar Legislative  Assembly,            
namely: — 
―1. Shri Sarfaraj A hmed . 
2. Shri Saryu Rai . 
3. Shri Mahavir Lal Vishwakarma . 
4. Shri Bhutnath Soren . 
5. Shri Rajendranath S hahdev . 
6. Smt. Vibha Ranjan . 
7. Shri Badri Narayan Lal.  
8. Shri Praveen Singh .‖. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 675(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  
 34 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 18)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE DELIMITA TION OF COUNCIL CONSTITUENCIES  
(BIHAR) ORDER, 1951  
(1) In the Table , omit the entries relating to — 
(i) Bhagalpur -cum-North Chhotanagpur (Graduates) Constituency;  
(ii) South Chhotanagpur (Graduates) Constituency;  
(iii) Bhagalpur -cum-North Chhotanagpur (Teachers) Constituency;  
(iv) South Chhotanagpur (Teachers) Constituency;  
(v) Santhal Parganas (Local Authorities) Constituency; .  
(vi) Hazaribagh (Local Authorities) Constituency;  
(vii) Giridih (Local Authorities) Constituency;  
(viii) Ranchi (Loc al Authorities) Constituency;  
(ix) Palamau (Local Authorities) Constituency;  
(x) Dhanbad ( Local Authorities) Constituency;  
(xi) East Singhbhum -cum-West Singhbhum (Local Authorities) Constituency.  
(2) In the Table, in column  2,— 
(i) against ―Kosi (Graduates) Constituency ‖ in column 1, after the word  ―khagaria ‖, insert the 
words ―Bhagalpur Monghyr ‖; 
(ii) against ―Kosi (Teachers)  Constituency ‖ in column I, after the word ―Khagaria ‖, insert the 
words ―Bhagalpur Monghyr ‖. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  35 
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
(See Section 23)  
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES) ORDER, 1950  
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes ) Order, 1950, in the Schedule ,— 
(i) in Part III relating to State of Bihar, in item No.  5, the brackets and words ‖ (excl uding North 
Chhotanagpur and South Chhotanagpur divisions and  Santal Parg anas district) ‖, shall be omitted;  
(ii) after Part VI, Himachal Pradesh, the follo wing shall be inserted, namely: — 
“PART  VIA –Jharkhand  
 
1. Bantar  
1[2. Baur i] 
3. Bhogta  
4. Bhuiya  
5. Chamar, Mochi  
1[6. Chaupal] 
1[7. Dabg ar] 
8. Dhobi  
9. Dom, Dhangad  
10. Dusadh, Dhari, Dharhi  
11. Ghasi  
12. Halalkhor  
1[13. Hari, Mehtar, Bhangi ] 
14. Kanjar  
1[15. Kura riar] 
16. Lalbegi  
17. Musahar  
18. Nat 
19. Pan, Sawasi  
20. Pasi 
21. Rajwar  
22. Turi.‖ 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 67 5(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  
 36 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 24)  
AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES) ORDER, 1950  
In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, — 
(1) in paragraph 2, for the figures ―XXI‖, the figures ―XXII ‖ shall be substituted;  
(2) in the Schedule, — 
(i) in Part III relating to State of Bihar, the item No.  6 and the entries relating  thereto, shall be 
omitted, and the item Nos. 7 to 30 shall be renumbered as  item Nos. 6 to 29;  
(ii) after Part X XI, the following Part shall be inserted, namely: — 
“PART XXII –Jharkhand  
1. Asur  
2. Baiga  
3. Banjara  
4. Bhathudi  
5. Bedia  
6. Binjhia  
7. Birhor  
8. Birjia  
9. Chero  
1[10. Chik Baraik]  
11. Gond  
12. Gorait  
13. Ho 
14. Karmali  
15. Khanria  
16. Kharwar  
17. Khond  
18. Kisan 
19. Kora  
20. Korwa  
21. Lohra  
22. Mahli  
1[23. Mal Paharia]  
24. Munda  
25. Oraon  
26. Parhaiya  
1[27. Santal]  
28. Sauria Paharia  
29. Savar  
30. Bhumij .‖. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 675(E) (w.e.f.  19-8-2003).  
 37 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 46 ( 1)] 
(Investment s and Credits in certain funds ) 
1. State  Provident Funds.  
2. Trusts and Endowments.  
3. Insurance and Pensions Funds.  
4. Depreciation Reserve Funds —relating to Government Commercial Departments and 
Undertakings.  
5. Famine Relief Funds.  
6. Investment Account.  
7. Development Fund for Educational  Purposes.  
8. General Reserve Funds of Government Commercial Departments Undertakings.  
9. Zamindari Abolition Funds.  
10. Calamity Relief Fund Investment Account  
11. Revenue  Deposits.  
12. Security Deposits.  
13. Civil Courts' Deposits.  
14. Criminal Courts' Deposits.  
15. Personal Deposits.  
16. Trust Interest Funds.  
17. Public Works Deposits . 
18. Forest Deposits.  
19. Deposits of Public Funds.  
20. Other Departmental Deposits.  
21. Deposits under various Central and  State Acts.  
22. Deposits for work done for Public bodies or private individuals.  
23. Deposits of fees received by Government servants for works done for private bodies.  
24. Deposits in connection with Elections.  
25. Mines Labour Welfare Deposits . 
26. Deposits of Educational Institutions.  
27. Unclaimed Deposits in the General  Provident Fund.  
28. Unclaimed Deposits in other Provident Fund s. 
29. Deposits on account of cost price of Liquor, Ganja and Bhang.  
30. District Funds . 
31. Municipal Funds.  
32. Cantonment Funds.  
33. Funds of Insurance Association.  
34. State Transport Corporation Fund.  
  38 
 35. State Electricity Boards Working.  
36. State Housing Funds.  
37. Panchayats Bodies Funds.  
38. Education Funds.  
39. Medical and Charitable Funds.  
40. Other Funds.  
41. Subventions  from Central Road Fund.  
42. Miscellaneous Deposits.  
 
 
 
 
  39 
 THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 53)  
APPORTIONMENT OF LIABILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS AND OTHER  
RETIREMENT BENEFITS  
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the successor State shall in respect of 
pension and other retirement benefits sanctioned before the appointed date, pay from their respective 
treasuries . 
2. Subject to the said adjustment, the liability in respect of  pensions and other retirement b enefits of 
officers serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar who retire or proceed on leave 
preparatory to reti rement before the appointed day, but whose c laims for pensions and other retirement 
benefits are outstanding immediately before that day, shall be the liability of the State of Bihar.  
3. Subject to the said adjustments, sanctions of such pension and other retirement  benefits by the 
competent authority may be given in those cases, in which their office  falls in the territory of Jharkhand 
State.  
4. There shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the appointed day  and ending on 
the 31st day of March of the financial year and in respect of each  subsequent financial year, the total 
payments made in all the successor States in  respect of pensions and other retirement benefits referred to 
in paragraphs 1 and 2.  The total representing the liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of 
pensions  and other retirement benefits shall be apportioned between the successor States in  the ratio of 
number of employees of each successor State and any successor State  paying more than its due share shall 
be reimbursed the excess amount by the  successor State or State paying less.  
5. The liability of the existing State of Bihar in respect of pen sions and other retirement  benefits 
granted before the appointed day and drawn in any area outside the territories  of the existing State shall 
be the liability of the State of Bihar paying subject to  adjustments to be made in accordance with 
paragraph 3 as  if such pensions and oth er retirement benefits had been drawn in any treasury in the State 
of Bihar under  paragraph 1.  
6. The liability in respect of the pensions and other retirement benefits of any officer  serving 
immediately before the appointed day i n connection with the affairs of the  existing State of Bihar and 
retiring on or after that day, shall be that of the successor  State granting him the pension and other 
retirement benefits, but the portion of the  pension and other retirement benefits attrib utable to the service 
of any such officer  before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Bihar  
shall be allocated between the successor States in the population ratio and the  Government granting the 
pension and other retir ement benefits shall be entitled to  receive from each of the other successor Stat es 
its share of this liability.  
7. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension and other retirement benefits shall be  construed as 
including a reference to the commuted value of the pension and other  retirement  benefits.  
 
 
  40 
 THE NINTH SCHEDULE  
[See section 65( 1)] 
LIST OF STATE OWNED CORPORATIONS/COMPANIES  
1. Bihar State Industries Development Corporation.  
2. Bihar State Leather Development Corporation.  
3. Bihar State Electronics Development Corporation.  
4. Bihar State Sugar Corporation Limited.  
5. Bihar State Medicine and Chemical Development Corporation.  
6. Bihar State Fruit and Vegetable s Development Corporation.  
7. Bihar State Dairy Corporation Limited.  
8. Bihar State Agro Industries Corporat ion. 
9. Bihar State Text iles Corporation Limited.  
10. Bihar State Small Industries Corporation Limited.  
11. Bihar State Handloom and Handicrafts Corporation  
12. Bihar State Khadi Gramudyog Board  
13. Bihar State Agriculture Marketing Board.  
14. Bihar State Forest Development Corp oration Limited.  
15. Bihar State Export Development Corporation Limited.  
16. Bihar State Seeds Corporation Limited.  
17. Bihar State Fish Seeds Development Corporation Limited.  
18. Bihar State Warehousing Corporation.  
19. Bihar State Tourism Development Corporation Limited.  
20. Bihar State Road Transport Corporation.  
21. Bihar State Food and Civil Supplies Corporaiton.  
22. Bihar State Text Book Publishing Corporation Limited.  
23. Bihar State Construction Corporation Limited.  
24. Bihar State Mineral Development Corporation Limited.  
25. Bihar State Ho using Board.  
26. Bihar State Bridge Construction Corporation Limited.  
27. Bihar State Police Building Construction Corporation Limited.  
28. Bihar State Electricity Board.  
29. Bihar State Hydroelectric Power Corporation Limited.  
30. Bihar State Hill Area and Irrigation Develop ment Limited.  
31. Patna Industrial Area Development Authority.  
32. Bokaro Industrial Area Development Authority.  
33. Ranchi Industrial Area Development Authority.  
34. Adityapur Industrial Area Development Authority.  
35. North Bihar Industrial Area Development Authority.  
36. Darbh anga Industrial Area Development Authority.  41 
 37. Patna Area Development Authority.  
38. Ranchi Area Development Authority  
39. Muzaffarpur Area Development Authority.  
40. Darbhanga Area Development Authority.  
41. Gaya Area Development Authority.  
42. Bihar State Pollution Control Board.  
43. Bihar State Water and Sewage Disposal Board.  
44. Bihar State Financial Corporation.  
45. Bihar State Credit and Investment Corporation Limited.  
46. Bihar State Panchayati Raj Finance Development Corporation Limited.  
47. Bihar State Minorities Finance Corporation Lim ited. 
48. Bihar State Film Development and Finance Corporation Limited.  
49. Electricity Corporation Limited.  
50. Mines Area Development Authority, Dhanbad.  
51. Hazaribagh Mines Board.  
52. Bhagalpur Regional Development  Authority, Bhagalpur . 
53. Women’s  Development Corporation.  
54. Backward Classes Development Corporation.  
55. Scheduled Castes Development Corporation  
56. Scheduled Tribes Development Corporation.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  42 
 THE TENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 70)  
CONTINUANCE OF FACILITIES IN CERTAIN STATE INSTITUTIONS  
List of Training Institution/Centres  
 
1. Sri Krishna Institute of Public Administration.  
2. Police Training College.  
3. Bihar Institute of Rural Development.  
4. Village Handicrafts Training Centre.  
5. Tribal Village Handicraft Training Centres.  
6. Training -cum-Production Centres for Toys, Ceramic Goods, Embroidery and Applique, 
Hornmade goods and Cutting and Tailoring.  
7. Ideal Woodwork Workshops/Iron Workshops.  
8. Indo Danish Tool Room and Training Centre, Jamshedpur.  
9. All Gover nment Industrial Institutes . 
-Affiliated with N.C.V. T. 
-Un-affiliated . 
10. All Private Industrial Institutes.  
-Affiliated with N.C.V.T. ;  
-Un-affiliated.  
11. B.I.T., Sindri.  
12. R.I. T., Jamshedpur.  
13. Government Polytechnic, Dhanbad.  
14. Government Polytechnic, Ranchi.  
15. Government Polytechnic, Adityapur.  
16. Government Polytechnic, Khutri.  
17. Government Polytechnic, Lathehar.  
18. Government Women's Polytechnic, Jamshedpur.  
19. Government Women's Polytechnic, Ranchi.  
20. Government  Women's Polytechnic, Bokaro.  
21. Mines Institution, Dhanbad.  
22. Mines institution, Bagha.  
23. Mines Institution, Koderma.  
24. Government Polytechnic, Dumka.  
25. Government Women's Industrial School, Ranchi.  
26. Government Women's Industrial School, Hazaribagh.  
27. Government Women's Industrial School, Daltonganj.  
28. Sainik School, Tilaiya.  
29. Netarhat School.  
30. Indir a Gandhi Girls School,  Hazaribag h. 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Central Road and Infrastructure Fund Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRAL ROAD FUND ACT, 2000  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title , extent  and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
CENTRAL ROAD FUND 
3. Levy and collection of cess.  
4. Crediting of cess  to Consolidated Fund of India.  
5. Grants and loans by the Central Government . 
6. Establishment of Central Road Fund . 
7. Utilisation of the Fund . 
8. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF CENTRAL ROAD FUND 
9. Powers of Central Government to administer the Fund . 
10. Functions of the Central Government . 
11. Administration of States’ share of the Fund . 
12. Power to make rules.  
13. Rules made under this Act to be laid before Parliament.  
14. Provisions relating to existing Central Road Fund . 
15. Repeal and saving . 
THE SCHEDULE.  
  2 
 THE CENTRAL  ROAD FUND ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 54 OF 2000  
[27th December , 2000.]  
An Act to give statutory status to the existing Central Road Fund governed by the Resolution of 
Parliament passed in 1988, for development and maintenance of national highways and 
improvement of safety at railway crossings, and for these purposes to lev y and collect by way 
of cess, a duty of excise and duty of customs on motor spirit commonly known as petrol, 
high speed diesel oil and for oth er matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parl iament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called t he Central Road Fund Act, 
2000.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day 
of November, 2000.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the date on which the Fund is established under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 6;  
(b) “cess” means a duty in the nature of duty of excise and customs, imposed and collected on 
motor spirit commonly known as petrol and high speed diesel oi l for the purposes of this Act;  
(c) “Fund ” means the Central Road Fund established under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(d) “national highways ” means the highways specified in the Schedule to the National Highways 
Act, 1956 (48 of 1956) or any other highway declared as national highway under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 2 of the said Act;  
(e) “National Highways Authority of India ” means an authority constituted under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 3 of the National Highways Authority o f India Act, 1988 (68 of 1988);  
(f) “prescribed ” means prescribed by ru les made under this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
CENTRAL ROAD FUND 
3. Levy and collection of cess .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, specify, there shall be levied and collected, as a cess, a duty of excise 
and customs for the purposes of this Act, o n every item specified in column ( 2) of the Schedule, which is 
produced  in or imported into India and — 
(a) removed from a refiner y or a factory or an outlet; or  
(b) transferred  by the person, by whom such item is produced or imported, to another person,  
at such rates not exceeding the rate set forth in the corresponding entry in column ( 3) of the Schedule, as 
the Central Government may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, specify:  3 
 Provided that until the Central Government specifies by such notification the rate of the cess in 
respect of petrol and high speed diesel oil (being items specified in the Schedule), the cess on petrol and 
high speed diesel  oil under this sub -section shal l be levied and collected at t he rate of rupee one per litre:  
Provided further that the additional duty of customs and the additional duty of excise on petrol levied 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 103 and sub -section ( 1) of section 111, as the ca se may be, of the Finance 
(No. 2) A ct, 1998 (21 of 1988) and the ad ditional duty of customs and the additional duty of excise on 
high speed diesel oil levied under sub -section ( 1) of section 116 and sub -section ( 1) of section 133, as the 
case may be, of th e Finance Act, 1999 (27 of 1999) shall be deemed to be a cess fo r the purposes of this 
Act from the date of its levy and the proceeds thereof  shall be credited to the Fund.  
(2) Every cess  leviable under sub -section ( 1) on any item shall be payable by the person by whom 
such item is produced, and in the case of imports, the cess shall be imposed and collected on items so 
imported  and specified in the Schedule.  
(3) The cess  leviable under sub -section ( 1) on the items specified in the Schedule shall be in addition 
to any cess or duty leviable on those items under any other law for the t ime being in force.  
(4) The provisions of the Central Excise Act, 1944 (1 of 1944) and the rules made thereunder and the 
provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) and the rules made thereunder, as the case may be, 
including those relating to refunds  and exemptio ns from duties shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to 
the levy and collection of cessleviable under t his section and for this purpose, the provisions of the 
Central Excise Act, 1944 and of the Customs Act, 1962, as the case may be, sha ll have effe ct as if the 
aforesaid Acts provided for the levy of cess on all items specified in the Schedule.  
4. Crediting  of cess  to Consolidated Fund of India. —The proceeds of the cess levied under section 
3 shall first be credited to the Consolidated Fund of India, and the Central Government may, if Parliament 
by appropriation made by law in this behalf so pr ovides, credit  such proceeds to the Fund from time to 
time, after deducting the expenses of collection, for being utilised exclusively for the purposes of this Act.  
5. Grants and loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made b y Parliament by law in this behalf, credit by way of grants or loans such sums of 
money as the Central Government may consider necessary in the Fund.  
6. Establishment of Central Road Fund .—(1) With effect from such date as the Central 
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established 
for the purposes of this Act, a Fund to be call ed as the “Central Road Fund ”. 
(2) The Fund shall be under the control of the Central Government and t here shall be cred ited 
thereto — 
(a) any sums of money pai d under section 4 or section 5;  
(b) unspent part of the cess, being already levied for the purposes of the development and 
maintenance of national highways;  
(c) the sums, if any, realised by the Central Government in  carrying out its functions or in the 
administration of this Act;  
(d) any fund provided by the Central Government for the development and maintenance of State 
roads.  
(3) The balance to the credit of the Fund shall not lapse at the end of the financial ye ar. 
7. Utilisation of the Fund .—The Fund shall be utilised for the — 
(i) development and maintenance of national highways;  4 
 (ii) development of the rural roads;  
(iii) development  and maintenance of other State roads including roads of inter -State and 
economic importance;  
(iv) construction of roads either under or over the railways by means of a bridge and erection of 
safety works at unmanned rail -road crossings; and  
 (v) disbursem ent in respect of such projects as may be prescribed.  
8. Accounts and audit. —(1) The concerned departments of the Central Government shall maintain 
proper accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, including the 
profit  and loss account and the balance -sheet in respect of allocations of their shares of fund in such form, 
as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -
General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the  Fund shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him.  
CHAPTER III  
MANAGEMENT OF CENTRAL ROAD FUND 
9. Powers of Central Government to administer the Fund .—(1)The Central Government shall 
have the power to  administer the Fund and shall — 
(a) take such decisions regarding investment on projects of national highways and expressways as 
it considers necessary;  
1[(b) take such measures as may be necessary to raise funds for the development and maintenance 
of the  national highways  and for the development of rural roads ;] 
(c) allocate and disburse such sums as are considered necessary, to the concerned departments 
responsible for the development and maintenance of — 
(i) national highways;  
(ii) rural roads;  
 (iii) State roads; and  
(iv) construction of roads either under or over the railways by means of a bridge and erect 
suitable safety works at unmanned rail -road level crossings.  
10. Functions of the Central Government .—2[(1)] The Central Governme nt shall be res ponsible for 
the— 
(i) administration and management of the share of Fund allocated to the development and 
maintenance of the national highways;  
(ii) co-ordination and complete and timely utilisation of all sums allocated out of the Fund;  
(iii) sanction  of schemes for State roads of inter -State and economic importance in su ch manner 
as may be prescribed;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2007, s. 2 , for clause (b) (w.e.f. 21 -8-2007).  
2. S.10 numbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by 18 of 2005, s. 121 (w.e.f. 13 -5-2005).  
 5 
 (iv) formulation of criteria on the basis of which the specific projects of State roads of inter -State 
and economic importance are to be approved and fi nanced out of share of State roads;  
(v) release of funds to the States for specific projects and monitoring of such projects an d 
expenditure incurred thereon;  
(vi) formulation of the criteria for allocation of the funds for such projects which are required  to 
be implemented by the National Highways Authority of India and also for other projects for the 
development and mainte nance of the national highways;  
(vii) allocation of share of funds to each State and Union territory specified in the Firs t Schedule 
to the Constitution;  
(viii) allocation of — 
(a) fifty per cent. of the cess on high speed diesel oil for the development of rural roads in 
such manner as may be prescribed; and  
(b) the ba lance amount of fifty per cent. of cess on high speed diesel oil and t he entire cess  
collected on petrol as follows: — 
(i) an amount equal to fifty -seven and one half per cent. of such sum for the development 
and maintenance of national highways;  
(ii) an amount equal t o twelve and one half per cent. for the construction of road either 
under or over the railways by means of a bridge and erection of safety works at unmanned 
rail-road crossings; and  
(iii) the balance thirty per cent. on development and maintenance of roads other than 
national highways and out of this amount, ten per cent. that is three per cent. of the total share 
of State roads shall be kept as reserve by the Central Government fo r allocation to States for 
implementation of State road schemes of inter -State and economic importance to be ap proved 
by the Central Government in terms of clauses ( iii) and ( iv) of this section.  
1[(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( viii) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government 
shall, with effect from the 1st day of March, 2005, allocate fifty  paise from the amount of rupee  two as 
amended by sections 119 and 120 of the Finance Act, 2005 as the additional duty of customs and the 
additional duty of excise on petrol, levied under sub -section ( 1) of section 103 and su b-section ( 1) of 
section 111, as the case may be, of the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1998  (21 of 1998) and the additional duty of 
customs and the additional du ty of excise on high speed diesel oil levied under  sub-section ( 1)  of section 
116 and sub -section ( 1) of section 133, as  the case may be , of the Finance Act, 1999  (27 of 1999) , 
exclusively for the development and maintenance of national highways.]  
11. Administration of States’  share of the Fund .—(1) The share of the Fund to be spent on 
development and maintenance of roads, other than national highways, as specified under sub -clause ( b) of 
clause (viii) of section 10, after deducting the reserve ke pt by the Central Government for State road 
schemes of inter -State and economic importance, shall be allocated to various States and Union te rritories 
in such manner as may be dec ided by the Central Government:  
2[Provided that the Central Government may use the share of the Fund under sub -clause ( a) of clause 
(viii) of section 10 for the repayment of any loan taken f or the purpose of development of  rural  roads in 
any State or Union territory.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 18 of 2005 , s. 121 (w. e. f. 13-5-2005). 
2. Ins. by  Act 28 of 2007,  s.3 (w. e. f. 21-3-2007 ). 
 6 
 (2) The portion of the Fund allocated for expenditure in the various States and Union territories shall 
be retained by the Central Government until it is actually required for expenditure.  
(3) If in the opinion of the Central Government, the Government of any State or the administration of 
any U nion territory has at any time — 
(a) failed to take such steps as the Central Government may recommend for the regulation and 
control of motor vehicles within the State or the Union territory; or  
(b) delayed without reasonable cause the application of any portion of the Fund allocated or r e-
allocated, as the case may be, for expenditure within the State or Union territory,  
the Central Government may resume the whole or part of any sums which it may have at that time held 
for expenditure in that State or the Union territory.  
(4) All sums r esumed by the Central Government from the account of any State Government or 
Union territory administration as aforesaid shall be re -allocated between the credit accounts of the 
defaulting and other State Gov ernments and Union territory adm inistrations in the ratio of the main 
allocation for the financial year preceding the year in which the re -allocation is made.  
(5) The balance to the credit of the Fund in respect of any allocation shall not lapse at the end of the 
financial year.  
12. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) specify the projects in respect of which the funds may be disbursed under section 7;  
(b) the manner in which the accounts shall be maintained and the annual statement of accounts 
may be prepared including the profit and lo ss account and the balance -sheet under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 8;  
(c) the manner in which the schemes for development and maintenance of State roads of inter -
State and economic importance are to be formulated and sanctioned under section 10;  
(d) any o ther matter for which rule is to be made, or may be, prescribed.  
13. Rules made under this Act to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be compri sed in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if , before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that 
the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect  only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
14. Provisions relating to existing Central roa d Fund .—With effect from the appointed day the 
Central Road Fund governed by the Parliamentary Resolution dated the 13th May, 1988 (hereafter 
referred to in this section as the existing Fund) shall be deemed to be the Fund e stablished under this Act 
and,— 
(a) all schemes relating to development and maintenance of national highways and State roads 
sanctioned under the existing Fund in so far as such schemes are relatable to the schemes under this 
Act, shall be deemed to be the sch emes sanctioned under this A ct; 7 
 (b) all funds accrued under the existing Fund including assets and liabilities shall be transferred to 
the Fund established under this Act.  
15. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Central Road Fund Ordinance, 2000 (Ord.  5 of 2000) is hereby 
repealed.  
(2) Notwit hstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
  8 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
Sl. No Name of item  Rate of duty  
(1) (2) (3) 
1. Motor spirit commonly known as petrol  Rupee one per litre  
2. High speed diesel oil  Rupee one per litre  
 
--------------------------The Chemical Weapons Convention Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION ACT, 2000  
____________  
ARRNGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
____________  
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIO NS 
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Application of the Convention.  
4. Power of Central Government to deny the request for inspection.  
5. Power of Central Government to declare Cessation of the Act.  
CHAPTER II  
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL AUTHORITY AND ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS  
6. Establishment of National Authority.  
7. Powers and functions of National Authority.  
8. National Authority to submit initial, annual and other periodical declaration to Organization . 
9. Appointment of enforcement officers.  
10. Power of National Authority to issue directions.  
11. Power of Ce ntral Government to constitute Committee.  
12. Power of National Authority to call for information, etc.  
CHAPTER III  
PROHIBITION AND REGULATION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND TOXIC CHEMICALS  
13. Prohibition to develop, produce, acquire, etc., Chemical Weapons.  
14. Knowledge about Old or Abandoned Chemical Weapons to be informed to National Authority.  
15. Prohibition to develop, produce, acquire, etc., Toxic Chemical or Precursor.  
16. Restriction on transfer of Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed in Schedule 2.  
17. Export or import to be m ade in accordance with Export and Import Policy.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF PERSONS AS PRODUCERS , USERS. ETC.  
18. Registration of person engaged in production, etc., of any Toxic Chemical or P recursor.  
CHAPTER V  
INSPECTION, SEARCH, SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE  
19. Power of Inspector to inspect any person or place.  
20. Enforcement officer to enter into any place for examining and testing facility or to conduct 
search.  
21. Certain acts to constitute an offence.  
22. Power to issue warrant and authorisation.  
23. Power of entry, search,  seizure and arrest without warrant or authorisation.  
24. Power of seizure and arrest in public places.  
25. Procedure where seizure of goods liable to confiscation not possible.  
26. Power to stop and search conveyance.  
27. Conditions under which search of persons be condu cted.  
28. Provisions of Act 2 of 1974 to apply to arrests, searches and seizures.  
29. Disposal of persons arrested and goods seized.  
30. Power to invest officers of the National Authority, etc., with powers of an officer in charge of a 
police station.  
31. Police to take c harge of goods seized and delivered.  
32. Report of arrest and seizure.  2 
 SECTIONS  
33. Liability of Toxic Chemical, Precursor and conveyance to confiscation.  
34. Confiscation of Goods used for concealing Toxic Chemicals or Precursors.  
35. Confiscation of sale proceeds of goods.  
36. Procedure in making confiscation.  
37. Power to call for information, etc.  
38. Information as to commission of offences.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
39. Punishment for failure to register.  
40. Punishment for contravention in relation to development, production, etc., of Chemical Weapons 
or riot control agents, etc.  
41. Punishment for contravention in relation to Toxic Chemicals, etc., listed in Schedule 1.  
42. Punishment for contravention in relation to transfer of Toxic Chemical, etc., listed in Schedule 2.  
43. Punishment for contravention in relation to export or import of Toxic Chemicals, etc.  
44. Punishment for contravention in relation to disclosure of confidential information.  
45. Punishment for contravention in relation to  denial of access.  
46. Punishment for contraven tion in relation to failure to furnish information, declaration or return.  
47. Offence punishable under section 46 to be cognizable.  
48. Offences by companies.  
49. Prosecution of offences.  
50. Appeals from the decision of National Authority.  
51. Provisions of Convention not t o apply to certain mixtures.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
52. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
53. Power to delegate.  
54. Officers to be public servants.  
55. Removal of difficulties.  
56. Power to make rules.  
THE SCHEDULE.  3 
 THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 34 OF 2000  
[26th August , 2000 .] 
An Act to give effect to the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, 
Stockpiling  and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction and to provide for 
matters connected therewith  or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  a Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of  
Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction was signed on behalf of the Government of India at Paris  on 
the 14th day of January, 1993;  
AND WHEREAS  India, having ratified the said Convention, has to make provisions for giving effect 
thereto  and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Chemical  
Weapons Convention Act, 2000.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India, and it shall apply to — 
(a) citizens of India outside India; and  
(b) associates, branches or subsidiaries, outside India of companies or bodies corporate,  registered 
or incorporated in India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official  Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appoin ted for different provisions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Article ” means an Article of the Convention;  
(b) “Chemical Weapons ” means, — 
(i) the  Toxic Chemicals and their precursors, except where intended for purposes not 
prohibited  under the Convention, as long as the types and quantities are consistent with such 
purposes;  
(ii) the munitions and devices, specifically designed to cause death or ot her harm through the  
toxic properties of those Toxic Chemicals specified in sub -clause ( i), which would be released as  
a result of the employment of such munitions and devices;  
(iii) any  equipment specifically designed for use directly in connection with the employment 
of munitions and devices specified in sub -clause ( ii),  
together or separately;  
(c) “Convention ” means the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, 
Stockpiling  and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction signed on behalf of the 
Government of India at  Paris on the 14th day of January, 1993;  
(d) “enforcement officer ” means a person appointed as such by the Central Government under 
sub-section  (1) of section 9 or by the State Government under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(e) “goods ”, in relation to Toxic Chemicals, Precursors or Discrete Organic Chemicals including 
those  Discrete Organic Chemicals containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or f luorine, means 
any material, commodity, article or compound consisting of such Toxic Chemicals, Precursors or 
Discrete  Organic Chemicals including those Discrete Organic Chemicals containing elements of 
phosphorous,  sulphur or fluorine and includes materia ls, commodities, articles, compounds or 
apparatus used in the  production, processing or storing of Toxic Chemicals, Precursors or Discrete 
                                                           
1. 1st July, 2005 (except sections 18 and 39), vide notification No. S.O. 818(E), dated 13th June, 2005, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 Organic Chemicals  including those Discrete Organic Chemicals containing elements of phosphorous, 
sulphur or fluorine;  
(f) “industry ” includes a Facility;  
(g) “Inspector ” means an individual designated by the Technical Secretariat, according to the  
procedures as set forth in Part II, Section A, of the Verification Annex to the Convention, to carry out  
an inspection or visit in accordance with the Convention;  
(h) “National Authority ” means the National Authority for the Chemical Weapons Convention  
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(i) “Organization ” means the Organization  for the prohibition of Chemical Wea pons established  
pursuant to Article VIII;  
(j) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(k) “purposes not prohibi ted under the Convention ” means — 
(i) industrial, agricultural, research, medical, pharmaceutical or other peaceful purposes;  
(ii) protective purposes namely those purposes directly related to protection against Toxic  
Chemicals and to protection against Chemical Weapons;  
(iii) military purposes not connected with the use of Chemical Weapons and not dependant on  
the use of the Toxic Properties of Chemicals as a method of warfare; and  
(iv) law enforcement including domestic riot control purposes;  
(l) “State Party ” means a signatory or acceding State to the Convention whose instrument of  
ratification or accession has been deposite d with the Depository of the Convention;  
(m) words and expressions used in this Act and not defined but defined in the Convention, or the 
Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them 
in that  Convention  or Code.  
3. Application of the Convention .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any  
other law, the provisions of the Convention set out in the Schedule to this Act shall have the force of  law 
in India.  
(2) The Central Government may, from time to time and by notification in the Official Gazette, 
amend  the Schedule in conformity with any amendments, duly made and adopted, of the provisions of the 
said Convention set out therein.  
4. Power of Central Government to deny the request for ins pection .—Where the Central  
Government considers any inspection of a Chemical Weapons Production Facility in India under this Act  
to be against the interest of national security or economic interests of India, it may deny the request  for 
such inspection.  
5. Power of Central Government to declare Cessation of the Act .—The Central Government may,  
by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that this Act shall cease to be in force in case the  
Government of India withdraws from the Convention in accordance with the provisions of Article XVI,  
and on such declaration this Act shall cease to be in force, but its expiry under the operation of this  
section shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered under, this Act or any rule  made 
there under or any order made under any such rule, or  
(b) any right privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred under this Act or any  
rule made there under or any order made under any such rule, or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any offence under this Act, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right , privilege,  
obligation, liab ility, penalty, fo rfeiture or punishment as afore said,  
and any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be instituted, continued or  enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had not  expired.  
 5 
 CHAPTER II 
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL AUTHORITY AND ITS POWERS AND FUNCTIONS  
6. Establishment of National Authority .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government  
shall establish, by notification in the Official Gazette, an Authority to be known as the National  Authority 
for implementing the provisions of the Convention which shall consist of a Chairperson and  such number 
of Directors as may be appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint officers and such other employe es to the National Authority  
as it thinks fit for the purposes of this Act . 
(3) The salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the 
Chairperson  and the Directors shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The salary and all owances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, officers and  
other employees of the National Authority shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(5) In the exercise of its powers and performance of its functions under this Act, the National 
Authority  shall be subject to the control of the Central Government.  
7. Powers and functions of National Authority .—(1) Subject to the provisi ons of this Act, — 
(a) it shall be the general duty of t he National Authority to fulfil , on behalf of the Government  of 
India, the obligations under the Convention;  
(b) it shall be incumbent on the National Authority to act as the national focal point for effective  
liaison with the Organization  and other States Parties on matters relating to the Convention.  
(2) Subject t o the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the functions of the National Authority shall be to — 
(a) interact with the Organistion and other States Parties for the purpose of fulfilling the  
obligations of the Government of India under the Convention;  
(b) monitor compliance with the provisions of the Convention;  
(c) regulate and monitor the development, production, processing, consumption, transfer or use  of 
Toxic Chemicals or Precursors as specified in the Convention;  
(d) make request to, or to receive request fro m, a State Party for assistance and protection  under 
Article X, against the use or threat of use of Chemical Weapons;  
(e) manage routine inspection or Challenge Inspection or managing investigation, in case a  
complaint of use of Chemical Weapons or riot control agents as a method of warfare is received  from 
the Organization ; 
(f) conduct inspections for the purposes of this Act;  
(g) interact with the Organization  in respect of acceptance of request of India for Challenge  
Inspection or to counter any frivol ous or defamatory request made by any State Party against  India to 
the Organization ; 
(h) scrutinise and accept list of Inspectors and to verify the Approved Equipment brought by an  
Inspection Team on to the Inspection Site;  
(i) provide escort to the Inspec tion Team and the Observer within the territory of India;  
(j) identify and oversee the closure and destruction of Chemical Weapons, Chemical Weapons  
Production Facilities, Old Chemical Weapons or Abandoned Chemical Weapons;  
(k) negotiate Managed Access dur ing the Challenge Inspection;  
(l) ensure decontamination of Approved Equipment after completion of an Inspection;  
(m) advise Central Government for laying down safeguards for transportation, sampling or  
storage of Chemical Weapons and fixation of standards  for emission or discharge of  environmental 
pollutants arising out of the destruction of Chemical Weapons, Old Chemical  Weapons, Abandoned 
Chemical Weapons or Chemical Weapons Production Facility;  6 
 (n) ensure  data base confidentiality and maintain secrecy of confidential information and  
technology collected or received by the National Authority under this Act;  
(o) facilitate exchange of scientific and technological information relating to developments in  
chemicals amongst the States Parties;  
(p) call for such information from any person which the National Authority has reasonable cause  
to believe that such information may be required for complying with the provisions of the  
Convention;  
(q) approve and decl are, on behalf of the Government of India, a single small -scale facility for  
production of Toxic Chemicals listed in Schedule 1 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention  for 
purposes not prohibited under the Convention;  
(r) provide training to enforcemen t officers;  
(s) ensure protection of environment, health and safety of the people during transportation,  
sampling, storage or destruction of Chemical Weapons, Chemical Weapons Production Facilities,  Old 
Chemical Weapons or Abandoned Chemical Weapons;  
(t) co-ordinate exchange of scientific and technological information among laboratories handling  
Toxic Chemicals or Precursors;  
(u) determine, from time to time, the quantity limit that a person at any time may produce,  
otherwise acquire, retain, transfer or us e any Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed in any of the  
Schedules 1 to 3 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention, any Discrete Organic Chemical  
including Discrete Organic Chemical containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine for  
purposes not prohibited under the Convention;  
(v) such other functions as may be prescribed.  
8. National Authority to submit initial, annual and other periodical declarations to  
Organization .—The National Authority shall prepare such initial, annual and other periodical  
declarations regarding Toxic Chemicals or Precursors listed in any of the Schedules 1 to 3 in the Annex  
on Chemicals to the Convention, Discrete Organic Chemicals including those Discrete Organic  
Chemicals containing elements of phosphorous, sul phur or fluorine, Chemical Weapons, Old Chemical  
Weapons, Abandoned Chemical Weapons, riot control agents, Chemical Weapons Production Facilities,  
past transfers of Chemical Weapons or their production equipments or any other declaration required  to 
be mad e under the Convention and shall submit such declarations to the Organization  at such time  as are 
specified under the Convention.  
9. Appointment of enforcement officers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the  
Official Gazette, appoint such of the officers of the National Authority 1[or of the Central Government]  as 
it thinks fit to be enforcement officers for the purposes of this Act:  
1[Provided that such officers shall fulfil the prescribed criteria.]  
(2) The State Government may, as and when so directed by the Central Government and by  
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint such of its officers of gazetted rank as it thinks fit to be  
enforcement officers for the purposes of this Act and assign to them such local limits as it may th ink fit.  
(3) Every officer appointed as enforcement officer under sub -section ( 1) or under sub -section ( 2) shall  
be furnished by the Central Government or by the State Government, as the case may be, with a  
certificate of appointment as an enforcement offi cer and the certificate shall, on demand, be produced  by 
such enforcement officer.  
10. Power of National Authority to issue directions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any  
other law but subject to the provisions of this Act ,the National Authority may, in the exercise of its  
powers and performance of its functions under this Act, issue directions in writing to any person, officer  
or authority and such person, officer or authority shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 2012, s.  2 (w.e.f. 23 -11-2012).  7 
 Explanation .—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue direction 
under  this sectio n includes the power to direct — 
(a) the closure, prohibition or regulation of any company, firm or industry engaged in the 
development,  production, processing, co nsumption or use of any Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed 
in any of the  Schedules 1 to 3 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention or, the production of any 
Discrete  Organic Chemical including Discrete Organic Chemicals containing elements of 
phosphorou s, sulphur or  fluorine; or  
(b) the stoppage or regulation of the supply of electricity or water or any other service to such  
company, firm or industry.  
11. Power of Central Government to constitute Committee .—The Central Government may, if it  
considers it necessary or expedient so to do for the purposes of this Act, by order, published in the  
Official Gazette, constitute a Committee by such name as may be specified in the order for the purpose  of 
overseeing the functions of the National Authority and exerci sing and performing such of the powers  and 
functions of the Central Government under this Act (except the power to make rules under section  56) as 
may be specified in the order and subject to the supervision and control of the Central  Government and 
the pr ovisions of such order, such Committee may exercise the powers or perform the  functions so 
specified in the order as if such Committee had been empowered by this Act to exercise  those powers or 
perform those functions.  
12. Power of National Authority to ca ll for information, etc .—(1) Notwithstanding anything  
contained in any other law for the time being in force, the National Authority may, by general or special  
order, call upon a person, to furnish to that Authority periodically or as and when required any  
information, declaration or return concerning Toxic Chemicals or Precursors listed in any of the  
Schedules 1 to 3 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention, Chemical Weapons, Old Chemical  
Weapons, Abandoned Chemical Weapons, Chemical Weapons Production Facilities, riot control agents,  
single small -scale facility or Discrete Organic Chemicals including those Discrete Organic Chemicals  
containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine with such particulars as may be specified by  the 
National Authorit y. 
(2) No person shall, when complying with any requisition made under sub -section ( 1), give any  
information or furnish any declaration, return or statement which he knows, or has reasonable cause to  
believe to be false or not true in any material particul ar. 
CHAPTER III  
PROHIBITION AND REGULATION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND TOXIC CHEMICALS  
13. Prohibition to develop, produce, acquire, etc., Chemical Weapons .—(1) No person shall — 
(a) develop, produce, otherwise acquire, stockpile, retain or use Chemical Weapons  or transfer, 
directly  or indirectly, any Chemical Weapons to any person;  
(b) use riot control agents as a method of warfare;  
(c) engage in any military preparations to use Chemical Weapons;  
(d) assist, encourage or induce, in any manner, any person to eng age in — 
(i) the use of any riot control agent as a method of warfare;  
(ii) any other activity prohibited to a State Party under the Convention.  
(2) The prohibition contained in sub -section ( 1) shall not apply to the retention or possession of  
Chemical Weap ons, which are permitted by the Convention, pending destruction of such Weapons.  
14. Knowledge about Old or Abandoned Chem ical Weapons to be informed to N ational  
Authority .—Any person having knowledge about the possession or location of Old Chemical Weapons 
or Abandoned Chemical Weapons shall inform the National Authority of such possession and the precise  
location of such Old Chemical Weapons or Abandoned Chemical Weapons within seven days from the  
commencement of this Act:  
Provided that where the kn owledge about the possession or location of Old Chemical Weapons or  
Abandoned Chemical Weapons is obtained after the commencement of this Act, an information about  8 
 knowledge of such possession or location shall be given to the National Authority within sev en days  from 
the occurrence of such knowledge.  
15. Prohibition to develop, produce, acq uire, etc., Toxic Chemical or P recursor .—No person  
shall — 
(a) produce, acquire, retain or use toxic Chemicals or Precursors listed in Schedule 1 in the  
Annex on Chemicals to the Convention, outside the territories of States Parties, and shall not transfer  
such Chemicals or Precursors outside the territory of India except to another State Party;  
(b) produce, acquire, retain, transfer or use Toxic Chemicals or Pre cursors listed in Schedule 1 in 
the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention without permission from the  National Authority and 
unless — 
(i) the Toxic Chemicals or Precursors listed in Schedule 1 in the Annex on Chemicals to the  
Convention are for the purposes to  be applied to research, medical, pharmaceutical or  protective 
purposes; and  
(ii) the types of Toxic Chemicals or Precursors are strictly limited to those that can be 
justified  with reference to the purposes specified in sub -clause ( i) and the quantities o f such Toxic  
Chemicals or Precursors for such purposes at any time do not exceed the limits fixed by the  
National Authority;  
(c) transfer the Toxic Chemicals or Precursors listed in Schedule 1 in the Annex on Chemicals to 
the Convention to another St ate Pa rty outside India except — 
(i) for the purposes specified in sub -clause ( i) of clause ( b); and  
(ii) in accordance with the procedure set out in Part VI of the Verification Annex to the  
Convention:  
Provided that no Toxic Chemicals or Precursors referred to in clause ( c) shall be re -transferred to any  
third State.  
1[16. Restriction o n transfer of Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed in Schedule 2 .—No person  
shall transfer to, or receive from, a State which is not a party to the Convention or any person who is  not a 
citizen of a State Party, any Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed in Schedule 2 in the Annex on  Chemicals 
to the Convention.]  
17. Export or import to be made in accordance with Export and Import Policy .—No person 
shall export  from, or import into, India a Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed in any of the Schedules 1 to 
3 in the  Annex on Chemicals to the Convention except in accordance with the provisions of the Export 
and Import Policy determined by the Central Government from time to time under the Foreign Trade  
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1992  (22 of 1992)  and the O rders issued thereunder.  
CHAPTER IV  
REGISTRATION OF PERSONS AS PRODUCERS, USERS, ETC.  
18. Registration of persons engaged in production, etc., of any Toxic Chemical or          
Precursor .—(1) 2[Subject to such exemptions and thresholds as may be prescribed, every person who is] 
engaged  in the production, processing, acquisition, consumption, transfer, import, export or use of any 
Toxic  Chemical or Precursor listed in any of the S chedules 1 to 3 in the Annex on Chemicals to the  
Convention or, engaged in the production of any Discrete Organic Chemical including Discrete Organic  
Chemicals containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine shall make, within thirty days from  
the commencement of this Act, an application for registration of his name, as a producer, processor,  
acquirer, consumer, transferor, importer, exporter or user of any Toxic Chemical or Precursor or, as the  
case may be, as a producer of any Discrete Organic Che micals including Discrete Organic Chemicals  
containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine, to such registration authority as the Central  
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 2012, s. 3, for se ction 16 (w.e.f. 23 -11-2012).  
2. Subs. by  s. 4, ibid.,  for “Every person who is”  (w.e.f. 23 -11-2012).  9 
 (2) 1[Subject to such exemptions and thresholds as may be prescribed, no person, who after the  
coming into force of this section], desires to produce, process, acquire, consume, transfer, import,  export 
or use any Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed in any of the Schedules 1 to 3 in the Annex on  Chemicals 
to the Convention or, desires to produce any Discrete Organic Chemical including Discrete  Organic 
Chemicals containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine, shall commence business  unless such 
person has applied to the r egistration authority specified under sub -section ( 1) for registration of his name 
as a producer, processor, acquirer, consumer, transferor, importer, exporter or  user of any Toxic Chemical 
or Precursor or, as the case may be, as a producer of any Discrete  Organic  Chemical including Discrete 
Organic Chemicals containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine.  
(3) The form of application to be made to the registration authority under sub -section ( 1) or                   
sub-section  (2), the particulars  to be contained in such application form, the manner in which such  
application shall be made, the fee payable on such application, the form of certificate of registration,  the 
procedure to be followed in granting or cancelling certificate of registration shall be such as may be  
prescribed.  
(4) On receipt of the application referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the registration  
authority shall, if the application is in the prescribed form, register the name of the applicant and grant  
him a certificate of registration 2[subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed].  
(5) The certificate of registration granted in pursuance of this section shall be valid for a period  
specified therein and may be renewed from time to time for such further period and on payment of  such 
fee as may be prescribed.  
2[(6) Every person, to whom a certificate of registration is granted under sub -section ( 4), shall furnish  
to the Central Government periodically, or, as and when required, such informatio n, declaration or  return 
as may be prescribed.]  
CHAPTER V  
INSPECTION, SEARCH, SEIZURE AND FORFEITURE  
19. Power of Inspector to inspect any person or place .—(1) An Inspector may inspect — 
(a) any perso n who is engaged in — 
(i) the production, processing, acquisition, consumption, transfer, import, export or use of any  
Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed in any of the Schedules 1 to 3 in the Annex on Chemicals to  
the Convention; or  
(ii) the production of any Discrete Organic Chemical including those Discrete  Organic 
Chemicals  containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine;  
(b) any place where any Chemical Weapon, Old Chemical Weapon or Abandoned Chemical  
Weapon is located or Chemical Weapon Production Facility exists,  
for the purposes specified in  the Verification Annex to the Convention.  
(2) An Inspection Team may undertake a Challenge Inspection of any Facility or location pursuant to  
Article IX and such inspection shall be undertaken in accordance with the provisions of the Verification  
Annex to the Convention.  
(3) The Inspection Team may, while carrying out a Challenge Inspection, be accompanied by an  
Observer to observe the conduct of the Challenge Inspection.  
(4) An enforcement officer shall accompany the Inspector or Inspection Team to observe  all 
verification  activities carried out by the Inspector or Inspection Team and to provide the Inspector or 
Inspection  Team, during the inspection, with such clarifications in connection with an ambiguity that may 
arise  during an inspection as may be nece ssary to remove such ambiguity.  
(5) Every Inspector  or Inspection Team shall have — 
(a) the right to interview any Facility personnel in the presence of enforcement officer for the  
purpose of establishing relevant facts;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 2012, s. 4, for “No person, who after the commencement of this Act”  (w.e.f. 23 -11-2012).  
2. Ins. by s.  4, ibid. (w.e.f. 23 -11-2012).  10 
 (b) the right to request clarificati ons in connection with ambiguities that may arise during  
inspection;  
(c) the right to demand production of such documentation and records which are relevant and  
necessary for the purpose of inspection;  
(d) the  right to take photographs of an object or a building located within the Inspection Site if  
question relating to that object or building is not resolved;  
(e) the right to draw samples, perform on site analysis of such samples; and  
(f) such other rights as are provided under the Convention.  
(6) An Inspector or Inspection Team shall, during the conduct of verification activities or Challenge  
Inspection, enjoy the privileges and immunities referred to in Part II of the Verification Annex to the  
Convention.  
(7) No sample drawn under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 5) by an Inspector or Inspection Team shall be  
sent for analysis in any laboratory situated outside the territory of India.  
20. Enforcement officer to enter int o any place for examining and te sting facility  or to  conduct 
search .—(1) Any enforcement officer shall have the right to enter with such assistance as he  considers 
necessary, any buildi ng or place for the purpose of — 
(a) verifying  the correctness of any information, declaration or return furnished under                            
sub-section  (2) of section 12;  
(b) performing any of the functions of the National Authority entrusted to him;  
(c) determining whether any provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder or any direction  
given under this Act is being complied with by any person engaged in the production,  processing, 
acquisition, consumption, transfer, import, export or use of any Toxic Chemical or  Precursor listed in 
any of the Schedules 1 to 3 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention or  engaged in the 
production of any Discrete Organic Chemical including Discrete Organic Chemical  containing 
elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine;  
(d) examining or testing any f acility, record, document or any other material object, as the case  
may be, or conducting a search of any place or person;  
(e) conducting a search where a warrant under sub -section ( 1) of section 22 is addressed to  such 
enforcement officer or he is so auth orised under sub -section ( 2) of that section.  
(2) Any enforcement officer shall have a right to accompany the Inspector or Inspection Team  as a 
representative of India during inspection in India.  
21. Certain acts to constitute an offence .—If any person wilfully — 
 (a) refuses without reasonable  excuse to comply with the request made by the Inspector or 
Inspection Team for the purpose of  facilitating the conduct of that inspection in accordance with the 
Verification Annex to the Convention;  
(b) delays or o bstructs any member of the Inspection Team, Inspector, enforcement officer or  the 
Observer in the conduct of inspection;  
(c) removes or tampers with any on -site instrument or Approved Equipment installed by the  
enforcement officer, Inspector or Inspection Team with the intention of adversely affecting the  
operation o f such instrument or Equipment,  
he shall be guilty of an offence punishable under  this Act.  
22. Power to issue warrant and authori sation .—(1) A Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial  
Magistrate of the first class or any Magistrate of the second class specially empowered by the State  
Government in this behalf, may issue a warrant for the arrest of any person whom he has reason to  believe 
to have committed any offence punishable under Chapter VI or  for the search, whether by day  or by night, 
of any industry, building, conveyance or place in which he has reason to believe that any  goods in relation 
to which an offence punishable under Chapter VI has been committed or any  document or other goods 
which  may furnish evidence of the commission of such offence is kept or  concealed.  11 
 (2) Any enforcement officer or such other officer of the National Authority as is empowered in this  
behalf by general or special order by the Central Government or any such offic er of a State  Government 
as is empowered in this behalf by general or special order of the State Government, if he  has reason to 
believe from personal knowledge or information given by any person and taken down in  writing that any 
person has committed an o ffence punishable under Chapter VI or any goods in relation  to which an 
offence punishable under Chapter VI has been committed or any document or other goods  which may 
furnish evidence of the commission of such offence has been kept or concealed in any  industry, building, 
conveyance or place, may authorise any officer subordinate to him to arrest such  person or search an 
industry or a building, conveyance or place, whether by day or by night, or himself  arrest a person or 
search an industry or a building, c onveyance or place.  
(3) The officer to whom a warrant under sub -section ( 1) is addressed and the officer who authorised  
the arrest or search or such subordinate officer who is so authorised under sub -section ( 2) shall have  all 
the powers of an officer acti ng under section 23.  
23. Power of entry, search, seizure and arrest without warrant or authori sation .—(1) Any such  
subordinate officer to the enforcement officer as is authorised in this behalf by general or special order  by 
the Central Government or any such subordinate officer to the enforcement officer as is authorised  in this 
behalf by general or special order of the State Government, if he has reason to believe from  personal 
knowledge or information given by any person and taken down in writing, that any goods in  relation  to 
which an offence punishable under Chapter VI has been committed or any document or  goods which may 
furnish evidence of the commission of such offence is kept or concealed in any  industry, building, 
conveyance or place, m ay, between  sunrise and sunset, — 
(a) enter into and search any such industry, building, conveyance or place;  
(b) in case of resistance, break open any door and remove any obstacle to such entry;  
(c) seize such Chemical Weapons, Chemical Weapons Production Facilities,  riot control agents,  
Old Chemical Weapons, Abandoned Chemical Weapons, Toxic Chemicals or Precursors or  Discrete 
Organic Chemicals including those Discrete Organic Chemicals containing elements of  phosphorous, 
sulphur or fluorine, all goods and any convey ance which he has reason to believe  to be liable to 
confiscation under this Act and any document or other goods which he has reason  to believe may 
furnish evidence of the commission of any offence punishable under Chapter VI  relating to such 
Chemical Weapo ns, Chemical Weapons Production Facilities, riot control agents,  Old Chemical 
Weapons, Abandoned Chemical Weapons, Toxic Chemicals, Precursors or Discrete  Organic 
Chemicals including those Discrete Organic Chemicals containing elements of  phosphorous, sulp hur 
or fluorine; and  
(d) detain and search, if he thinks proper, arrest any person whom he has reason to believe to  have 
committed any offence punishable under Chapter VI relating to such Chemical Weapons,  Chemical 
Weapons Production Facilities, riot contr ol agents, Old Chemical Weapons, Abandoned  Chemical 
Weapons, Toxic Chemicals or Pre cursors or Discrete Organic Chemicals including  those Discrete 
Organic Chemicals containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine:  
Provided that if such subordinate officer has reason to believe that search warrant or  authorisation 
cannot be obtained without affording opportunity for the concealment of evidence  or facility for the 
escape of an offender, he may enter and search such industry, building,  conveyance or pl ace at any time 
between sunset and sunrise after recording the grounds of his  belief.  
(2) Where an officer takes down any information in writing under sub -section ( 1) or records grounds  
for his belief under the proviso thereto, he shall forthwith send a co py thereof to his immediate  superior 
officer.  
24. Power of seizure and arrest in public places .—Any subordinate officer to the enforcement  
officer as is authorised in section 23 may — 
(a) seize, in any public place or in transit, any goods, in  relation to which he has reason to believe 
an offence punishable under Chapter VI has been committed,  and, along with such goods, any 
conveyance liable to confiscation under this Act, and any document or  goods which he has reason to 
believe may furnish evidence of the  commission of an offence punishable  under Chapter VI relating 
to such goods;  12 
 (b) detain and search any person whom he has reason to believe to have committed an offence  
punishable under Chapter VI, and, if such person has any Toxic Chemical or Precursor or any  
Discrete Organic Chemical including Discrete Organic Chemicals containing elements of 
phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine in his possession and such  possession appears to him to be unlawful, 
arrest him and any other person in his company.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of  this section, the expression “public place ” includes any public 
conveyance, shop, hotel or other  place intended for use by, or accessible to, the public.  
25. Procedure where seizure of goods liable to confiscation not possible .—(1) Where it is not  
practicable to seize any goods which are liable to confiscation under this Act, any officer authorised  under 
section 23 may serve on the owner or person in possession of the goods, an order that he shall  not 
remove, part with or otherwise d eal with the goods except with the previous permission of such  officer.  
(2) For effecting seizure and confiscation, the owner, the plant operator and other officials of the  
facility shall provide all assistance with regard to safety in handling of goods.  
26. Power to stop and search conveyance .—Any subordinate officer authorised under section 23  
may, if he has reason to suspect that any conveyance is, or is likely to be, used for the transport of any  
goods in respect of which he suspects that any provision of this Act has been, or is being, or is likely to  
be, contravened at any time, stop such conveyance, or in the case of an aircraft compel it to land and — 
(a) rummage and search the conveyance or part thereof;  
(b) examine and search any goods in the convey ance;  
(c) if it becomes necessary to stop the conveyance, he may use all lawful means for stopping it.  
27. Conditions under which search of persons be conducted .—(1) When any subordinate officer  
authorised under section 23 or any subordinate officer exerci sing power in pursuance of sub -section ( 3) of 
section 22 is about to search any person under the provisions of section 22 or section 23 or section  24, he 
shall, if such person so requires, take such person without unnecessary delay to the nearest  enforcement 
officer or the officer authorising such search or the nearest Magistrate.  
(2) If such requisition is made, the officer may detain the person until he can bring him before the  
officer or the Magistrate referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(3) The off icer or the Magistrate before whom any such person is brought shall, if he sees no  
reasonable ground for search, forthwith discharge the person but otherwise shall direct that search be  
made.  
(4) No female shall be searched by anyone excepting a female.  
28. Provisions of Act 2 of 1974 to apply to arrests, searches and seizures .—The provisions of the  
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 shall apply, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions  of 
this Act, to all  warrants issued and arrests, se arches and seizures made under this Act.  
29. Disposal  of persons arrested and goods seized .—(1) Any officer arresting a person under 
section 22 or section 23 or section 24 shall, as soon as may  be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest.  
(2) Every perso n arrested and goods seized under warrant issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 22  
shall be forwarded without unnecessary delay to the Magistrate by whom the warrant was issued.  
(3) Every person arrested and goods seized under sub -section ( 2) of section 22 or section 23 or 
section  24 shall be forwarded without unnecessary delay to — 
(a) the officer in charge of the nearest police  station; or  
(b) the officer empowered under section 30.  
(4) The authority or officer to whom any person or goods is forwarded under sub -section ( 2) or             
sub-section  (3) shall, with all convenient despatch, take such measures as may be necessary for the  
disposal according to law of such person or goods.  
30. Power to invest officers of the National Authority, etc., with p owers of an officer in  charge of 
a police station .—(1) The Central Government may, after consultation with the State  Government, by 
notification published in the Official Gazette, inves t any officer of the National Authority  with the powers 
of an officer in charge of a police station for the investigation of the offences under this  Act. 13 
 (2) The State Government may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, invest any of officer 
of gazetted rank or any class of such officers with the powers of an officer in charge of a police station for  
the investigation of the offences under this Act.  
31. Police to take charge of goods seized and delivered .—An officer in charge of a police station  
shall take charge of and keep in safe custody, pending the orders of the Magistrate, all goods seized  under 
this Act within the local area of that police station and which may be delivered to him, and shall  allow 
any officer who may accompany such goods to the police station or who may be deputed for the  purpose, 
to affi x his seal to such goods or to take samples of and from them and all samples so taken  shall also be 
sealed with a seal of the officer in charge of the police station.  
32. Report of arrest and seizure .—Whenever any person makes any arrest or seizure under this Act, 
he shall, within forty -eight hours next after such arrest or seizure, make a full report of all the particulars  
of such arrest or seizure to his immediate superior officer.  
33. Liability of Toxic Chemicals, Precursors and conveyance to confiscati on.—(1) Whenever any  
offence punishable under Chapter VI has been committed, the goods or in respect of which or by  means 
of which such offence has been committed, shall be liable o confiscation.  
(2) Any Toxic Chemical or Precursor lawfully produced, impor ted into India, transported, used,  
purchased or sold along with, or in addition to, any goods which is liable to confiscation under                        
sub-section  (1) and the receptacles, packages and coverings i n which any goods liable to confiscation  
under  sub-section ( 1), is found, and the other contents, if any, of such receptacles or packages shall 
likewise  be liable to confiscation.  
(3) Any conveyance used in carrying any goods liable to confiscation under sub -section ( 1) or             
sub-section  (2) shall be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of the conveyance proves that it was used  
without the knowledg e or connivance of the owner him self, his agent, if any, and the person in charge of  
the conveyance and that each of them had ta ken all reasonable precautions against such use.  
34. Confiscation of goods used for concealing Toxic Chemicals or Precursors .—Any Goods used  
for concealing any goods which is liable to confiscation under this Act shall also be liable to  confiscation.  
Expla nation .—In this section, “Goods ” includes conveyance as a means of transport.  
35. Confiscation of sale proceeds of goods .—Where any goods is sold by a person having 
knowledge  or reason to believe that the goods is liable to confiscation under this Act, the  sale proceeds 
thereof  shall also be liable to confiscation.  
36. Procedure in making confiscation .—(1) In the trial of offences under this Act, whether the  
accused is convicted or acquitted or discharged, the court shall decide whether any goods seized und er 
this Act is liable to confiscation and, if it decides  that the goods is so liable, it may order confiscation  
accordingly.  
(2) Where any goods seized under this Act appears to be liable to confiscation under section 33 or  
section 34 or section 35, but the person who committed the offence therewith is not known or cannot  be 
found, the court may inquire  into and decide such l iability, and may order confiscation accordingly:  
Provided that no order of confiscation of any goods shall be made until the expiry  of one month from  
the date of seizure, or without hearing any person who may claim any right thereto and the evidence,  if 
any, which he produces in respect of his claim.  
(3) Any person not convicted who claims any right to property which has been confiscated under this  
section may appeal to the Court of Session against the order of confiscation.  
37. Power to call for information, etc .—Any subordinate officer authorised under section 23 may,  
during the course of any inquiry in connection with the contravention of any provision of this Act, — 
(a) call for information from any person for the purpose of satisfying himself whether there has  
been any contravention of the provisions of this Act or any rule or order made or direction  issued 
thereunder;  
(b) require any person to produce or deliver any document or thing useful or relevant to the  
enquiry;  
 14 
 (c) examine any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case.  
38. Information as to commission of offences .—No enforcement officer, subord inate officer to  
enforcement officer or officer of the National Authority or the State Government or officer subordinate  to 
such officer as is mentioned in sub -section ( 2) of section 22 acting in exercise of powers vested in  him 
under any provision of this  Act or any such order made thereunder shall be compelled to say when  he got 
any information as to the commission of any offence.  
CHAPTER VI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
39. Punishment for failure to register .—Whoever — 
(a) before the commencement of this Act had  been engaged in development, production,  
processing, acquisition, consumption, transfer, import, export or use of any Toxic Chemical or  
Precursor listed in any of the Schedules 1 to 3 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention or  
engaged in the productio n of any Discrete Organic Chemical including Discrete Organic  Chemicals 
containing elements of phosphorous, sulphur or fluorine and continues to be, after  such 
commencement, so engaged; or  
(b) after the commencement of this Act produces, processes, acquire s, consumes, transfers,  
imports, exports or uses any Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed in any of the Schedules 1 to 3 in  the 
Annex on Chemicals to the Convention or produces any Discret e Organic Chemical including  
Discrete Organic Chemicals containing ele ments of ph osphorous, sulphur or fluorine,  
without  complying with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or, as the case may be, sub -section ( 2) of section 
18 shall, unless his name is registered in accordance with the provisions of that section,  be punishable 
with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, and in the case of continuing  default, with a further fine 
which may extend to one lakh rupees every day during which such  default continues after conviction for 
the first default or with imprisonment for a te rm which  may extend to three years, or w ith both.  
40. Punishment for contravention in relation to development, production, etc., of Chemical  
Weapons or riot control agents, etc .—Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act,  develops, 
produces, otherwise acquires, stockpiles, retains or uses Chemical Weapons, transfers,  directly or 
indirectly, any Chemical Weapon to any person, uses any riot control agent as a method of  warfare, 
engages in any military preparations to use Chemical Weapons, assist s, encourages or induces  in any 
manner any person to engage in the use of any riot control agent as a method of warfare or any  other 
activity prohibited to a State Party under the Convention, shall be punishable with imprisonment  for a 
term which shall not  be less than one year but which may extend to term of life and shall also be  liable to 
fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
41. Punishment for contravention in relation to Toxic Chemic als, etc., listed in Schedule 1. —
Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act, produces, acquires, retains, transfers or uses  any 
Toxic Chemical or Precursor listed in Schedule 1 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention for  the 
purposes prohibited to a State Party under the Convention or transfers any Toxic Chemical or  Precursor 
listed in Schedule 1 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention outside India, shall be  punishable wit h 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend to  term of life and 
shall also be liable to fi ne which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
42. Punishment for contravention in relation to transfer of Toxic Chemicals, etc., listed in  
Schedule 2 .—Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act transfers to or receives from 1[a 
State which is not a State Party or any person] who is not a citizen of a State Party any Toxic Chemical  or 
Precursor listed in Schedule 2 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention, shall be punishable with  
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but wh ich may extend to term of life and  
shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
43. Punishment for contravention in relation to export or  import of Toxic Chemicals, etc. —
Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act, exports f rom or imports into India any Toxic  
Chemical or Precursor listed in any of the Schedules 1 to 3 in the Annex on Chemicals to the  Convention, 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but  which may 
extend to term  of life and shall also be liable to fine which may extend to one lakh rupees.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 36 of 2012, s. 5, for “any person”  (w.e.f. 23 -11-2012).  15 
 44. Punishment for contravention in relation to disclosure of co nfidential information. —
Whoever, in contravention of any provision of this Act, divulges any confidential information obtained  by 
the National Authority from any declaration or return furnished or any statement made, information  
supplied to, or obtained by, an enforcement officer during the course of any inspection carried out  under 
the provisions of this Act to any other person, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term  which 
shall not be less than one year but which may extend to term of life and shall also be liable to  fine which 
may extend to one lakh rupees.  
45. Punishment for contravention in relat ion to denial of access .—Whoever does not comply with  
the obligations related to inspection activity under the Convention or delays or obstructs any Inspection  
Team or Inspector or enforcement officer or Observer in performance of his functions or wilfully  removes 
or tampers with any installed on site instrument or any Approved Equipment shall be  punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend  to term of life and 
shall also be liable to fine which may exten d to one lakh rupees.  
46. Punishment for contravention in relation to failure to furnish information, declaration or  
return .—Any person who being required by o r under this Act to furnish any — 
(a) information;  
(b) declaration; or  
(c) return,  
fails to furnish such information, declaration or return shall be punishable with fine which  may extend to 
one lakh rupees, and in the case of continuing default, with a further fine which may  extend to one lakh 
rupees for every day during which such def ault contin ues after conviction for the  first such default, or 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with both.  
47. Offence punishable under section 46 to be cognizable .—Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , the offence punishable under sec tion 46 shall be 
cognizable.  
48. Offences by companies .—(1) Where any offence under Chapter VI has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the  time the offence was committed was in charge of, or wa s responsible 
to, the company for the conduct  of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and  shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in  this s ub-section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence  was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the  commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under Chapter VI has  
been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent  or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretar y or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be  guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate, and includes a firm or other association of  individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner of the firm.  
49. Prosecution of offences .—No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under this 
Act except with the previous sanction of the Central Government or the authority notified by the Central  
Government, in the Official Gazette, to be competent to  sanction  prosecution of the offences under this 
Act. 
50. Appeals from the decision of the National Authority .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any  
direction of the National Authority issued under section 10 may prefer an appeal to the Central  
Government within such time as may be prescribed.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after t he expiry of the period prescribed therefor:  16 
 Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period prescribed therefor if the  
appellant satisfies the Central Government that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appeal  within 
the prescribed period.  
(3) Every appeal made under this section shall be made in such form and shall be accompanied by a  
copy of the direction appealed against and by such fee as may be prescribed.  
(4) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before  disposing of an appeal, the appellant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of 
being heard.  
51. Provisions of Convention not to apply to certain mixtures .—Notwithstanding anything  
contained in this Act, the provisions of the Convention in so far as they relate to — 
(a) restriction or reporting;  
(b) inspection; or  
(c) declaration and verification,  
shall not apply to any mixtures containing such concentration of any  Chemicals specified in Schedule 2 or 
Schedule 3 in the Annex on Chemicals to the Convention as the  Central Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
52. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or a State Government or any officer of the Central Government or of  
a State Government or the Chairperson, Directors, officers and other employees of the National  Authority 
or any other person exercising any powers or discha rging any functions or performing any  duties under 
this Act, for anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule  or order made 
thereunder.  
53. Power to delegate .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  
delegate, subject to such conditions and limitations as may be specified in the notification, such of its  
powers and functions under this Act (except the power to make rules under section 56) as it may deem  
necessary or expedient, to the National Authority or the Committee referred to in section 11.  
(2) The State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, delegate, subject to such  
conditions and limitations as may be specified in the notification, such of its powers and functions  unde r 
this Act, as it may deem necessary or expedient, t o any authority or officer of that Government.  
54. Officers to be public servants .—The Chairperson, Directors, officers and other employees of the  
National Authority or any other person exercising any pow ers or discharging any functions under this  Act 
shall be deemed to be the public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal  Code                    
(45 of 1860) . 
55. Removal of difficulties .—If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the  
Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not  
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appea r to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing  the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years  from the date on 
which this Act receives the assent of the President.  
56. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notifica tion in the Official Gazette,  
make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may  
provide for all or any of the follo wing matters, namely: — 
(a) the salary and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions of service of, the  
Chairperson and the Directors under sub -section ( 3) of section 6, and the salary and allowances  
payable to and other terms and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the  National 
Authority under sub -section ( 4) of that section;  17 
 (b) other functions of the National Authority that may be prescribed under clause ( v) of                     
sub-section  (2) of section 7;  
1[(ba) the criteria which the officers are  required to fulfil under sub -section ( 1) of section 9;]  
2[(c) the exe mptions and thresholds under sub -section s (1) and ( 2) of section 18, the form of  
application, the particulars to be contained in the application form, the form of certificate of  
registration, the manner of making application, the amount of fee payable, the procedure to be  
followed in granting or cancelling certificate of registration under sub -section ( 3) of section 18,  the 
terms and conditions for granting a certificate of regist ration under sub -section ( 4) of section 18, the 
period for which a renewed certificate of registration may be issued and the  amount of fee payable 
therefor under sub -section ( 5) of sub -section 18, and information,  declaration or return to be furnished 
unde r sub -section ( 6) of that section;]  
(d) the time within which appeal may be preferred under sub -section ( 1) of section 50;  
(e) the form for making appeal and the fee to be accompanied therewith under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 50;  
(f) the procedure for disposing of appeal under sub -section ( 4) of section 50;  
(g) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, any declaration made under section 5,  
every order made und er section 55 and every rule made under section 56 shall be laid, as soon as may  be 
after it is issued or made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period  of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or mo re successive sessions, and if,  before 
the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,  both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the notification, order or rule or both Houses agree  that the 
notificat ion, order or rule should not be issued or made, the notification, order or rule shall  thereafter have 
effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however,  that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice  to the validity of anything  previously done under 
that notification, order or rule.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 36 of 2012, s.  6 (w.e.f. 23 -11-2012).  
2. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 23 -11-2012).  18 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 3)  
PROVISIONS OF THE CONVENTION WHICH SHALL HAVE THE FORCE OF LAW  
ARTICLE I  
GENERAL OBLIGATIONS  
1. Each State Party to this Convention undertakes never under any circumstances:  
(a) To develop, produce, otherwise acquire, stockpile or retain Chemical Weapons,  or transfer, 
directly or indirectly, chemical weapons to anyone;  
(b) To use Chemical Weapons;  
(c) To engage in any military preparations to use Chemical Weapons;  
(d) To assist, encourage or induce, in any way, anyone to engage in any activity  prohibited to a 
State Party under this Convention.  
2. Each State Party undertakes to destroy Chemical Weapons  it owns or possesses, or  that are located 
in any place under its jurisdiction or control, in accordance with  the provisions of this Convention.  
3. Each State Party undertakes to destroy all Chemical Weapons it abandoned on the  territory of 
another State Party, in accordance with the provisions of this  Convention.  
4. Each State Party unde rtakes to destroy any Chemical W eapons production facilities  it owns or 
possesses, or that are located in any place under its jurisdiction or  control, in accordance with t he 
provisions of this Convention.  
5. Each State Party undertakes not to use riot control agents as a method of warfare.  
  19 
 ARTICLE II  
DEFINITIONS AND CRITERIA  
For the purposes of this Convention:  
1. “Chemical Weapons ” means the following, together or separately:  
(a) Toxic chemicals and their precursors, except where intended for purposes not  prohibited 
under this Convention, as long as the types and quantities are  consistent with such purposes;  
(b) Munitions and device s, specifically designed to cause death or other harm  through the toxic 
properties of those toxic chemicals specified in  sub-paragraph ( a), which would be released as a result 
of the employment of  such munitions and devices;  
(c) Any equipment specifically designed for use directly in connection with the  employment of 
munitions and devices specified in sub -paragraph ( b). 
2. “Toxic Chemical ” means:  Any chemical which through its chemical action on life processes can 
cause death,  temporary incapacitation or permanent harm to humans or animals. This includes  all such 
chemicals, regardless of their origin or of their method of production, and  regardless of whether they are 
produced in facilities, in munitions or elsewhere.  
(For the purpose of implementing this Convention, toxic chemicals which have  been identified for the 
application of verification measures are listed in Schedules  contained in the Annex on Chemicals.)  
3. “Precursor ” means:  Any chemical reactant which takes part at any stage in the production by  
whatever  method of a toxic chemical. This includes any key component of a binary or  multicomponent 
chemical system.  
(For the purpose of implementing this Convention, precursors which have been  identified for the 
application of verification measures are li sted in Schedules  contained in the Annex on Chemicals.)  
4. “Key Component of Binary or Multicomponent Chemical Systems ” (hereinafter  referred to as “key 
component ”) means:  The precursor which plays the most important role in determining the toxic  
properties of the final product and reacts rapidly with other chemicals in the  binary or multicomponent 
system.  
5. “Old Chemical Weapons ” means:  
(a) Chemical weapons which were produced before 1925; or  
(b) Chemical weapons produced in the period between 19 25 and 1946 that have  deteriorated to 
such extent that they can no longer be used as chemical  weapons.  
6. “Abandoned Chemical Weapons ” means:  Chemical weapons, including old chemical weapons, 
abandoned by a State after 1  January 1925 on the territory of another State without the consent of the 
latter.  
7. “Riot Control Agent ” means:  Any chemical not listed in a Schedule, which can produce rapidly in 
humans  sensory irritation or disabling physical effects which disappear within a short time  following 
termin ation of exposure.  
8. “Chemical Weapons Production Facility ”: 
(a) Means any equipment, as well as any building housing such equipment, that  was designed, 
constructed or used at any time since 1 January 1946:  
(i) As part of the stage in the production of ch emicals ( “final technological  stage ”) where the 
material flows would contain, when the equipment is  in operation:  
(1) Any chemical listed in Schedule 1 in the Annex on Chemicals; or  
(2) Any other chemical that has no use, above 1 tonne per year on the  territory of a State 
Party or in any other place under the  jurisdiction or control of a State Party, for purposes not  
prohibited under this Convention, but can be used for chemical  weapons purposes;  or 
(ii) For filling chemical weapons, including, inter alia , the filling of  chemicals listed in 
Schedule 1 into munitions,    devices or    bulk    storage    containers; the filling of chemicals into   20 
 containers that form part of  assembled binary munitions and devices or into chemical 
submunitions  that form part of  assembled unitary munitions and devices, and the  loading of the 
containers and chemical submunitions into the respective  munitions and devices;  
(b) Does not mean:  
(i) Any facility having a production capacity for synthesis of chemicals  specified in                 
sub-paragraph ( a) (i) that is less than 1 tonne;  
(ii) Any facility in which a chemical specified in sub -paragraph ( a) (i) is or  was produced as 
an unavoidable by -product of activities for purposes  not prohibited under this Convention, 
provided that the chemical does  not exceed 3 per cent . of the total product and that the facility is 
subject  to declaration and inspection under the Annex on Implementation and  Verification 
(hereinafter referred to as “Verification Annex ”); or 
(iii) The single smal l-scale facility for production of chemicals listed in  Schedule 1 for 
purposes not prohibited under this Convention as  referred to in Part VI of the Verification Annex.  
9. “Purposes Not Prohibited Under this Convention ” means:  
(a) Industrial, agricultural,  research, medical, pharmaceutical or other peaceful  purposes;  
(b) Protective purposes, namely those purposes directly related to protection  against toxic 
chemicals and to protection against chemical weapons;  
(c) Military purposes not connected with the us e of chemical weapons and not  dependent on the 
use of the toxic properties of chemicals as a method of  warfare;  
(d) Law enforcement including domestic riot control purposes.  
10. “Production Capacity ” means:  The annual quantitative potential for manufacturing a specific 
chemical based on  the technological process actually used or, if the process is not yet operational,  planned 
to be used at the relevant facility. It shall be deemed to be equal to the  nameplate capacity or, if the 
nameplate capacit y is not available, to the design  capacity. The nameplate capacity is the product output 
under conditions optimized  for maximum quantity for the production facility, as demonstrated by one or 
more  test-runs. The design capacity is the corresponding theoret ically calculated product  output.  
11. “Organization ” means the Organization  for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons  established 
pursuant to Article VIII of this Convention.  
12. For the purposes of Article VI:  
(a) “Production ” of a chemical means its format ion through chemical reaction;  
(b) “Processing ” of a chemical means a physical process, such as formulation,  extraction and 
purification, in which a chemical is not converted into another  chemical;  
(c) “Consumption ” of a chemical means its conversion into another chemical via a chemical 
reaction.  
  21 
 ARTICLE III  
DECLARATIONS  
1. Each State Party shall submit to the Organization , not later than 30 days after this  Convention 
enters into force for it, the following declara tions, in which it shall:  
(a) With respect to chemical weapons:  
(i) Declare whether it owns or possesses any chemical weapons, or  whether there are any 
chemical weapons located in any place under its  jurisdiction or control;  
(ii) Specify the precise location, aggregate quantity and detailed inventory  of chemical 
weapons it owns or possesses, or that are located in any  place under its jurisdiction or control, in 
accordance with Part IV (A),  paragraphs 1 to 3, of the Verification Annex, except for those  
chemical  weapons referred to in sub -paragraph ( iii); 
(iii) Report any chemical weapons on its territory that are owned and  possessed by another 
State and located in any place under the  jurisdiction or control of another State, in accordance 
with Part IV ( A), paragraph 4, of the Verification Annex;  
(iv) Declare whether it has transferred or received, directly or indirectly,  any chemical 
weapons since 1 January 1946 and specify the transfer or  receipt of such weapons, in accordance 
with Part IV (A), paragrap h 5, of the Verification Annex;  
(v) Provide its general plan for destruction of chemical weapons that it  owns or possesses, or 
that are located in any place under its  jurisdiction or control, in accordance with Part IV (A), 
paragraph 6, of  the Verification  Annex;  
(b) With respect to old chemical weapons and abandoned chemical weapons:  
(i) Declare whether it has on its territory old chemical weapons and  provide all available 
information in accordance with Part IV (B),  paragraph 3, of the Verification Annex;  
(ii) Declare whether there are abandoned chemical weapons on its territory  and provide all 
available information in accordance with Part IV (B),  paragraph 8, of the Verification Annex;  
(iii) Declare whether it has abandoned chemical weapons on the territor y of other States and 
provide all available information in accordance with  Part IV (B), paragraph 10, of the 
Verification Annex;  
(c) With respect to chemical weapons production facilities:  
(i) Declare whether it has or has had any chemical weapons producti on facility under its 
ownership or possession, or that is or has been located  in any place under its jurisdiction or 
control at any time since 1  January 1946;  
(ii) Specify any chemical weapons production facility it has or has had  under its ownership or 
possession or that is or has been located in any  place under its jurisdiction or control at any time 
since 1 January 1946,  in accordance with Part V, paragraph 1, of the Verification Annex,  except 
for those facilities referred to in sub -paragraph ( iii); 
(iii) Report any chemical weapons production facility on its territory that  another State has or 
has had under its ownership and possession and  that is or has been located in any place under the 
jurisdiction or control  of another State at any time since 1 Janu ary 1946, in accordance with  Part 
V, paragraph 2, of the Verification Annex;  
(iv) Declare whether it has transferred or received, directly or indirectly,  any equipment for 
the production of chemical weapons since 1 January  1946 and specify the transfer or receipt of 
such equipment, in  accordance with Part V, paragraphs 3 to 5, of the Verification Annex;  
(v) Provide its general plan for destruction of any chemical weapons  production facility it 
owns or possesses, or that is located in any place  under its jurisdiction or control, in accordance 
with Part V, paragraph 6,  of the Verification Annex;  
(vi) Specify actions to be taken for closure of any chemical weapons  production facility it 
owns or possesses, or that is located in any place  under its jurisdictio n or control, in accordance 
with Part V, paragraph 1  (i), of the Verification Annex;  22 
 (vii) Provide its general plan for any temporary conversion of any chemical  weapons 
production facility it owns or possesses, or that is located in  any place under its jur isdiction or 
control, into a chemical weapons  destruction facility, in accordance with Part V, paragraph 7, of 
the Verification Annex;  
(d) With r espect to other facilities, s pecify the precise location, nature and general scope of 
activities of any  facilit y or establishment under its ownership or possession, or located in any  place 
under its jurisdiction or control, and that has been designed,  constructed or used since 1 January 1946 
primarily for development of  chemical weapons. Such declaration shall incl ude, inter alia , 
laboratories and  test and evaluation sites;  
(e) With  respect to riot control agents  specify the chemical name, structural  formula and 
Chemical Abstracts Service (CAS) registry number, if assigned,  of each chemical it holds for riot 
control  purposes. This declaration shall be  updated not later than 30 days after any change becomes 
effective.  
2. The provisions of this Article and the relevant provisions of Part IV of the  Verification Annex shall 
not, at the discretion of a State Party, apply to chemical  weapons buried on its territory before 1 January 
1977 and which remain buried, or  which had been dumped at sea before 1 January 1985.  
  23 
 ARTICLE IV  
CHEMICAL WEAPONS  
1. The provisions of this Article and the detailed procedures for its implementation  shall apply to all 
chemical weapons owned or possessed by a State Party, or that  are located in any place under its 
jurisdiction or control, except old chemical  weapons and abandoned chemical weapons to which Part IV 
(B) of the Verification  Annex applies.  
2. Detailed procedures for the implementation of this Article are set forth in the  Verification Annex.  
3. All locations at which chemical weapons specified in paragraph 1 are stored or  destroyed shall be 
subject to systematic verification th rough on -site inspection and  monitoring with on -site instruments, in 
accordance with Part IV (A) of the  Verification Annex.  
4. Each State Party shall, immediately after the declaration under Article III,  paragraph 1 ( a), has 
been submitted, provide access to chemical weapons specified  in paragraph 1 for the purpose of 
systematic verification of the declaration through  on-site inspection. Thereafter, each State Party shall not 
remove any of these  chemical weapons, except to a chemical weapons destruction fac ility. It shall  provide 
access to such chemical weapons, for the purpose of systematic on -site verification.  
5. Each State Party shall provide access to any chemical weapons destruction  facilities and their 
storage areas, that it owns or possesses, or that  are located in  any place under its jurisdiction or control, 
for the purpose of systematic  verification through on -site inspection and monitoring with on -site 
instruments.  
6. Each State Party shall destroy all chemical weapons specified in paragraph 1  pursuant to the 
Verification Annex and in accordance with the agreed rate and  sequence of destruction (hereinafter 
referred to as “order of destruction ”). Such  destruction shall begin not later than two years after this 
Convention enters into  force for it and shall finish not later than 10 years after entry into force of this  
Convention. A State Party is not precluded from destroying such chemical weapons  at a faster rate.  
7. Each State Party shall:  
(a) Submit detailed plans for the destruction of chemical weap ons specified in  paragraph 1 not 
later than 60 days before each annual destruction period  begins, in accordance with Part IV (A), 
paragraph 29, of the Verification  Annex; the detailed plans shall encompass all stocks to be destroyed 
during  the next annual destruction period;  
(b) Submit declarations annually regarding the implementation of its plans for  destruction of 
chemical weapons specified in paragraph 1, not later than 60  days after the end of each annual 
destruction period; and  
(c) Certify, not later than 30 days after the destruction process has been  completed, that all 
chemical weapons specified in paragraph 1 have been  destroyed.  
8. If a State ratifies or accedes to this Convention after the 10 -year period for  destruction set forth in 
paragraph 6, it shall destroy chemical weapons specified in  paragraph 1 as soon as possible. The order of 
destruction and procedures for  stringent verification for such a State Party shall be determined by the 
Executive  Council.  
9. Any chemical weapons discovered by a State Party after the initial declaration of  chemical 
weapons shall be reported, secured and destroyed in accordance with  Part IV (A) of the Verification 
Annex.  
10. Each State Party, during transportation, sampling, storage and destruction of  chemical weap ons, 
shall assign the highest priority to ensuring the safety of people  and to protecting the environment. Each 
State Party shall transport, sample, store  and destroy chemical weapons in accordance with its national 
standards for safety  and emissions.  
11. Any State Party which has on its territory chemical weapons that are owned or  possessed by 
another State, or that are located in any place under the jurisdiction  or control of another State, shall make 
the fullest efforts to ensure that these  chemical weap ons are removed from its territory not later than one 
year after this  Convention enters into force for it. If they are not removed within one year, the  State Party 
may request the Organization  and other States Parties to provide  assistance in the destructi on of these 
chemical weapons.  24 
 12. Each State Party undertakes to cooperate with other States Parties that request  information or 
assistance on a bilateral basis or through the Technical Secretariat  regarding methods and technologies for 
the safe and effici ent destruction of  chemical weapons.  
13. In carrying out verification activities pursuant to this Article and Part IV (A) of the  Verification 
Annex, the Organization  shall consider measures to avoid unnecessary  duplication of bilateral or 
multilateral agre ements on verification of chemical  weapons storage and their destruction among States 
Parties.  
To this end, the Executive Council shall decide to limit verification to measures  complementary to 
those undertaken pursuant to such a bilateral or multilateral  agreement, if it considers that:  
(a) Verification provisions of such an agreement are consistent with the  verification provisions of 
this Article and Part IV (A) of the Verification  Annex;  
(b) Implementation of such an agreement provides for sufficient assurance of  compliance with the 
relevant provisions of this Convention; and  
(c) Parties to the bilateral or multilateral agreement keep the Organization  fully informed about 
their verification activities.  
14. If the Executive Council takes a decision purs uant to paragraph 13, the  Organization  shall have 
the right to monitor the implementation of the bilateral or  multilateral agreement.  
15. Nothing in paragraphs 13 and 14 shall affect the obligation of a State Party to  provide declarations 
pursuant to Artic le III, this Article and Part IV (A) of the  Verification Annex.  
16. Each State Party shall meet the costs of destruction of chemical weapons it is  obliged to destroy. 
It shall also meet the costs of verification of storage and  destruction of these chemical  weapons unless the 
Executive Council decides  otherwise. If the Executive Council decides to limit verification measures of 
the Organization  pursuant to paragraph 13, the costs of complementary verification  and monitoring by the 
Organization  shall be paid in accordance with the United  Nations scale of assessment, as specified in 
Article VIII, paragraph 7.  
17. The provisions of this Article and the relevant provisions of Part IV of the  Verification Annex 
shall not, at the discretion of a State Party, apply t o chemical  weapons buried on its territory before 1 
January 1977 and which remain buried, or  which had been dumped at sea before 1 January 1985.  
  25 
 ARTICLE V  
CHEMICAL WEAPONS PRODUCTION FACILITIES  
1. The provisions of this Article and the detailed procedures for its implementation  shall apply to any 
and all chemical weapons production facilities owned or  possessed by a State Party, or that are located in 
any place under its jurisdiction or  control.  
2. Detailed procedures for the implementation of this Article are set forth in the  Verification Annex.  
3. All chemical weapons production facilities specified in paragraph 1 shall be subject  to systematic 
verification through on -site inspection and monitoring with on -site instruments in accordance with P art V 
of the Verification Annex.  
4. Each State Party shall cease immediately all activity at chemical weapons  production facilities 
specified in paragraph 1, except activity required for closure.  
5. No State Party shall construct any new chemical weapons p roduction facilities or  modify any 
existing facilities for the purpose of chemical weapons production or  for any other activity prohibited 
under this Convention.  
6. Each State Party shall, immediately after the declaration under Article III,  paragraph 1 ( c), has been 
submitted, provide access to chemical weapons  production facilities specified in paragraph 1, for the 
purpose of systematic  verification of the declaration through on -site inspection.  
7. Each State Party shall:  
(a) Close, not later than 90 days  after this Convention enters into force for it, all  chemical 
weapons production facilities specified in paragraph 1, in  accordance with Part V of the Verification 
Annex, and give notice thereof;  and 
(b) Provide access to chemical weapons production facilities specified in  paragraph 1, subsequent 
to closure, for the purpose of systematic verification  through on -site inspection and monitoring with 
on-site instruments in order  to ensure that the facility remains closed and is subsequently destroyed.  
8. Each State Party shall destroy all chemical weapons production facilities specified  in paragraph 1 
and related facilities and equipment, pursuant to the Verification  Annex and in accordance with an agreed 
rate and sequence of destruction  (hereinafter refer red to as “order of destruction ”). Such destruction shall 
begin not  later than one year after this Convention enters into force for it, and shall finish  not later than 
ten years after entry into force of this Convention. A State Party is  not precluded from  destroying such 
facilities at a faster rate.  
9. Each State Party shall:  
(a) Submit detailed plans for destruction of chemical weapons production  facilities specified in 
paragraph 1, not later than 180 days before the  destruction of each facility begins;  
(b) Submit declarations annually regarding the implementation of its plans for  the destruction of 
all chemical weapons production facilities specified in  paragraph 1, not later than 90 days after the 
end of each annual destruction  period; and  
(c) Certify, n ot later than 30 days after the destruction process has been  completed, that all 
chemical weapons production facilities specified in  paragraph 1 have been destroyed.  
10. If a State ratifies or accedes to this Convention after the 10 -year period for  destruc tion set forth in 
paragraph 8, it shall destroy chemical weapons production  facilities specified in paragraph 1 as soon as 
possible. The order of destruction and  procedures for stringent verification for such a State Party shall be 
determined by  the Executive Council.  
11. Each State Party, during the destruction of chemical weapons production facilities,  shall assign 
the highest priority to ensuring the safety of people and to protecting  the environment. Each State Party 
shall destroy chemical weapons  production  facilities in accordance with its national standards for safety 
and emissions.  
12. Chemical weapons production facilities specified in paragraph 1 may be  temporarily converted 
for destruction of chemical weapons in accordance with Part  V, parag raphs 18 to 25, of  the   Verification   26 
 Annex. Such a converted facility must  be destroyed as soon as it is no longer in use for destruction of 
chemical weapons  but, in any case, not later than 10 years after entry into force of this Convention.  
13. A Sta te Party may request, in exceptional cases of compelling need, permission to  use a chemical 
weapons production facility specified in paragraph 1 for purposes  not prohibited under this Convention. 
Upon the recommendation of the Executive  Council, the Confer ence of the States Parties shall decide 
whether or not to  approve the request and shall establish the conditions upon which approval is  contingent 
in accordance with Part V, Section D, of the Verification Annex.  
14. The chemical weapons production facility  shall be converted in such a manner that  the converted 
facility is not more capable of being reconverted into a chemical  weapons production facility than any 
other facility used for industrial, agricultural,  research, medical, pharmaceutical or other peac eful 
purposes not involving  chemicals listed in Schedule 1.  
15. All converted facilities shall be subject to systematic verification through on -site inspection and 
monitoring with on -site instruments in accordance with Part V,  Section D, of the Verificatio n Annex.  
16. In carrying out verification activities pursuant to this Article and Part V of the  Verification 
Annex, the Organization  shall consider measures to avoid unnecessary  duplication of bilateral or 
multilateral agreements on verification of chemica l weapons production facilities and their destruction 
among States Parties.  
To this end, the Executive Council shall decide to limit the verification to  measures complementary to 
those undertaken pursuant to such a bilateral or  multilateral agreement, if it considers that:  
(a) Verification provisions of such an agreement are consistent with the  verification provisions of 
this Article and Part V of the Verification Annex;  
(b) Implementation of the agreement provides for sufficient assurance of  compliance with the 
relevant provisions of this Convention; and  
(c) Parties to the bilateral or multilateral agreement keep the Organization  fully informed about 
their verification activities.  
17. If the Executive Council takes a decision pursuant to paragraph 16, th e Organization  shall have 
the right to monitor the implementation of the bilateral or  multilateral agreement.  
18. Nothing in paragraphs 16 and 17 shall affect the obligation of a State Party to  make declarations 
pursuant to Article III, this Article and Pa rt V of the  Verification Annex.  
19. Each State Party shall meet the costs of destruction of chemical weapons  production facilities it is 
obliged to destroy. It shall also meet the costs of  verification under this Article unless the Executive 
Council decide s otherwise. If  the Executive Council decides to limit verification measures of the 
Organization  pursuant to paragraph 16, the costs of complementary verification and monitoring  by the 
Organization  shall be paid in accordance with the United Nations scale of assessment, as specified in 
Article VIII, paragraph 7.  
  27 
 ARTICLE VI  
ACTIVITIES NOT PROHIBITED UNDER THIS CONVENTION  
1. Each State Party has the right, subject to the provisions of this Convention, to  develop, produce, 
otherwise acquire, retain, transfer  and use toxic chemicals and  their precursors for purposes not prohibited 
under this Convention.  
2. Each State Party shall adopt the necessary measures to ensure that toxic chemicals  and their 
precursors are only developed, produced, otherwise acquired, re tained,  transferred, or used within its 
territory or in any other place under its jurisdiction  or control for purposes not prohibited under this 
Convention. To this end, and in  order to verify that activities are in accordance with obligations under this  
Convention, each State Party shall subject toxic chemicals and their precursors  listed in Schedules 1, 2 
and 3 of the Annex on Chemicals, facilities related to such  chemicals, and other facilities as specified in 
the Verification Annex, that are  located on its territory or in any other place under its jurisdiction or 
control, to  verification measures as provided in the Verification Annex.  
3. Each State Party shall subject chemicals listed in Schedule 1 (hereinafter referred  to as “Schedule 1 
chemicals ”) to t he prohibitions on production, acquisition,  retention, transfer and use as specified in Part 
VI of the Verification Annex. It  shall subject Schedule 1 chemicals and facilities specified in Part VI of 
the Verification Annex to systematic verification throug h on-site inspection and  monitoring with on -site 
instruments in accordance with that Part of the  Verification Annex.  
4. Each State Party shall subject chemicals listed in Schedule 2 (hereinafter referred  to as “Schedule 2 
chemicals ”) and facilities specified in Part VII of the Verification  Annex to data monitoring and on -site 
verification in accordance with that Part of  the Verification Annex.  
5. Each State Party shall subject chemicals listed in Schedule 3 (hereinafter referred  to as “Schedule 3 
chemicals ”) and facilities specified in Part VIII of the Verification  Annex to data monitoring and on -site 
verification in accordance with that Part of  the Verification Annex.  
6. Each State Party shall subject facilities specified in Part IX of the Verificati on Annex to data 
monitoring and eventual on -site verification in accordance with that  Part of the Verification Annex unless 
decided otherwise by the Conference of the  States Parties pursuant to Part IX, paragraph 22, of the 
Verification Annex.  
7. Not later  than thirty  days after this Convention enters into force for it, each State  Party shall make 
an initial declaration on relevant chemicals and facilities in  accordance with the Verification Annex.  
8. Each State Party shall make annual declarations regardin g the relevant chemicals  and facilities in 
accordance with the Verification Annex.  
9. For the purpose of on -site verification, each State Party shall grant to the  inspectors access to 
facilities as required in the Verification Annex.  
10. In conducting veri fication activities, the Technical Secretariat shall avoid undue  intrusion into the 
State Party ’s chemical activities for purposes not prohibited  under this Convention and, in particular, 
abide by the provisions set forth in the  Annex on the Protection of Confidential Information (hereinafter 
referred to as  “Confidentiality Annex ”). 
11. The provisions of this Article shall be implemented in a manner which avoids  hampering the 
economic or technological development of States Parties, and  international coopera tion in the field of 
chemical activities for purposes not  prohibited under this Convention including the international exchange 
of scientific  and technical information and chemicals and equipment for the production,  processing or use 
of chemicals for purpo ses not prohibited under this Convention.  
  28 
 ARTICLE VII  
NATIONAL IMPLEMENTATION MEASURES  
General undertakings  
1. Each State Party shall, in accordance with its constitutional processes, adopt the  necessary 
measures to implement its obligations under this Convention. In  particular, it shall:  
(a) Prohibit natural and legal persons anywhere on its territory or in any other  place under its 
jurisdiction as recognized by international law from  undertaking any activity prohibited to a State 
Party under this Conve ntion,  including enacting penal legislation with respect to such activity;  
(b) Not permit in any place under its control any activity prohibited to a State  Party under this 
Convention; and  
(c) Extend its penal legislation enacted under sub -paragraph ( a) to any activity  prohibited to a 
State Party under this Convention undertaken anywhere by  natural persons, possessing its nationality, 
in conformity with international  law. 
2. Each State Party shall cooperate with other States Parties and afford the  appropria te form of legal 
assistance to facilitate the implementation of the  obligations under paragraph 1.  
3. Each State Party, during the implementation of its obligations under this  Convention, shall assign 
the highest priority to ensuring the safety of people a nd to protecting the environment, and shall cooperate 
as appropriate with other  States Parties in this regard.  
Relations between the State Party and the Organization  
4. In order to fulfil its obligations under this Convention, each State Party shall  design ate or establish 
a National Authority to serve as the national focal point for  effective liaison with the Organization  and 
other States Parties. Each State Party  shall notify the Organization  of its National Authority at the time 
that this  Convention enters into force for it.  
5. Each State Party shall inform the Organization  of the legislative and administrative  measures taken 
to implement this Convention.  
6. Each State Party shall treat as confidential and afford special handling to  information and da ta that 
it receives in confidence from the Organization  in connection with the implementation of this Convention.  
It shall treat such information and data exclusively in connection with its rights  and obligations under 
this Convention and in accordance wit h the provisions set  forth in the Confidentiality Annex.  
7. Each State Party undertakes to cooperate with the Organization  in the exercise of  all its functions 
and in particular to provide assistance to the Technical Secretariat.  
  29 
 ARTICLE VIII  
THE ORGANIZATION  
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS  
1. The States Parties to this Convention hereby establish the Organization  for the  Prohibition of 
Chemical Weapons to achieve the object and purpose of this  Convention, to ensure the implementation of 
its provisions, including those for  international verification of compliance with it, and to provide a forum 
for consultation and cooperation among States Parties.  
2. All States Parties to this Convention shall be members of the Organization . A State  Party shall not 
be de prived of its membership in the Organization . 
3. The seat of the Headquarters of the Organization  shall be The Hague, Kingdom of  the Netherlands.  
4. There are hereby established as the organs of the Organization : the Conference of  the States 
Parties, the E xecutive Council, and the Technical Secretariat.  
5. The Organization  shall conduct its verification activities provided for under this  Convention in the 
least intrusive manner possible consistent with the timely and  efficient accomplishment of their 
object ives. It shall request only the information  and data necessary to fulfil its responsibilities under this 
Convention. It shall take  every precaution to protect the confidentiality of information on civil and 
military  activities and facilities coming to its knowledge in the implementation of this  Convention and, in 
particular, shall abide by the provisions set forth in the  Confidentiality Annex.  
6. In undertaking its verification activities the Organization  shall consider measures  to make use of 
advances in s cience and technology.  
7. The costs of the Organization ’s activities shall be paid by States Parties in  accordance with the 
United Nations scale of assessment adjusted to take into  account differences in membership between the 
United Nations and this  Organ ization , and subject to the provisions of Articles IV and V. Financial  
contributions of States Parties to the Preparatory Commission shall be deducted in  an appropriate way 
from their contributions to the regular budget. The budget of  the Organization  shall comprise two separate 
chapters, one relating to  administrative and other costs, and one relating to verification costs.  
8. A member of the Organization  which is in arrears in the payment of its financial  contribution to the 
Organization  shall have n o vote in the Organization  if the  amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the 
amount of the contribution due from it  for the preceding two full years. The Conference of the States 
Parties may,  nevertheless, permit such a member to vote if it is satisfied t hat the failure to pay  is due to 
conditions beyond the control of the member.  
B. THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES  
Composition, procedures and decision -making  
9. The Conference of the States Parties (hereinafter referred to as “the Conference ”) shall be  
composed of all members of this Organization . Each member shall have  one representative in the 
Conference, who may be accompanied by alternates and  advisers.  
10. The first session of the Conference shall be convened by the depositary not later  than 30 days 
after the entry into force of this Convention.  
11. The Conference shall meet in regular sessions which shall be held annually unless  it decides 
otherwise.  
12. Special sessions of the Conference shall be convened:  
(a) When decided by the Conference;  
(b) When requested by the Executive Council;  
(c) When requested by any member and supported by one third of the members;  or 
(d) In accordance with paragraph 22 to undertake reviews of the operation of  this Convention.  
Except in the case of sub -paragraph ( d), the special session shall be convened not  later than 30 days after 
receipt of the request by the Director -General of the  Technical Secretariat, unless specified otherwise in 
the request.  30 
 13. The Conference shall also be convened in the form of an Amendmen t Conference  in accordance 
with Article XV, paragraph 2.  
14. Sessions of the Conference shall take place at the seat of the Organization  unless  the Conference 
decides otherwise.  
15. The Conference shall adopt its rules of procedure. At the beginning of eac h regular  session, it 
shall elect its Chairman and such other officers as may be required.  They shall hold office until a new 
Chairman and other officers are elected at the  next regular session.  
16. A majority of the members of the Organization  shall constitute a quorum for the  Conference.  
17. Each member of the Organization  shall have one vote in the Conference.  
18. The Conference shall take decisions on questions of procedure by a simple  majority of the 
members present and voting. Decisions on  matters of substance  should be taken as far as possible by 
consensus. If consensus is not attainable  when an issue comes up for decision, the Chairman shall defer 
any vote for 24  hours and during this period of deferment shall make every effort to facilit ate 
achievement of consensus, and shall report to the Conference before the end of  this period. If consensus is 
not possible at the end of 24 hours, the Conference  shall take the decision by a two -thirds majority of 
members present and voting  unless specif ied otherwise in this Convention. When the issue arises as to 
whether  the question is one of substance or not, that question shall be treated as a matter  of substance 
unless otherwise decided by the Conference by the majority required  for decisions on matt ers of 
substance.  
19. The Conference shall be the principal organ of the Organization . It shall consider  any questions, 
matters or issues within the scope of this Convention, including  those relating to the powers and functions 
of the Executive Council and  the Technical Secretariat. It may make recommendations and take decisions 
on any  questions, matters or issues related to this Convention raised by a State Party or  brought to its 
attention by the Executive Council.  
20. The Conference shall oversee the imp lementation of this Convention, and act in  order to promote 
its object and purpose. The Conference shall review compliance  with this Convention. It shall also 
oversee the activities of the Executive Council  and the Technical Secretariat and may issue guide lines in 
accordance with this  Convention to either of them in the exercise of their functions.  
21. The Conference shall:  
(a) Consider and adopt at its regular sessions the report, programme and budget  of the 
Organization , submitted by the Executive Council , as well as consider  other reports;  
(b) Decide on the scale of financial contributions to be paid by States Parties in  accordance with 
paragraph 7;  
(c) Elect the members of the Executive Council;  
(d) Appoint the Director -General of the Technical Secretariat (hereinafter  referred to as “the 
Director -General ”); 
(e) Approve the rules of procedure of the Executive Council submitted by the  latter;  
(f) Establish such subsidiary organs as it finds necessary for the exercise of its  functions in 
accordance  with this Convention;  
(g) Foster international cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of  chemical activities;  
(h) Review scientific and technological developments that could affect the  operation of this 
Convention and, in this context, direct the Director -General  to establish a Scientific Advisory Board 
to enable him, in the performance of  his functions, to render specializ ed advice in areas of science and 
technology  relevant to this Convention, to the Conference, the Executive Council or  States Pa rties. 
The Scientific Advisory Board shall be composed of  independent experts appointed in accordance 
with terms of reference  adopted by the Conference;  
(i) Consider and approve at its first session any draft agreements, provisions  and guidelines 
developed  by the Preparatory Commission;  
(j) Establish at its first session the voluntary fund for assistance in accordance  with Article X;  31 
 (k) Take the necessary measures to ensure compliance with this Convention and  to redress and 
remedy any situation which contravenes the provisions of this  Convention, in accordance with Article 
XII. 
22. The Conference shall not later than one year after the expiry of the fifth and the  tenth year after 
the entry into force of this Convention, and at such other times  within that time period as may be decided 
upon, convene in special sessions to  undertake reviews of the operation of this Convention. Such reviews 
shall take into  account any relevant scientific and technological developments. At intervals of five  years 
thereafte r, unless otherwise decided upon, further sessions of the Conference  shall be convened with the 
same objective.  
C. THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL  
Composition, procedure and decision -making  
23. The Executive Council shall consist of 41 members. Each State Party shal l have the  right, in 
accordance with the principle of rotation, to serve on the Executive  Council. The members of the 
Executive Council shall be elected by the Conference  for a term of two years. In order to ensure the 
effective functioning of this  Convent ion, due regard being specially paid to equitable geographical 
distribution,  to the importance of chemical industry, as well as to political and security interests,  the 
Executive Council shall be composed as follows:  
(a) Nine States Parties from Africa to be designated by States Parties located in  this region. As a 
basis for this designation it is understood that, out of these  nine States Parties, three members shall, as 
a rule, be the States Parties with  the most significant national chemical industry in t he region as 
determined  by internationally reported and published data; in addition, the regional  group shall agree 
also to take into account other regional factors in  designating these three members;  
(b) Nine States Parties from Asia to be designated by S tates Parties located in  this region. As a 
basis for this designation it is understood that, out of these  nine States Parties, four members shall, as 
a rule, be the States Parties with  the most significant national chemical industry in the region as 
determ ined by internationally reported and published data; in addition, the regional  group shall agree 
also to take into account other regional factors in  designating these four members;  
(c) Five States Parties from Eastern Europe to be designated by States Part ies located in this 
region. As a basis for this designation it is understood that,  out of these five States Parties, one 
member shall, as a rule, be the State  Party with the most significant national chemical industry in the 
region as  determined by interna tionally reported and published data; in addition, the  regional group 
shall agree also to take into account other regional factors in  designating this one member;  
(d) Seven States Parties from Latin America and the Caribbean to be designated  by States Part ies 
located in this region. As a basis for this designation it is  understood that, out of these seven States 
Parties, three members shall, as a  rule, be the States Parties with the most significant national 
chemical  industry in the region as determined by internationally reported and  published data; in 
addition, the regional group shall agree also to take into  account other regional factors in designating 
these three members;  
(e) Ten States Parties from among Western European and other States to be  designat ed by States 
Parties located in this region. As a basis for this  designation it is understood that, out of these 10 
States Parties, 5 members  shall, as a rule, be the States Parties with the most significant national  
chemical industry in the region as dete rmined by internationally reported  and published data; in 
addition, the regional group shall agree also to take  into account other regional factors in designating 
these five members;  
(f) One further State Party to be designated consecutively by States Parties  located in the regions 
of Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean. As a  basis for this designation it is understood that this 
State Party shall be a  rotating member from these regions.  
24. For the first election of the Executive Council 20 members  shall be elected for a  term of one year, 
due regard being paid to the established numerical proportions  as described in paragraph 23.  
25. After the full implementation of Articles IV and V the Conference may, upon the  request of a 
majority of the  members  of the  Executive Council, review the   composition   of   the  Executive  Council   32 
 taking into account developments related to  the principles specified in paragraph 23 that are governing its 
composition.  
26. The Executive Council shall elaborate its rule s of procedure and submit them to  the Conference 
for approval.  
27. The Executive Council shall elect its Chairman from among its members.  
28. The Executive Council shall meet for regular sessions. Between regular sessions it  shall meet as 
often as may be required for the fulfilment of its powers and  functions.  
29. Each member of the Executive Council shall have one vote. Unless otherwise  specified in this 
Convention, the Executive Council shall take decisions on matters  of substance by a two -thirds majorit y 
of all its members. The Executive Council  shall take decisions on questions of procedure by a simple 
majority of all its  members. When the issue arises as to whether the question is one of substance or  not, 
that question shall be treated as a matter of s ubstance unless otherwise  decided by the Executive Council 
by the majority required for decisions on matters  of substance.  
Powers and functions  
30. The Executive Council shall be the executive organ of the Organization . It shall be  responsible to 
the Conference. The Executive Council shall carry out the powers  and functions entrusted to it under this 
Convention, as well as those functions  delegated to it by the Conference. In so doing, it shall act in 
conformity with the  recommendations, decisions and guidelines of the Conference and assure their  proper 
and continuous implementation.  
31. The Executive Council shall promote the effective implementation of, and  compliance with, this 
Convention. It shall supervise the activities of the Technical  Secretaria t, cooperate with the National 
Authority of each State Party and facilitate  consultations and cooperation among States Parties at their 
request.  
32. The Executive Council shall:  
(a) Consider and submit to the Conference the draft programme and budget of  the Organization ; 
(b) Consider and submit to the Conference the draft report of the Organization  on the 
implementation of this Convention, the report on the performance of  its own activities and such 
special reports as it deems necessary or which the  Conference may request;  
(c) Make arrangements for the sessions of the Conference including the  preparation of the draft 
agenda.  
33. The Executive Council may request the convening of a special session of the  Conference.  
34. The Executive Council shall:  
(a) Conclude agreements or arrangements with States and international  Organization s on behalf 
of the Organization , subject to prior approval by the  Conference;  
(b) Conclude agreements with States Parties on behalf of the Organization  in connection with 
Articl e X and supervise the voluntary fund referred to in  Article X;  
(c) Approve agreements or arrangements relating to the implementation of  verification activities, 
negotiated by the Technical Secretariat with States  Parties.  
35. The Executive Council shall co nsider any issue or matter within its competence  affecting this 
Convention and its implementation, including concerns regarding  compliance, and cases of non -
compliance, and, as appropriate, inform States  Parties and bring the issue or matter to the attenti on of the 
Conference.  
36. In its consideration of doubts or concerns regarding compliance and cases of  non-compliance, 
including, inter alia , abuse of the rights provided for under this  Convention, the Executive Council shall 
consult with the States Partie s involved  and, as appropriate, request the State Party to take measures to 
redress the  situation within a specified time. To the extent that the Executive Council  considers further 
action to be necessary, it shall take, inter alia , one or more of  the following measures:  
(a) Inform all States Parties of the issue or matter;  
  33 
 (b) Bring the issue or matter to the attention of the Conference;  
(c) Make recommendations to the Conference regarding measures to redress the  situation and to 
ensure compliance,  
The Executive Council shall, in cases of particular gravity and urgency, bring the  issue or matter, 
including relevant information and conclusions, directly to the  attention of the United Nations General 
Assembly and the United Nations Security  Council. It shall at the same time inform all States Parties of 
this step.  
D. THE TECHNICAL SECRETARIAT  
37. The Technical Secretariat shall assist the Conference and the Executive Council in  the 
performance of their functions. The Technical Secretariat shall carry out  the verification measures 
provided for in this Convention. It shall carry out the other  functions entrusted to it under this Convention 
as well as those functions  delegated to it by the Conference and the Executive Council.  
38. The Technical Secretariat s hall: 
(a) Prepare and submit to the Executive Council the draft programme and  budget of the 
Organization ; 
(b) Prepare and submit to the Executive Council the draft report of the  Organization  on the 
implementation of this Convention and such other  reports a s the Conference or the Executive Council 
may request;  
(c) Provide administrative and technical support to the Conference, the  Executive Council and 
subsidiary organs;  
(d) Address and receive communications on behalf of the Organization  to and  from States Parties 
on matters pertaining to the implementation of this  Convention;  
(e) Provide technical assistance and technical evaluation to States Parties in the  implementation 
of the provisions of this Convention, including evaluation of  scheduled and unschedule d chemicals.  
39. The Technical Secretariat shall:  
(a) Negotiate agreements or arrangements relating to the implementation of  verification activities 
with States Parties, subject to approval by the Executive  Council;  
(b) Not later than 180 days after entry into force of this Convention, coordinate  the establishment 
and maintenance of permanent stockpiles of emergency  and humanitarian assistance by States Parties 
in accordance with Article X,  paragraphs 7 (b) and (c). The Technical Secretariat may inspect the  
items  maintained for serviceability. Lists of items to be stockpiled shall be  considered and approved 
by the Conference pursuant to paragraph 21 ( i) above;  
(c) Administer the voluntary fund referred to in Article X, compile declarations  made by the 
States  Parties and register, when requested, bilateral agreements  concluded between States Parties or 
between a State Party and the  Organization  for the purposes of Article X.  
40. The Technical Secretariat shall inform the Executive Council of any problem that  has arisen with 
regard to the discharge of its functions, including doubts,  ambiguities or uncertainties about compliance 
with this Convention that have  come to its notice in the performance of its verification activities and that 
it has  been unable to reso lve or clarify through its consultations with the State Party  concerned.  
41. The Technical Secretariat shall comprise a Director -General, who shall be its head  and chief 
administrative officer, inspectors and such scientific, technical and other  personnel as may be required.  
42. The Inspectorate shall be a unit of the Technical Secretariat and shall act under  the supervision of 
the Director -General.  
43. The Director -General shall be appointed by the Conference upon the  recommendation of the 
Executive Counci l for a term of four years, renewable for  one further term, but not thereafter.  
44. The Director -General shall be responsible to the Conference and the Executive  Council for the 
appointm ent of the staff and the Organization  and functioning of  the Technical Secretariat.The paramount 
consideration in the employment of the  staff and in the determination of the conditions of service shall be 
the necessity of  securing the highest standards of efficiency, competence and integrity. Only  citizens of  34 
 States Parties shall serve as the Director -General, as inspectors or as  other members of the professional 
and clerical staff. Due regard shall be paid to  the importance of recruiting the staff on as wide a 
geographical basis as possible.  Recruitment shall be  guided by the principle that the staff shall be kept to 
a minimum necessary for the proper discharge of the responsibilities of the  Technical Secretariat.  
45. The Director -General shal l be responsible for the Organization  and functioning of  the Scientific  
Advisory Board referred to in paragraph 21(h). The Director -General  shall, in consultation with States 
Parties, appoint members of the Scientific  Advisory Board, who shall serve in their individual capacity. 
The members of the  Board shall be appointed on the basis of their expertise in the particular scientific  
fields relevant to the implementation of this Convention. The Director -General  may also, as appropriate, 
in consultation with members of the Board, establish  temporary working groups of scientific e xperts to 
provide recommendations on  specific issues. In regard to the above, States Parties may submit lists of 
experts to  the Director -General.  
46. In the performance of their duties, the Director -General, the inspectors and the  other members of 
the staf f shall not seek or receive instructions from any  Government or from any othe r source external to 
the Organization . They shall  refrain from any action that might reflect on their positions as international  
officers responsible only to the Conference and th e Executive Council.  
47. Each State Party shall respect the exclusively international character of the  responsibilities of the 
Director -General, the inspectors and the other members of  the staff and not seek to influence them in the 
discharge of their responsibilities.  
E. PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES  
48. The Organization  shall enjoy on the territory and in any other place under the  jurisdiction or 
control of a State Party such legal capacity and such privileges and  immunities as are necessary for the 
exercise of its functions.  
49. Delegates of States Parties, together with their alternates and advisers,  representatives appointed 
to the Executive Council together with their alternates  and advisers, the Director -Gene ral and the staff of 
the Organization  shall enjoy  such privileges and immunities as are necessary in the independent exercise 
of their function s in connection with the Organization . 
50. The legal capacity, privileges, and immunities referred to in this Article shall be  defined i n 
agreements be tween the Organization  and the States Parties as well as  in an agreement between the 
Organization  and the State in which the  headquarters of the Organization  is seated. These agreements 
shall be considered  and approved by the Conf erence pursuant to paragra ph 21 (i). 
51. Notwithstanding paragraphs 48 and 49, the privileges and immunities enjoyed by  the Director -
General and the staff of the Technical Secretariat during the conduct  of verification activities shall be 
those set forth in Part II, Section B, of th e Verification Annex.  
  35 
 ARTICLE IX  
CONSULTATIONS, COOPERATION AND FACT -FINDING  
1. States Parties shall consult and cooperate, directly among themselves, or through  the Organization  
or other appropriate international procedures, including  procedures within the framework of the United 
Nations and in accordance with its  Charter, on any matter which may be raised relating to the object and 
purpose, or  the implementation of the provisions, of this Convention.  
2. Without prejudice to the right of any State Party to request a challenge inspection,  States Parties 
should, whenever possible, first make every effort to clarify and  resolve, through exchange of information 
and consultations among themselves, any  matter which may cause doubt about compliance with this 
Convention, or which  gives rise to concerns about a related matter which may be considered ambiguous.  
A State Party which receives a request from another State Party for clarification of  any matter which the 
requesting State Party believes causes such a doubt  or concern shall provide the requesting State Party as 
soon as possible, but in any  case not later than 10 days after the request, with information sufficient to 
answer  the doubt or concern raised along with an explanation of how the information  provided resolves 
the matter. Nothing in this Convention shall affect the right of  any two or more States Parties to arrange 
by mutual consent for inspections or  any other procedures among themselves to clarify and resolve any 
matter which  may cause doubt about com pliance or gives rise to a concern about a related  matter which 
may be considered ambiguous. Such arrangements shall not affect  the rights and obligations of any State 
Party under other provisions of this  Convention.  
Procedure for requesting clarification  
3. A State Party shall have the right to request the Executive Council to assist in  clarifying any 
situation which may be considered ambiguous or which gives rise to  a concern about the possible non -
compliance of another State Party with this  Convention. T he Executive Council shall provide appropriate 
information in its  possession relevant to such a concern.  
4. A State Party shall have the right to request the Executive Council to obtain  clarification from 
another State Party on any situation which may be c onsidered  ambiguous or which gives rise to a concern 
about its possible non -compliance with  this Convention. In such a case, the following shall apply:  
(a) The Executive Council shall forward the request for clarification to the State  Party concerned 
throu gh the Director -General not later than 24 hours after  its receipt;  
(b) The requested State Party shall provide the clarification to the Executive  Council as soon as 
possible, but in any case not later than 10 days after the  receipt of the request;  
(c) The Executive Council shall take note of the clarification and forward it to  the requesting 
State Party not later than 24 hours after its receipt;  
(d) If the requesting State Party deems the clarification to be inadequate, it shall  have the right to 
request th e Executive Council to obtain from the requested  State Party further clarification;  
(e) For the purpose of obtaining further clarification requested under  sub-paragraph ( d), the 
Executive Council may call on the Director -General to  establish a group of experts from the 
Technical Secretariat, or if appropriate  staff are not available in the Technical Secretariat, from 
elsewhere, to  examine all available information and data relevant to the situation causing  the concern. 
The group of experts shall submit a  factual report to the  Executive Council on its findings;  
(f) If the requesting State Party considers the clarification obtained under  sub-paragraphs ( d) and 
(e) to be unsatisfactory, it shall have the right to  request a special session of the Executive Council in 
which States Parties  involved that are not members of the Executive Council shall be entitled to  take 
part. In such a special session, the Executive Council shall consider the  matter and may recommend 
any measure it deems appropriate to resolve the situation.  
5. A State Party shall also have the right to request the Executive Council to clarify  any situation 
which has been considered ambiguous or has given rise to a concern  about its possible non -compliance 
with this Convention. The Executive Cou ncil shall respond by providing such assistance as appropriate.  
6. The Executive Council shall inform the States Parties about any request for  clarification provided 
in this Article.  36 
 7. If the doubt or concern of a State Party about a possible non -complian ce has not  been resolved 
within 60 days after the submission of the request for clarification  to the Executive Council, or it believes 
its doubts warrant urgent consideration,  notwithstanding its right to request a challenge inspection, it may 
request a sp ecial  session of the Conference in accordance with Article VIII, paragraph 12 (c). At  such a 
special session, the Conference shall consider the matter and may  recommend any measure it deems 
appropriate to resolve the situation.  
Procedures for challenge inspections  
8. Each State Party has the right to request an on -site challenge inspection of any  facility or location 
in the territory or in any other place under the jurisdiction or  control of any other State Party for the sole 
purpose of clarifying and re solving any  questions concerning possible non -compliance with the 
provisions of this  Convention, and to have this inspection conducted anywhere without delay by an  
inspection team designated by the Director -General and in accordance with the  Verification A nnex.  
9. Each State Party is under the obligation to keep the inspection request within the  scope of this 
Convention and to provide in the inspection request all appropriate  information on the basis of which a 
concern has arisen regarding possible  non-comp liance with this Convention as specified in the 
Verification Annex. Each  State Party shall refrain from unfounded inspection requests, care being taken 
to avoid abuse. The challenge inspection shall be carried out for the sole purpose of  determining facts 
relating to the possible non -compliance.  
10. For the purpose of verifying compliance with the provisions of this Convention,  each State Party 
shall permit the Technical Secretariat to conduct the on -site challenge inspection pursuant to paragraph 8.  
11. Pu rsuant to a request for a challenge inspection of a facility or location, and in  accordance with 
the procedures provided for in the Verification Annex, the  inspected State Party shall have:  
(a) The right and the obligation to make every reasonable effort t o demonstrate  its compliance 
with this Convention and, to this end, to enable the inspection  team to fulfil its mandate;  
(b) The obligation to provide access within the requested site for the sole  purpose of establishing 
facts relevant to the concern regar ding possible  non-compliance; and  
(c) The right to take measures to protect sensitive installations, and to prevent  disclosure of 
confidential information and data, not related to this  Convention.  
12. With regard to an observer, the following shall apply:  
(a) The requesting State Party may, subject to the agreement of the inspected  State Party, send a 
representative who may be a national either of the  requesting State Party or of a third State Party, to 
observe the conduct of the  challenge inspection;  
(b) The inspected State Party shall then grant access to the observer in  accordance with the 
Verification Annex;  
(c) The inspected State Party shall, as a rule, accept the proposed observer, but  if the inspected 
State Party exercises a refusal, that fact shall be recorded in  the final report.  
13. The requesting State Party shall present an inspection request for an on -site challenge inspection 
to the Executive Council and at the same time to the  Director -General for immediate processing.  
14. The Director -General  shall immediately ascertain that the inspection request meets  the 
requirements specified in Part X, paragraph 4, of the Verification Annex, and,  if necessary, assist the 
requesting State Party in filing the inspection request  accordingly. When the inspect ion request fulfils the 
requirements, preparations for  the challenge inspection shall begin.  
15. The Director -General shall transmit the inspection request to the inspected State  Party not less 
than 12 hours before the planned arrival of the inspection tea m at the point of entry.  
16. After having received the inspection request, the Executive Council shall take  cognizance of the 
Director -General ’s actions on the request and shall keep the case  under its consideration throughout the 
inspection procedure. However, its  deliberations shall not delay the inspection process.  
17. The Executive Council may, not later than 12 hours after having received the  inspection request, 
decide by a three -quarter majority of all its members against  carrying out the challenge  inspection, if it 
considers the inspection request to be  frivolous, abusive or clearly beyond the scope of this Convention as 37 
 described in  paragraph 8. Neither the requesting nor the inspected State Party shall participate  in such a 
decision. If the Execu tive Council decides against the challenge  inspection, preparations shall be stopped, 
no further action on the inspection  request shall be taken, and the States Parties concerned shall be 
informed  accordingly.  
18. The Director -General shall issue an inspec tion mandate for the conduct of the  challenge 
inspection. The inspection mandate shall be the inspection request  referred to in paragraphs 8 and 9 put 
into operational terms, and shall conform  with the inspection request.  
19. The challenge inspection shall  be conducted in accordance with Part X or, in the  case of alleged 
use, in accordance with Part XI of the Verification Annex. The  inspection team shall be guided by the 
principle of conducting the challenge  inspection in the least intrusive manner possible , consistent with the 
effective and  timely accomplishment of its mission.  
20. The inspected State Party shall assist the inspection team throughout the challenge  inspection and 
facilitate its task. If the inspected State Party proposes, pursuant to  Part X,  Section C, of the Verification 
Annex, arrangements to demonstrate  compliance with this Convention, alternative to full and 
comprehensive access, it  shall make every reasonable effort, through consultations with the inspection 
team,  to reach agreement on t he modalities for establishing the facts with the aim of  demonstrating its 
compliance.  
21. The final report shall contain the factual findings as well as an assessment by the  inspection team 
of the degree and nature of access and cooperation granted for th e satisfactory implementation of the 
challenge inspection. The Director -General shall  promptly transmit the final report of the inspection team 
to the requesting State  Party, to the inspected State Party, to the Executive Council and to all other States  
Parties. The Director -General shall further transmit promptly to the Executive  Council the assessments of 
the requesting and of the inspected States Parties, as  well as the views of other States Parties which may 
be conveyed to the  Director -General for that purpose, and then provide them to all States Parties.  
22. The Executive Council shall, in accordance with its powers and functions, review  the final report 
of the inspection team as soon as it is presented, and address any  concerns as to:  
(a) Whether any non-compliance has occurred;  
(b) Whether the request had been within the scope of this Convention; and  
(c) Whether the right to request a challenge inspection had been abused.  
23. If the Executive Council reaches the conclusion, in keeping with its powers and functions, that 
further action may be necessary with regard to paragraph 22, it  shall take the appropriate measures to 
redress the situation and to ensure  compliance with this Convention, including specific recommendations 
to the  Conference. In the cas e of abuse, the Executive Council shall examine whether the  requesting State 
Party should bear any of the financial implications of the  challenge inspection.  
24. The requesting State Party and the inspected State Party shall have the right to  participate i n the 
review process. The Executive Council shall inform the States  Parties and the next session of the 
Conference of the outcome of the process.  
25. If the Executive Council has made specific recommendations to the Conference,  the Conference 
shall conside r action in accordance with Article XII.  
  38 
 ARTICLE X  
ASSISTANCE AND PROTECTION  AGAINST CHEMICAL WEAPONS  
1. For the purposes of this Article, “Assistance ” means the coordination and delivery  to States Parties 
of protection against chemical weapons, including, inter alia , the  following: detection equipment and 
alarm systems; protective equipment;  decontamination equipment and decontaminants; medical antidotes 
and treatments; and advice on any o f these protective measures.  
2. Nothing in this Convention shall be interpreted as impeding the right of any State  Party to conduct 
research into, develop, produce, acquire, transfer or use means of  protection against chemical weapons, 
for purposes not pro hibited under this  Convention.  
3. Each State Party undertakes to facilitate, and shall have the right to participate in,  the fullest 
possible exchange of equipment, material and scientific and  technological information concerning means 
of protection agains t chemical  weapons.  
4. For the purposes of increasing the transparency of national programmes related to  protective 
purposes, each State Party shall provide annually to the Technical  Secretariat information on its 
programme, in accordance with procedures t o be considered and approved by the Conference pursuant to 
Article VIII, paragraph 21(i).  
5. The Technical Secretariat shall establish, not later than 180 days after entry into  force of this 
Convention and maintain, for the use of any requesting State Part y, a data bank containing freely 
available information concerning various means of  protection against chemical weapons as well as such 
information as may be  provided by States Parties.  
The Technical Secretariat shall also, within the resources available to  it, and at  the request of a State 
Party, provide expert advice and assist the State Party in  identifying how its programmes for the 
development and improvement of a  protective capacity against chemical weapons could be implemented.  
6. Nothing in this Conv ention shall be interpreted as impeding the right of States  Parties to request 
and provide assistance bilaterally and to conclude individual  agreements with other States Parties 
concerning the emergency procurement of  assistance.  
7. Each State Party undertakes to provid e assistance through the Organization  and to  this end to elect 
to take one or more of the following measures:  
(a) To contribute to the voluntary fund for assistance to be established by the  Conference at its 
first session;  
(b) To conclu de, if possible not later than 180 days after this Convention enters  into force for it, 
agreements with the Organization  concerning the  procurement, upon demand, of assistance;  
(c) To declare, not later than 180 days after this Convention enters into force  for it, the kind of 
assistance it might provide in response to an appeal by the  Organization . If, however, a State Party 
subsequently is unable to provide the  assistance envisaged in its declaration, it is still under the 
obligation to  provide assistance in accordance with this paragraph.  
8. Each State Party has the right to request and, subject to the procedures set forth  in paragraphs 9, 10 
and 11, to receive assistance and protection against the use or  threat of use of chemical weapons if it 
considers t hat: 
(a) Chemical weapons have been used against it;  
(b) Riot control agents have been used against it as a method of warfare; or  
(c) It is threatened by actions or activities of any State that are prohibited for  States Parties by 
Article I.  
9. The request, substantiated by relevant information, shall be submitted to the  Director -General, who 
shall transmit it immediately to the Executive Council and  to all States Parties. The Director -General shall 
immediately forward the request to  States Parties w hich have volunteere d, in accordance with paragraph  
7(b) and ( c), to dispatch emergency assistance in case of use of chemical weapons or use of riot  control 
agents as a method of warfare, or humanitarian assistance in case of  serious threat of use of chem ical 
weapons or serious threat of use of riot control  agents as a method of warfare to the State Party concerned 
not later than 12 hours  after receipt of the request. The  Director -General  shall  initiate,   not later than 24    39 
 hours after receipt of the request, an investigation in order to provide foundation  for further action. He 
shall complete the investigation within 72 hours and forward  a report to the Executive Council. If 
additional time is required for completion of  the investigation, an interim r eport shall be submitted within 
the same time -frame.  The additional time required for investigation shall not exceed 72 hours. It may,  
however, be further extended by similar periods. Reports at the end of each  additional period shall be 
submitted to the E xecutive Council. The investigation  shall, as appropriate and in conformity with the 
request and the information  accompanying the request, establish relevant facts related to the request as 
well as  the type and scope of supplementary assistance and protect ion needed.  
10. The Executive Council shall meet not later than 24 hours after receiving an  investigation report to 
consider the situation and shall take a decision by simple  majority within the following 24 hours on 
whether to instruct the Technical  Secretariat to provide supplementary assistance. The Technical 
Secretariat shall  immediately transmit to all States Parties and relevant international Organization s the 
investigation report and the decision taken by the Executive Council. When so  decided by the Executive 
Council, the Director -General shall provide assistance  immediately. For this purpose, the Director -
General may cooperate with the  requesting State Party, other States Parties and relevant international  
Organization s. The States Parties sha ll make the fullest possible efforts to provide  assistance.  
11. If the information available from the ongoing investigation or other reliable  sources would give 
sufficient proof that there are victims of use of chemical  weapons and immediate action is indi spensable, 
the Director -General shall notify  all States Parties and shall take emergency measures of assistance, using 
the resources the Conference has placed at his disposal for such contingencies. The  Director -General shall 
keep the Executive Council inf ormed of actions undertaken  pursuant to this paragraph.  
  40 
 ARTICLE XI  
ECONOMIC AND TECHNOLOGY  DEVELOPMENT  
1. The provisions of this Convention shall be implemented in a manner which avoids  hampering the 
economic or technological development of States Parties, and  international cooperation in the field of 
chemical activities for purposes not  prohibited under this Convention including the international exchange 
of scientific  and technical information and chemicals and equipment for the production,  proces sing or use 
of chemicals for purposes not prohibited under this Convention.  
2. Subject to the provisions of this Convention and without prejudice to the  principles and applicable 
rules of international law, the States Parties shall:  
(a) Have the right, ind ividually or collectively, to conduct research with, to  develop, produce, 
acquire, retain, transfer, and use chemicals;  
(b) Undertake to facilitate, and have the right to participate in, the fullest  possible exchange of 
chemicals, equipment and scientific and technical  information relating to the development and 
application of chemistry for  purposes not prohibited under this Convention;  
(c) Not maintain among themselves any restrictions, including those in any  international 
agreements, incompatible with the  obligations undertaken  under this Convention, which would 
restrict or impede trade and the  development and promotion of scientific and technological 
knowledge in the  field of chemistry for industrial, agricultural, research, medical,  pharmaceutical or 
other peaceful purposes;  
(d) Not use this Convention as grounds for applying any measures other than  those provided for, 
or permitted, under this Convention nor use any other  international agreement for pursuing an 
objective inconsistent with this  Convention;  
(e) Undertake to review their existing national regulations in the field of trade in  chemicals in 
order to render them consistent with the object and purpose of  this Convention.  
  41 
 ARTICLE XII  
MEASURES TO REDRESS A SITUATION AND TO ENSURE  COMPLIANCE, INCLUDING SANCTIONS  
1. The Conference shall take the necessary measures, as set forth in paragraphs 2, 3  and 4, to ensure 
compliance with this Convention and to redress and remedy any  situation which contravenes the 
provisions of this Convention. In consid ering  action pursuant to this paragraph, the Conference shall take 
into account all  information and recommendations on the issues submitted by the Executive  Council.  
2. In cases where a State Party has been requested by the Executive Council to take  measur es to 
redress a situation raising problems with regard to its compliance,  and where the State Party fails to fulfil 
the request within the specified time, the  Conference may, inter alia , upon the recommendation of the 
Executive Council,  restrict or suspend  the State Party ’s rights and privileges under this Convention  until it 
undertakes the necessary action to conform with its obligations under this  Convention.  
3. In cases where serious damage to the object and purpose of this Convention may  result from 
activities prohibited under this Convention, in particular by Article I,  the Conference may recommend 
collective measures to States Parties in conformity  with international law.  
4. The Conference shall, in cases of particular gravity, bring the issue, includi ng relevant information 
and conclusions, to the attention of the United Nations  General Assembly and the United Nations 
Security Council.  
 
ARTICLE XIII  
RELATION TO OTHER INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENTS  
Nothing in this Convention shall be interpreted as in any way  limiting or detracting  from the 
obligations assumed by any State under the Protocol for the Prohibition of the  Use in War of 
Asphyxiating, Poisonous or other Gases, and of Bacteriological Methods  of War  fare, signed at Geneva 
on 17 June 1925, and under th e Convention on the  Prohibition of the Development, Production and 
Stockpiling of Bacteriological  (Biolog ical) and Toxin Weapons and on t heir Destruction, signed at 
London, Moscow  and Washington on 10 April 1972.  
  42 
 ARTICLE XIV  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES  
1. Disputes that may arise concerning the application or the interpretation of this  Convention shall be 
settled in accordance with the relevant provisions of this  Convention and in conformity with the 
provisions of the Charter of the United  Nations.  
2. When a  dispute arises between two or more States Parties, or between one or  more States Parties 
and the Organization , relating to the interpretation or  application of this Convention, the parties concerned 
shall consult together with a  view to the expeditious se ttlement of the dispute by negotiation or by other  
peaceful means of the parties ’ choice, including recourse to appropriate organs of  this Convention and, by 
mutual consent, referral to the International Court of  Justice in conformity with the Statute of the Court. 
The States Parties involved  shall keep the Executive Council informed of actions being taken.  
3. The Executive Council may contribute to the settlement of a dispute by whatever  means it deems 
appropriate, including offering its good offices, cal ling upon the  States Parties to a dispute to start the 
settlement process of their choice and  recommending a time -limit for any agreed procedure.  
4. The Conference shall consider questions related to disputes raised by States  Parties or brought to its 
attention by the Executive Council. The Conference shall,  as it finds necessary, establish or entrust organs 
with tasks related to the  settlement of these disputes in conformity with Article VIII, paragraph 21 (f). 
5. The Conference and the Executive Council ar e separately empowered, subject to  authorization 
from the General Assembly of the United Nations, to request the  International Court of Justice to give an 
advisory opinion on any legal question  arising within the scope of the activities  of the Organization . An 
agreement  between the Organization  and the United Nations shall be concluded for this  purpose in 
accordance with Article VIII, paragraph 34 (a). 
6. This Article is without prejudice to Article IX or to the provisions on measures to  redress a 
situation and to ensure compliance, including sanctions.  
  43 
 ARTICLE XV  
AMENDMENTS  
1. Any State Party may propose amendments to this Convention. Any State Party  may also propose 
changes, as specified in paragraph 4, to the Annexes of this  Convention. Proposals for amendments shall 
be subject to the procedures in  paragraphs 2 and 3. Proposals for changes, as specified in paragraph 4, 
shall be  subject to the procedures in paragraph 5.  
2. The text of a proposed amendment shall be submitted to the Director -General for  circulation to all 
States Parties and to the Depositary. The proposed amendment  shall be considered only by an 
Amendment Conference. Such an Amendment  Conference shall be convened if one third or more of the 
States Parties notify the  Director -General not la ter than 30 days after its circulation that they support  
further consideration of the proposal. The Amendment Conference shall be held  immediately following a 
regular session of the Conference unless the requesting  States Parties ask for an earlier meeting . In no 
case shall an Amendment  Conference be held less than 60 days after the circulation of the proposed  
amendment.  
3. Amendments shall enter into force for all States Parties 30 days after deposit of  the instruments of 
ratification or acceptance by all the States Parties referred to  under sub -paragraph ( b) below:  
(a) When adopted by the Amendment Conference by a positive vote of a  majority of all States 
Parties with no State Party casting a negative vote; and  
(b) Ratified or accepted by all those States Parties casting a positive vote at the  Amendment 
Conference.  
4. In order to ensure the viability and the effectiveness of this Convention, provisions  in the Annexes 
shall be subject to changes in accordance with paragraph 5, if  proposed changes are related  only to 
matters of an administrative or technical  nature. All changes to the Annex on Chemicals shall be made in 
accordance with  paragraph 5. Sections A and C of the Confidentiality Annex, Part X of the  Verification 
Annex, and those definitions in Part I of the Verification Annex which  relate exclusively to challenge 
inspections, shall not be subject to changes in  accordance with paragraph 5.  
5. Proposed changes referred to in paragraph 4 shall be made in accordance with the  following 
procedures:  
(a) The t ext of the proposed changes shall be transmitted together with the  necessary information 
to the Director -General. Additional information for the  evaluation of the proposal may be provided by 
any State Party and the  Director -General. The Director -General shall promptly communicate any  such 
proposals and information to all States Parties, the Executive Council  and the Depositary;  
(b) Not later than 60 days after its receipt, the Director -General shall evaluate  the proposal to 
determine all its possible cons equences for the provisions of  this Convention and its implementation 
and shall communicate any such  information to all States Parties and the Executive Council;  
(c) The Executive Council shall examine the proposal in the light of all  information available  to 
it, including whether the proposal fulfils the  requirements of paragraph 4. Not later than 90 days after 
its receipt, the  Executive Council shall notify its recommendation, with appropriate  explanations, to 
all States Parties for consideration. States Parties shall  acknowledge receipt within 10 days;  
(d) If the Executive Council recommends to all States Parties that the proposal  be adopted, it shall 
be considered approved if no State Party objects to it  within 90 days after receipt of the 
recommendation . If the Executive Council  recommends that the proposal be rejected, it shall be 
considered rejected if  no State Party objects to the rejection within 90 days after receipt of the  
recommendation;  
(e) If a recommendation of the Executive Council does not me et with the  acceptance required 
under sub -paragraph (d), a decision on the proposal,  including whether it fulfils the requirements of 
paragraph 4, shall be taken as  a matter of substance by the Conference at its next session;  
(f) The Director -General shall  notify all States Parties and the Depositary of any  decision under 
this paragraph;  
(g) Changes approved under this procedure shall enter into force for all States  Parties 180 days 
after the date of notification by the Director -General of their  approval un less another time period is 
recommended by the Executive  Council or decided by the Conference.  
  44 
 ARTICLE XVI  
DURATION AND WITHDRAWAL  
1. This Convention shall be of unlimited duration.  
2. Each State Party shall, in exercising its national sovereignty, have the right to  withdraw from this 
Convention if it decides that extraordinary events, related to  the subject -matter of this Convention, have 
jeopardized the supreme interests of  its country. It shall give notice of such withdrawal 90 days in 
advance to all o ther States Parties, the Executive Council, the Depositary and the United Nations  Security 
Council. Such notice shall include a statement of the extraordinary events  it regards as having jeopardized 
its supreme interests.  
3. The withdrawal of a State Party  from this Convention shall not in any way affect  the duty of States 
to continue fulfilling the obligations assumed under any relevant  rules of international law, particularly 
the Geneva Protocol of 1925.  
 
ARTICLE XVII  
STATUS OF THE ANNEXES  
The Annexes form an integral part of this Convention. Any reference to this Convention  includes the 
Annexes.  
 
ARTICLE XVIII  
SIGNATURE  
This Convention shall be open for signature for all States before its entry into force.  
 
ARTICLE XIX  
RATIFICATION  
This Convention shall be subject to ratification by States Signatories according to their  respective 
constitutional processes.  
 
ARTICLE XX  
ACCESSION  
Any State which does not sign this Convention before its entry into force may accede to  it at any time 
thereafter.  
 
ARTICLE  XXI 
ENTRY INTO FORCE  
1. This Convention shall enter into force 180 days after the date of the deposit of the  65th instrument 
of ratification, but in no case earlier than two years after its  opening for signature.  
2. For States whose instruments of ratific ation or accession are deposited subsequent  to the entry into 
force of this Convention, it shall enter into force on the 30th day  following the date of deposit of their 
instrument of ratification or accession.  
 
ARTICLE XXII  
RESERVATIONS  
The Articles of thi s Convention shall not be subject to reservations. The Annexes of this  Convention 
shall not be subject to reservations incompatible with its object and purpose.  45 
 ARTICLE XXIII  
DEPOSITARY  
The Secretary -General of the United Nations is hereby designated as the Depositary of  this 
Convention and shall, inter alia : 
(a) Promptly inform all signatory and acceding States of the date of each  signature, the date of 
deposit of each instrument of ratification or accession  and the date of the entry into force of this 
Convention, and of the receipt of  other notices;  
(b) Transmit duly certified copies of this Convention to the Governments of all  signatory and 
acceding States; and  
(c) Register this Convention pursuant to Article 102 of the Charter of the United  Nations.  
 
ARTICLE XXIV  
AUTHENTIC TEXTS  
This Convention, of which the Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish  texts are 
equally authentic, shall be deposited with the Secretary -General of the United  Nations.  
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the undersigned, being duly  authorized to that effect, have  signed this 
Convention.  
Done at Paris on the thirteenth day of January, one thousand nine hundred and  ninety -three.  
  46 
 ANNEX ON CHEMICALS  
A. GUIDELINES FOR SCHEDULES OF CHEMICALS  
Guidelines for Schedule 1 
1. The following cr iteria shall be taken into account in considering whether a toxic  chemical or 
precursor should be included in Schedule 1:  
(a) It has been developed, produced, stockpiled or used as a chemical weapon as  defined in 
Article II;  
(b) It poses otherwise a high risk to the object and purpose of this Convention  by virtue of its high 
potential for use in activities prohibited under this  Convention because one or more of the following 
conditions are met:  
(i) It possesses a chemical structure closely related to that of other toxic  chemicals listed in 
Schedule 1, and has, or can be expected to have,  comparable properties;  
(ii) It possesses such lethal or incapacitating toxicity as well as other  properties that would 
enable it to be used as a chemical weapon;  
(iii) It m ay be used as a precursor in the final single technological stage of  production of a 
toxic chemical listed in Schedule 1, regardless of  whether this stage takes place in facilities, in 
munitions or elsewhere;  
(c) It has little or no use for purposes not pr ohibited under this Convention.  
Guidelines for Schedule 2 
2. The following criteria shall be taken into account in considering whether a toxic  chemical not listed 
in Schedule 1 or a precursor to a Schedule 1 chemical or to a  chemical listed in Schedule 2, part A, should 
be included in Schedule 2:  
(a) It poses a significant risk to the object and purpose of this Convention  because it possesses 
such lethal or incapacitating toxicity as well as other  properties that could enable it to be used as a 
chemical wea pon; 
(b) It may be used as a precursor in one of the chemical reactions at the final  stage of formation of 
a chemical listed in Schedule 1 or Schedule 2, part A;  
(c) It poses a significant risk to the object and purpose of this Convention by  virtue of its 
importance in the production of a chemical listed in Schedule 1or Schedule 2, part A;  
(d) It is not produced in large commercial quantities for purposes not prohibited  under this 
Convention.  
Guidelines for Schedule 3 
3. The following criteria shall be take n into account in considering whether a toxic  chemical or 
precursor, not listed in other Schedules, should be included in  Schedule 3:  
(a) It has been produced, stockpiled or used as a chemical weapon;  
(b) It poses otherwise a risk to the object and purpose  of this Convention  because it possesses 
such lethal or incapacitating toxicity as well as other  properties that might enable it to be used as a 
chemical weapon;  
(c) It poses a risk to the object and purpose of this Convention by virtue of its  importance in the 
production of one or more chemicals listed in Schedule 1  or Schedule 2, part B;  
(d) It may be produced in large commercial quantities for purposes not  prohibited under this 
Convention.  
B. SCHEDULES OF CHEMICALS  
The following Schedules list toxic chemicals and their precursors. For the purpose of  implementing 
this Convention, these Schedules identify chemicals for the application of  verification measures according 
to the provisions of the Verification Annex. Pursuant to  Article II, sub -paragraph 1 (a), these Schedules do 
not constitute a definition of chemical  weapons.  47 
 (Whenever reference is made to groups of dialkylated chemicals, followed by a list of  alkyl groups in 
parentheses, all chemicals possible by all possible combinations of alkyl  groups l isted in the parentheses 
are considered as listed in the respective Schedule as  long as they are not explicitly exempted. A chemical 
marked “*” on Schedule 2, part A,  is subject to special thresholds for declaration and verification, as 
specified in Part VII of the Verification Annex.)  
 
Schedule 1  
(CAS registry number)  
A. Toxic chemicals:  
(1) O-Alkyl (≤C 10, incl.  cycloalkyl) alkyl   
 (Me, Et, n -Pr or i-Pr)-phosphonofluoridates   
 e.g. Sarin: O -Isopropyl methylphosphonofluoridate  (107-44-8) 
 Soman: O -Pinacolyl methylphosphonofluoridate  (96-64-0) 
(2) O-Alkyl (≤C 10, incl. cycloalkyl) N,N -dialkyl   
 (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr) phosphoramidocyanidates   
 e.g. Tabun: 0 -Ethyl N,N -dimethyl   
 Phosphoramidocyanidate  (77-81-6) 
(3) O-Alkyl  (H or ≤C 10, incl. cycloalkyl) S -2 dialkyl   
 (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr)-aminoethyl alkyl   
 (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr) phosphonothiolates and  
corresponding alkylated or protonated salts   
 e.g. VX: O -Ethyl S -2 diisopropylaminoethyl   
 methyl phosphonothiolate  (50782 -69-9) 
(4) Sulfur mustards:   
 2-Chloroethylchloromethylsulfide  (2625 -76-5) 
 Mustard gas: Bis(2 -chloroethyl) sulfide  (505-60-2) 
 Bis(2 -chloroethylthio) methane  (63869 -13-6) 
 Sesquimustard: 1,2 -Bis (2 -chloroethylthio) ethane  (3563 -36-8) 
 1,3-Bis(2 -chloroethy lthio) -n-propane  (63905 -10-2) 
 1,4-Bis(2 -chloroethylthio) -n-butane  (142868 -93-7) 
 1,5-Bis(2-chloroethy lthio) -n-pentane  (142868 -94-8) 
 Bis(2 -chloroethylthiomet hyl)ether (63918 -90-1) 
 O-Mustard: Bis(2 -chloroethylthioethy l)ether  (63918 -89-8) 
(5) Lewisites :  
 Lewisites 1: 2 -Chlorovinyldichloroarsine  (541-25-3) 
 Lewisites 2: Bis(2 -chlorovinyl)chloroarsine  (40334 -69-8) 
 Lewisites 3: Tris(2 -chlorovinyl)arsine  (40334 -70-1) 
(6) Nitrogen mustards:   
 HN 1: Bis(2 -chloroethyl)ethylamine  (538-07-8) 
 HN 2: Bis(2-chloroethyl)methylamine  (51-75-2) 
 HN 3: Tris(2 -chloroethy1)amine  (555-77-1) 
(7) Saxitoxin  (35523 -89-8) 
(8) Rich  (9009 -86-3) 
B. Precursors:  
(9) Alkyl (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr) phosphonyldifluorides   
 e.g. DF: Methylphosphonyldifluoride  (676-99-3) 
  48 
 (10) O-Alkyl (H or ≤C 10, incl. cycloalkyl) O -2-dialkyl   
 (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr)-aminoethyl alkyl   
 (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr) phosphonites and  
corresponding alkylated or protonated salts   
 e.g. QL: O -Ethyl O -2-diisopropylaminoethyl   
 methylphosphonite  (57856 -11-8) 
(11) Chlorosarin: O -Isopropyl methy lphosphonoch loridate  (1445 -76-7) 
(12) Chlorosoman: O-Pinacolyl  methylphosphonochloridate  (7040 -57-5) 
 
Schedule 2  
A. Toxic chemicals:  
(1) Amiton: O,O -Diethyl S-[2-(diethylamino)ethyl]   
 Phosphorothiolate  (78-53-5) 
 and corresponding alkylated or protonated salts   
(2) PFIB: 1,1,3,3,3 -Pentafluoro -2-(trifluoromethyl )-1-propene  (382-2 1-8) 
(3) BZ: 3 -Quinuclidinyl benzilate (*)  (6581-06-2) 
B. Precursors:  
(4) Chemicals, except for those listed in Schedule 1,   
 containing a phosphorus atom to which is bonded   
 one methyl, ethy l or propy l (normal or iso) group   
 but not further carbon atoms,   
 e.g. Methylphosphonyl dichloride  (676-97-1) 
 Dimethyl methylphosphonate  (756-79-6) 
 Exemption: Fonofos: O-Ethy l S-pheny l  
 ethylphosphonothiolothionate  (944-22-9) 
(5) N,N-Dialkyl (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr) phosphoramidic dihalides   
(6) Dialkyl (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr) N,N -dialkyl   
 (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr)-phosphor amidates   
(7) Arsenic trichloride  (7784 -34-1) 
(8) 2,2-Diphenyl -2-hydroxyacetic acid (76-93-7) 
(9) Quinuclidin -3-ol (1619 -34-7) 
(10) N,N-Dialkyl (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr) aminoethyle -2-chlorides   
 and corresponding protonated salts   
(11) N,N-Dialkyl (Me, Et , n-Pr or i -Pr) amhoethane -2-ols  
 and corresponding protonated salts   
 Exemptions: N,N-Dimethylaminoethanol  (108-01-0) 
 and corresponding protonated salts   
 N,N-Diethylaminoethanol  (100-37-8) 
 and c orresponding protonated salts   
(12) N,N-Dialkyl (Me, Et, n -Pr or i -Pr) amin oethane -2-thiols   
 and corresponding protonated salts   
(13) Thiodiglycol: Bis(2 -hydroxyethy l)sulfide  (111-48-8) 
(14) Pinacoly l alcohol: 3,3 -Dimethylbutan -2-ol (464-07-3) 
 
  49 
 Schedule 3 
A. Toxic chemicals:  
(1) Phosge ne: Carbonyl dichloride  (75-44-5) 
(2) Cyanogen chloride  (506-77-4) 
(3) Hydrogen cyanide  (74-90-8) 
(4) Chloropicrin: T richloronitromethane  (76-06-2) 
B. Precursors:  
(5) Phospho rus oxychloride  (10025 -87-3) 
(6) Phospho rus trichloride  (7719 -12-2) 
(7) Phosphor us pentachloride  (10026 -13-8) 
(8) Trimethyl  phosphite  (121-45-9) 
(9) Triethyl phosphite  (122-52-1) 
(10) Dimethy l phosphite  (868-85-9) 
(11) Diethyl  phosphite  (762-04-9) 
(12) Sulfu r monochloride  (10025 -67-9) 
(13) Sulfur dichloride  (10545 -99-0) 
(14) Thionyl chloride  (7719 -09-7) 
(15) Ethyldiethanolamine  (139-87-7) 
(16) Methyldiethanolamine  (105-59-9) 
(17) Triethanolamine  (102-71-6). 
  50 
 ANNEX ON IMPLEMENTATION AND VERIFICATION  
(“VERIFICATION ANNEX ”) 
PART I  
DEFINITIONS  
1. “Approved Equipment ” means the devices and instruments necessary for the  performance of the 
inspection team ’s duties that have been certified by the  Technical Secretariat in accordance with 
regulations prepared by the Technical  Secretariat pursuant to Part II, paragraph 27 of  this Annex. Such 
equipment may  also refer to the administrative supplies or recording materials that would be used  by the 
inspection team.  
2. “Building ” as referred to in the definition of chemical weapons production facility  in Article II 
comprises speci alized b uildings and standard buildings:  
(a) “Specialized Building ” means:  
(i) Any building, including underground structures, containing specialized  equipment in a 
production or filling configuration;  
(ii) Any building, including underground structures, which has distinctive  features which 
distinguish it from buildings normally used for chemical  production or filling activities not 
prohibited under this Convention.  
(b) “Standard Building ” means any building, including underground structures,  constructed t o 
prevailing industry standards for facilities not producing any  chemical specified in Article II, 
paragraph 8 ( a) (i), or corrosive chemicals.  
3. “Challenge Inspection ” means the inspection of any facility or location in the  territory or in any 
other plac e under the jurisdiction or control of a State Party  requested by another State Party pursuant to 
Article IX, paragraphs 8 to 25.  
4. “Discrete Organic Chemical ” means any chemical belonging to the class of  chemical compounds 
consisting of all compounds of carbon except for its oxides,  sulfides and metal carbonates, identifiable by 
chemical name, by structural  formula, if known, and by Chemical Abstracts Service registry number, if 
assigned.  
5. “Equipment ” as referred to in the definition of chemical weapons  production  facility in Article II 
comprises specialized equipment and standard equipment.  
(a) “Specialized Equipment ” means:  
(i) The main production train, including any reactor or equipment for  product synthesis, 
separation or purification, any equipment  used directly for heat transfer in the final technological 
stage, such as in  reactors or in product separation, as well as any other equipment which  has been 
in contact with any chemical specified in Article II, paragraph  8 (a) (i), or would be in contact  
with such a chemical if the facility were  operated;  
(ii) Any chemical weapon filling machines;  
(iii) Any other equipment specially designed, built or installed for the  operation of the facility 
as a chemical weapons production facility, as  distinct from a  facility constructed according to 
prevailing commercial  industry standards for facilities not producing any chemical specified in  
Article II, paragraph 8 ( a) (i), or corrosive chemicals, such as:  equipment made of high -nickel 
alloys or other special  corro sion-resistant material; special equipment for waste control, waste  
treatment, air filtering, or solvent recovery; special containment  enclosures and safety shields; 
non-standard laboratory equipment used  to analyse toxic chemicals for chemical weapons 
purposes;  custom -designed process control panels; or dedicated spares for  specialized equipment.  
(b) “Standard Equipment ” means:  
(i) Production equipment which is generally used in the chemical industry  and is not included 
in the types of specialized equipmen t; 
  51 
 (ii) Other equipment commonly used in the chemical industry, such as:  fire-fighting 
equipment; guard and security/safety surveillance  equipment; medical facilities, laboratory 
facilities; or communications  equipment.  
6. “Facility ” in the context of Article VI means any of the industrial sites as defined  below ( “plant 
site”,“plant ” and “unit”). 
(a) “Plant Site ” (Works, Factory) means the local integration of one or more  plants, with any 
intermediate administrative levels, which are under one  operational control, and includes common 
infrastructure, such as:  
(i) Administration and other offices;  
(ii) Repair and maintenance shops;  
(iii) Medical centre;  
(iv) Utilities;  
(v) Central analytical laboratory;  
(vi) Research  and development laboratories;  
(vii) Central effluent and waste treatment area; and  
(viii) Warehouse storage.  
(b) “Plant ” (Production facility, Workshop) means a relatively self -contained area,  structure or 
building containing one or more units with auxili ary and  associated infrastructure, such as:  
(i) Small administrative section;  
(ii) Storage/handling areas for feedstock and products;  
(iii) Effluent/waste handling/treatment area;  
(iv) Control/analytical laboratory;  
(v) First aid service/related medical se ction; and  
(vi) Records associated with the movement into, around and from the site,  of declared 
chemicals and their feedstock or product chemicals formed  from them, as appropriate.  
(c) “Unit” (Production unit, Process unit) means the combination of those items  of equipment, 
including vessels and vessel set up, necessary for the  production, processing or consumption of a 
chemical.  
7. “Facility Agreement ” means an agreement or arrangement between a State Party  and the 
Organization  relating to a specific facility subject to on -site verification  pursuant to Articles IV, V and VI.  
8. “Host State ” means the State on whose territory lie facilities or areas of another  State, Party to this 
Convention, which are subject to inspection under  this Convention.  
9. “In-Country Escort ” means individuals specified by the inspected State Party and,  if appropriate, 
by the Host State, if they so wish, to accompany and assist the  inspection team during the in -country 
period.  
10. “In-Country Period ” means the period from the arrival of the inspection team at a  point of entry 
until its departure from the State at a point of entry.  
11. “Initial Inspection ” means the first on -site inspection of facilities to verify  declarations submitted 
pursuant to Article s III, IV, V and VI and this Annex.  
12. “Inspected State Party ” means the State Party on whose territory or in any other  place under its 
jurisdiction or control an inspection pursuant to this Convention  takes place, or the State Party whose 
facility or are a on the territory of a Host  State is subject to such an inspection; it does not, however, 
include the State Party  specified in Part II, paragraph 21 of this Annex.  
13. “Inspection Assistant ” means an individual designated by the Technical Secretariat  as set forth in 
Part II, Section A, of this Annex to assist inspectors in an inspection  or visit, such as medical, security and 
administrative personnel and interpreters.  52 
 14. “Inspection Mandate ” means the instructions issued by the Director -General to the  inspection 
team for the conduct of a particular inspection.  
15. “Inspection Manual ” means the compilation of additional procedures for the  conduct of 
inspections developed by the Technical Secretariat.  
16. “Inspection Site ” means any facility or area at which an inspection is carried out  and which is 
specifically defined in the respective facility agreement or inspection  request or mandate or inspection 
request as expanded by the alternative or final  perimeter.  
17. “Inspecti on Team ” means the group of inspectors and inspection assistants  assigned by the 
Director -General to conduct a particular inspection.  
18. “Inspector ” means an individual designated by the Technical Secretariat according  to the 
procedures as set forth in Pa rt II, Section A, of this Annex, to carry out an  inspection or visit in 
accordance with this Convention.  
19. “Model Agreement ” means a document specifying the general form and content for  an agreement 
concluded between a State Party and the Organization  for fulfilling  the verification provisions specified in 
this Annex.  
20. “Observer ” means a representative of a requesting State Party or a third State  Party to observe a 
challenge inspection.  
21. “Perimeter ” in case of challenge inspection means the external  boundary of the  inspection site, 
defined by either geographic coor dinates or description on a map:  
(a) “Requested Perimeter ” means the inspection site perimeter as specified in  conformity with 
Part X, paragraph 8, of this Annex;  
(b) “Alternative Perimeter ” means the inspection site perimeter as specified,  alternatively to the 
requested perimeter, by the inspected State Party; it shall  conform to the requirements specified in 
Part X, paragraph 17, of this Annex;  
(c) “Final Perimeter ” means the final inspect ion site perimeter as agreed in  negotiations between 
the inspection team and the inspected State Party, in  accordance with Part X, paragraphs 16 to 21, of 
this Annex;  
(d) “Declared Perimeter ” means the external boundary of the facility declared  pursuant to  Articles 
III, IV, V and VI.  
22. “Period of Inspection ”, for the purposes of Article IX, means the period of time  from provision of 
access to the inspection team to the inspection site until its  departure from the inspection site, exclusive of 
time spent o n briefings before and  after the verification activities.  
23. “Period of Inspection ”, for the purposes of Articles IV, V and VI, means the period  of time from 
arrival of the inspection team at the inspection site until its departure  from the inspection sit e, exclusive of 
time spent on briefings before and after the  verification activities.  
24. “Point of Entry ”/“Point of Exit ” means a location designated for the in -country  arrival of 
inspection teams for inspections pursuant to this Convention or for their  departure after completion of 
their mission.  
25. “Requesting State Party ” means a State Party which has requested a challenge  inspection pursuant 
to Article IX.  
26. “Tonne ” means metric ton, i.e., 1,000 kg.  
  53 
 PART II  
GENERAL RULES OF VERIFICATION  
A. DESIGNATION OF INSPECTORS AND INSPECTION ASSISTANTS  
1. Not later than 30 days after entry into force of this Convention the Technical  Secretariat shall 
communicate, in writing, to all States Parties the names,  nationalities and ranks of the inspectors and 
inspection assistants proposed for  designation, as well as a description of their qualifications and 
professional  experiences.  
2. Each State Party shall immediately acknowledge receipt of the list of inspectors  and inspection 
assistants, proposed for desig nation communicated to it. The State  Party shall inform the Technical 
Secretariat in writing of its acceptance of each  inspector and inspection assistant, not later than 30 days 
after acknowledgement  of receipt of the list. Any inspector and inspection ass istant included in this list  
shall be regarded as designated unless a State Party, not later than 30 days after  acknowledgement of 
receipt of the list, declares its non -acceptance in writing. The  State Party may include the reason for the 
objection.  
In the  case of non -acceptance, the proposed inspector or inspection assistant  shall not undertake or 
participate in verification activities on the territory or in  any other place under the jurisdiction or control 
of the State Party which has  declared its non -acceptance. The Technical Secretariat shall, as necessary, 
submit  further proposals in addition to the original list.  
3. Verification activities under this Convention shall only be performed by designated  inspectors and 
inspection assistants.  
4. Subject to th e provisions of paragraph 5, a State Party has the right at any time to  object to an 
inspector or inspection assistant who has already been designated. It  shall notify the Technical Secretariat 
of its objection in writing and may include  the reason for the  objection. Such objection shall come into 
effect 30 days after  receipt by the Technical Secretariat. The Technical Secretariat shall immediately  
inform the State Party concerned of the withdrawal of the designation of the  inspector or inspection 
assistant . 
5. A State Party that has been notified of an inspection shall not seek to have  removed from the 
inspection team for that inspection any of the designated  inspectors or inspection assistants named in the 
inspection team list.  
6. The number of inspectors or inspection assistants accepted by and designated to a  State Party must 
be sufficient to allow for availability and rotation of appropriate  numbers of inspectors and inspection 
assistants.  
7. If, in the opinion of the Director -General, the non -acceptance  of proposed  inspectors or inspection 
assistants impedes the designation of a sufficient number  of inspectors or inspection assistants or 
otherwise hampers the effective fulfilment  of the tasks of the Technical Secretariat, the Director -General 
shall refer  the issue  to the Executive Council.  
8. Whenever amendments to the above -mentioned lists of inspectors and inspection  assistants are 
necessary or requested, replacement inspectors and inspection  assistants shall be designated in the same 
manner as set fort h with respect to the  initial list.  
9. The members of the inspection team carrying out an inspection of a facility of a  State Party located 
on the territory of another State Party shall be designated in  accordance with the procedures set forth in 
this Anne x as applied both to the  inspected State Party and the Host State Party.  
B. PRIVILEGES AND IMMUNITIES  
10. Each State Party shall, not late r than 30 days after acknowledg ment of receipt of  the list of 
inspectors and inspection assistants or of changes there to, provide  multiple entry/exit and/or transit visas 
and other such documents to enable each  inspector or inspection assistant to enter and to remain on the 
territory of that  State Party for the purpose of carrying out inspection activities. These document s shall be 
valid for at least two years after their provision to the Technical  Secretariat.  
11. To exercise their functions effectively, inspectors and inspection assistants shall be  accorded 
privileges and immunities as set forth in sub -paragraphs ( a) to (i). Privileges and immunities shall be 
granted to members of the inspection team for  the sake of this Convention and not for the personal benefit 54 
 of the individuals  themselves. Such privileges and immunities shall be accorded to them for the  entire 
period  between arrival on and departure from the territory of the inspected  State Party or Host State, and 
thereafter with respect to acts previously performed  in the exercise of their officia l functions:  
(a) The members of the inspection team shall be accorded the inviolability  enjoyed by diplomatic 
agents pursuant to Article 29 of the Vienna  Convention on Diplomatic Relations of 18 April , 1961 ; 
(b) The living quarters and office premises occupied by the inspection team  carrying out 
inspection activities pursuan t to this Convention shall be  accorded the inviolability and protection 
accorded to the premises of  diplomatic agents pursuant to Article 30, paragraph 1, of the Vienna  
Convention on Diplomatic Relations.  
(c) The papers and correspondence, including record s, of the inspection team  shall enjoy the 
inviolability accorded to all papers and correspondence of  diplomatic agents pursuant to Article 30, 
paragraph 2, of the Vienna  Convention on Diplomatic Relations. The inspection team shall have the  
right to use co des for their communications  with the Technical Secretariat.  
(d) Samples and approved equipment carried by members of the inspection team  shall be 
inviolable subject to provisions contained in this Convention and  exempt from all customs duties. 
Hazardous s amples shall be transported in  accor dance with relevant regulations.  
(e) The members of the inspection team shall be accorded the immunities  accorded to diplomatic 
agents pursuant to Article 31, paragraphs 1, 2 and 3,  of the Vienna Convention on Diplomatic  
Relations.  
(f) The members of the inspection team carrying out prescribed activities  pursuant to this 
Convention shall be accorded the exemption from dues and  taxes accorded to diplomatic agents 
pursuant to Article 34 of the Vienna  Convention on Diplomatic Relations.  
(g) The members of the inspection team shall be permitted to bring into the  territory of the 
inspected State Party or Host State Party, without payment of  any customs duties or related charges, 
articles for personal use, with the  exception of articles the import or export of which is prohibited by 
law or  controlled by quarantine regulations.  
(h) The members of the inspection team shall be accorded the same currency  and exchange 
facilities as are accorded to representatives of foreign  Governments on temporary official missions.  
(i) The members of the inspection team shall not engage in any professional or  commercial 
activity for personal profit on the territory of the inspected State  Party or the Host State.  
12. When transiting the terri tory of non -inspected States Parties, the members of the  inspection team 
shall be accorded the privileges and immunities enjoyed by  diplomatic agents pursuant to Article 40, 
paragraph 1, of the Vienna Convention  on Diplomatic Relations. Papers and correspo ndence, including 
records, and  samples and approved equipment, carried by them, shall be accorded the  privileges and 
immunities set forth in paragraph 11 ( c) and ( d). 
13. Without prejudice to their privileges and immunities the members of the  inspection te am shall be 
obliged to respect the laws and regulations of the  inspected State Party or Host State and, to the extent 
that is consistent with the  inspection mandate, shall be obliged not to interfere in the internal affairs of 
that State. If the inspected State Party or Host State Party considers that there has  been an abuse of 
privileges and immunities specified in this Annex, consultations  shall be held between the State Party and 
the Director -General to determine  whether such an abuse has occurred and, i f so determined, to prevent a 
repetition  of such an abuse.  
14. The immunity from jurisdiction of members of the inspection team may be waived  by the 
Director -General in those cases when the Director -General is of the opinion  that immunity would impede 
the course of justice and that it can be waived  without prejudice to the implementation of the provisions 
of this Convention.  Waiver must always be express.  
15. Observers shall be accorded the same privileges and immunities accorded to  inspectors pursuant 
to this section, except for those accorded pursuant to  paragraph 11 ( d). 
  55 
 C. STANDING ARRANGEMENTS  
Points of entry  
16. Each State Party shall designate the points of entry and shall supply the required  information to 
the Technical Secretariat not later than 30 days after this  Convention enters into force for it. These points 
of entry shall be such that the  inspection team can reach any inspection site from at least one point of 
entry  within 12 hours. Locations of points of entry shall be provided to all State s Parties  by the Technical 
Secretariat.  
17. Each State Party may change the points of entry by giving notice of such change to  the Technical 
Secretariat. Changes shall become effective 30 days after the  Technical Secretariat receives such 
notification to allow appropriate notification to  all States Parties.  
18. If the Technical Secretariat considers that there are insufficient points of entry for  the timely 
conduct of inspections or that changes to the points of entry proposed  by a State Party would hamper  such 
timely conduct of inspections, it shall enter  into consultations with the State Party concerned to resolve 
the problem.  
19. In cases where facilities or areas of an inspected State Party are located on the  territory of a Host 
State Party or where the  access from the point of entry to the  facilities or areas subject to inspection 
requires transit through the territory of  another State Party, the inspected State Party shall exercise the 
rights and fulfill the obligations concerning such inspections in a ccordance with this Annex. The  Host 
State Party shall facilitate the inspection of those facilities or areas and shall  provide for the necessary 
support to enable the inspection team to carry out its  tasks in a timely and effective manner. States Parties 
through whose territory  transit is required to inspect facilities or areas of an inspected State Party shall  
facilitate such transit.  
20. In cases where facilities or areas of an inspected State Party are located on the  territory of a State 
not Party to thi s Convention, the inspected State Party shall  take all necessary measures to ensure that 
inspections of those facilities or areas  can be carried out in accordance with the provisions of this Annex. 
A State Party  that has one or more facilities or areas on the territory of a State not Party to this  
Convention shall take all necessary measures to ensure acceptance by the Host  State of inspectors and 
inspection assistants designated to that State Party. If an  inspected State Party is unable to ensure access, 
it shall demonstrate that it took  all necessary measures to ensure access.  
21. In cases where the facilities or areas sought to be inspected are located on the  territory of a State 
Party, but in a place under the jurisdiction or control of a State  not Party  to this Convention, the State 
Party shall take all necessary measures as  would be required of an inspected State Party and a Host State 
Party to ensure  that inspections of such facilities or areas can be carried out in accordance with  the 
provisions of th is Annex. If the State Party is unable to ensure access to those  facilities or areas, it shall 
demonstrate that it took all necessary measures to  ensure access. This paragraph shall not apply where the 
facilities or areas sought  to be inspected are those o f the State Party.  
Arrangements for use of non -scheduled aircraft  
22. For inspections pursuant to Article IX and for other inspections where timely  travel is not feasible 
using scheduled commercial transport, an inspection team  may need to utilize aircraft  owned or chartered 
by the Technical Secretariat. Not  later than 30 days after this Convention enters into force for it, each 
State Party  shall inform the Technical Secretariat of the standing diplomatic clearance number  for                 
non-scheduled a ircraft transporting inspection teams and equipment necessary  for inspection into and out 
of the territory in which an inspection site is located.  Aircraft routings to and from the designated point of 
entry shall be along  established international airways that are agreed upon between the States Parties  and 
the Technical Secretariat as the basis for such diplomatic clearance.  
23. When a non -scheduled aircraft is used, the Technical Secretariat shall provide the  inspected State 
Party with a flight plan, throu gh the National Authority, for the  aircraft ’s flight from the last airfield prior 
to entering the airspace of the State in  which the inspection site is located to the point of entry, not less 
than six hours  before the scheduled departure time from that air field. Such a plan shall be filed  in 
accordance with the procedures of the International Civil Aviation Organization  applicable to civil 
aircraft. For its owned or chartered flights, the Technical  Secretariat shall include in the remarks section 
of each fl ight plan the standing  diplomatic clearance number and the appropriate notation identifying the 
aircraft  as an inspection aircraft.  56 
 24. Not less than three hours before the scheduled departure of the inspection team  from the last 
airfield prior to entering  the airspace of the State in which the  inspection is to take place, the inspected 
State Party or Host State Party shall  ensure that the flight plan filed in accordance with paragraph 23 is 
approved so  that the inspection team may arrive at the point of en try by the estimated arrival  time.  
25. The inspected State Party shall provide parking, security protection, servicing and  fuel as required 
by the Technical Secretariat for the aircraft of the inspection team  at the point of entry when such aircraft 
is own ed or chartered by the Technical  Secretariat. Such aircraft shall not be liable for landing fees, 
departure tax, and  similar charges. The Technical Secretariat shall bear the cost of such fuel, security  
protection and servicing.  
Administrative arrangements  
26. The inspected State Party shall provide or arrange for the amenities necessary for  the inspection 
team such as communication means, interpretation services to the  extent necessary for the performance of 
interviewing and other tasks,  transportation, wo rking space, lodging, meals and medical care. In this 
regard, the  inspected State Party shall be reimbursed by the Organization  for such costs  incurred by the 
inspection team.  
Approved equipment  
27. Subject to paragraph 29, there shall be no restriction by  the inspected State Party  on the inspection 
team bringing onto the inspection site such equipment, approved  in accordance with paragraph 28, which 
the Technical Secretariat has determined  to be necessary to fulfil the inspection requirements. The 
Technica l Secretariat  shall prepare and, as appropriate, update a list of approved equipment, which may  
be needed for the purposes described above, and regulations governing such  equipment which shall be in 
accordance with this Annex. In establishing the list of  approved equipment and these regulations, the 
Technical Secretariat shall ensure  that safety considerations for all the types of facilities at which such 
equipment is  likely to be used, are taken fully into account. A list of approved equipment shall  be 
considered and approved by the Conference pursuant to Article VIII, paragraph  21 (i). 
28. The equipment shall be in the custody of the Technical Secretariat and be  designated, calibrated 
and approved by the Technical Secretariat. The Technical  Secretariat sha ll, to the extent possible, select 
that equipment which is specifically  designed for the specific kind of inspection required. Designated and 
approved  equipment shall be specifically protected against unauthorized alteration.  
29. The inspected State Party shall have the right, without prejudice to the prescribed  time-frames, to 
inspect the equipment in the presence of inspection team members  at the point of entry, i.e., to check the 
identity of the equipment brought in or  removed from the territory of the i nspected State Party or the Host 
State. To  facilitate such identification, the Technical Secretariat shall attach documents and  devices to 
authenticate its designation and approval of the equipment. The  inspection of the equipment shall also 
ascertain to t he satisfaction of the inspected  State Party that the equipment meets the description of the 
approved equipment  for the particular type of inspection. The inspected State Party may exclude  
equipment not meeting that description or equipment without the  above-mentioned authentication 
documents and devices. Procedures for the  inspection of equipment shall be considered and approved by 
the Conference  pursuant to Article VIII, paragraph 21 ( i). 
30. In cases where the inspection team finds it necessary to use eq uipment available  on site not 
belonging to the Technical Secretariat and requests the inspected State  Party to enable the team to use 
such equipment, the inspected State Party shall  comply with the request to the extent it can.  
D. PRE -INSPECTION ACTIVITIES  
Notification  
31. The Director -General shall notify the State Party before the planned arrival of the  inspection team 
at the point of entry and within the prescribed time -frames, where  specified, of its intention to carry out an 
inspection.  
32. Notifications made by the Director -General shall include the following  information:  
(a) The type of inspection;  
(b) The point of entry;  
(c) The date and estimated time of arrival at the point of entry;  57 
 (d) The means of arrival at the point of entry;  
(e) The site to be inspected;  
(f) The names of inspectors and inspection assistants;  
(g) If appropriate, aircraft clearance for special flights.  
33. The inspected State Party shall acknowledge the receipt of a notification by the  Technical 
Secretariat of an in tention to conduct an inspection, not later than one  hour after receipt of such 
notification.  
34. In the case of an inspection of a facility of a State Party located on the territory of  another State 
Party, both States Parties shall be simultaneously notif ied in  accordance with paragraphs 31 and 32.  
Entry into the territory of the inspected State Party or Host State and  transfer  
to the inspection site  
35. The inspected State Party or Host State Party which has been notified of the  arrival of an 
inspection team, shall ensure its immediate entry into the territory  and shall through an in -country escort 
or by other means do everything in its  power to ensure the safe conduct of the inspection team and its 
equipment and  supplies, from its point of entry to the i nspection site(s) and to a point of exit.  
36. The inspected State Party or Host State Party shall, as necessary, assist the  inspection team in 
reaching the inspection site not later than 12 hours after the  arrival at the point of entry.  
Pre-inspection brie fing 
37. Upon arrival at the inspection site and before the commencement of the inspection,  the inspection 
team shall be briefed by facility representatives, with the aid of  maps and other documentation as 
appropriate, on the facility, the activities carri ed out there, safety measures and administrative and logistic 
arrangements necessary  for the inspection. The time spent for the briefing shall be limited to the 
minimum  necessary and in any event not exceed three hours.  
E. CONDUCT OF INSPECTIONS  
General rules  
38. The members of the inspection team shall discharge their functions in accordance  with the 
provisions of this Convention, as well as rules established by the  Director -General and facility agreements 
concluded between States Parties and the  Organization . 
39. The inspection team shall strictly observe the inspection mandate issued by the  Director -General. 
It shall refrain from activities going beyond this mandate.  
40. The activities of the inspection team shall be so arranged as to ensure the timely  and effective 
discharge of its functions and the least possible inconvenience to the  inspected State Party or Host State 
and disturbance to the facility or area  inspected. The inspection team shall avoid unnecessarily hampering 
or delaying  the opera tion of a facility and avoid affecting its safety. In particular, the  inspection team shall 
not operate any facility. If inspectors consider that, to fulfil their mandate, particular operations should be 
carried out in a facility, they shall  request the de signated representative of the inspected facility to have 
them  performed. The representative shall carry out the request to the extent possible.  
41. In the performance of their duties on the territory of an inspected State Party or  Host State, the 
members of the inspection team shall, if the inspected State Party  so requests, be accompanied by 
representatives of the inspected State Party, but  the inspection team must not thereby be delayed or 
otherwise hindered in the  exercise of its functions.  
42. Detailed  procedures for the conduct of inspections shall be developed for inclusion  in the 
inspection manual by the Technical Secretariat, taking into account  guidelines to be considered and 
approved by the Conference pursuant to Article  VIII, paragraph 21 ( i). 
Safety 
43. In carrying out their activities, inspectors and inspection assistants shall observe  safety regulations 
established at the inspection site, including those for the  protection of controlled environments within a 
facility and for personal safety. In  order to implement these requirements, appropriate detailed procedures 
shall be  considered and approved by the Conference pursuant to Article VIII, paragraph 21( i). 58 
 Communications  
44. Inspectors shall have the right throughout the in -country period to com municate  with the 
Headquarters of the Technical Secretariat. For this purpose they may use  their own, duly certified, 
approved equipment and may request that the inspected  State Party or Host State Party provide them with 
access to other  telecommunications . The inspection team shall have the right to use its own  two-way 
system of radio communications between personnel patrolling the  perimeter and other members of the 
inspection team.  
Inspection team  and inspected State Party rights  
45. The inspection team s hall, in accordance with the relevant Articles and Annexes of  this 
Convention as well as with facility agreements and procedures set forth in the  inspection manual, have the 
right to unimpeded access to the inspection site. The  items to be inspected will be chosen by the 
inspectors.  
46. Inspectors shall have the right to interview any facility personnel in the presence  of 
representatives of the inspected State Party with the purpose of establishing  relevant facts. Inspectors 
shall only request information and data which are  necessary for the conduct of the inspection, and the 
inspected State Party shall  furnish such information upon request. The inspected State Party shall have the  
right to object to questions posed to the facility personnel if those questi ons are  deemed not relevant to the 
inspection. If the head of the inspection team objects  and states their relevance, the questions shall be 
provided in writing to the  inspected State Party for reply. The inspection team may note any refusal to  
permit inte rviews or to allow questions to be answered and any explanations given,  in that part of the 
inspection report that deals with the cooperation of the  inspected State Party.  
47. Inspectors shall have the right to inspect documentation and records they deem  relevant to the 
conduct of their mission.  
48. Inspectors shall have the right to have photographs taken at their request by  representatives of the 
inspected State Party or of the inspected facility. The  capability to take instant development photographic 
prints shall be available. The  inspection team shall determine whether photographs conform to those 
requested  and, if not, repeat photographs shall be taken. The inspection team and the  inspected State Party 
shall each retain one copy of every photograph.  
49. The representatives of the inspected State Party shall have the right to observe all  verification 
activities carried out by the inspection team.  
50. The inspected State Party shall receive copies, at its request, of the information  and data gathered 
abou t its facility(ies) by the Technical Secretariat.  
51. Inspectors shall have the right to request clarifications in connection with  ambiguities that arise 
during an inspection. Such requests shall be made promptly  through the representative of the inspected  
State Party. The representative of the  inspected State Party shall provide the inspection team, during the 
inspection, with  such clarification as may be necessary to remove the ambiguity. If questions  relating to 
an object or a building located within the  inspection site are not  resolved, the object or building shall, if 
requested, be photographed for the  purpose of clarifying its nature and function. If the ambiguity cannot 
be removed  during the inspection, the inspectors shall notify the Technical Secret ariat immediately. The 
inspectors shall include in the inspection report any such  unresolved question, relevant clarifications, and 
a copy of any photographs taken.  
Collection, handling and analysis of samples  
52. Representatives of the inspected State Party or of the inspected facility shall take  samples at the 
request of the inspection team in the presence of inspectors. If so  agreed in advance with the 
representatives of the inspected State Party or of the  inspected facility, the inspection team may t ake 
samples itself.  
53. Where possible, the analysis of samples shall be performed on -site. The inspection  team shall 
have the right to perform on -site analysis of samples using approved  equipment brought by it. At the 
request of the inspection team, the i nspected State  Party shall, in accordance with agreed procedures, 
provide assistance for the  analysis of samples on -site. Alternatively, the inspection team may request that  
appropriate analysis on -site be performed in its presence.  59 
 54. The inspected State  Party has the right to retain portions of all samples taken or  take duplicate 
samples and be present when samples are analysed on -site. 
55. The inspection team shall, if it deems it necessary, transfer samples for analysis  off-site at 
labora tories designa ted by the Organization . 
56. The Director -General shall have the primary responsibility for the security,  integrity and 
preservation of samples and for ensuring that the confidentiality of  samples transferred for analysis                 
off-site is protect ed. The Director -General shall do  so in accordance with procedures, to be considered 
and approved by the  Conference pursuan t to Article VIII, paragraph 21 (i), for inclusion in the  inspection 
manual. He shall:  
(a) Establish a stringent regime governing the collection, handling, transport and  analysis of 
samples;  
(b) Certify the laboratories designated to perform different types of analysis;  
(c) Oversee the standardization of equipment and procedures at these designated  laboratories, 
mobile analytical equipment and procedures, and monitor  quality control and overall standards in 
relation to the certification of these  laboratories, mobile equipment and procedures; and  
(d) Select from among the designated laboratories those which shall perform  analytical or other 
functions in relation to specific investigations.  
57. When off -site analysis is to be performed, samples shall be analysed in at least two  designated 
laboratories. The Technical Secretariat shall ensure the expeditious  processing of the analysis. The 
samples shall be accounted for by the Technical  Secretariat and any unused samples or portions thereof 
shall be returned to the  Technical Secretariat.  
58. The Technical Secretariat shall compile the results of the laboratory analysis of  samples relevan t 
to compliance with this Convention and include them in the final  inspection report. The Technical 
Secretariat shall include in the report detailed  information concerning the equipment and methodology 
employed by the  designated laboratories.  
Extension of inspection duration  
59. Periods of inspection may be extended by agreement with the representative of the  inspected State 
Party.  
Debriefing  
60. Upon completion of an inspection the inspection team shall meet with  representatives of the 
inspected State Part y and the personnel responsible for the  inspection site to review the preliminary 
findings of the inspection team and to  clarify any ambiguities. The inspection team shall provide to the 
representatives of  the inspected State Party its preliminary findings  in written form according to a  
standardized format, together with a list of any samples and copies of written  information and data 
gathered and other material to be taken off -site. The  document shall be signed by the head of the 
inspection team. In order to indicate  that he has taken notice of the contents of the document, the 
representative of the  inspected State Party shall countersign the document. This meeting shall be  
completed not later than 24 hours after the completion of the inspection.  
F. DEPARTU RE 
61. Upon completion of the post -inspection procedures, the inspection team shall  leave, as soon as 
possible, the territory of the inspected State Party or the Host  State.  
G. REPORTS  
62. Not later than 10 days after the inspection, the inspectors shall p repare a factual,  final report on 
the activities conducted by them and on their findings. It shall only  contain facts relevant to compliance 
with this Convention, as provided for under  the inspection mandate. The report shall also provide 
information as to  the manner in which the State Party inspected cooperated with the inspection team.  
Differing observations made by inspectors may be attached to the report. The  report shall be kept 
confidential.  
63. The final report shall immediately be submitted to the i nspected State Party. Any  written 
comments, which the inspected State Party may immediately make on its  findings shall be annexed to it. 60 
 The final report together with annexed comments  made by the inspected State Party shall be submitted to 
the Director -General not  later than 30 days after the inspection.  
64. Should the report contain uncertainties, or should cooperation between the  National Authority and 
the inspectors not measure up to the standards required,  the Director -General shall approach the State 
Party for clarification.  
65. If the uncertainties cannot be removed or the facts established are of a nature to  suggest that 
obligations undertaken under this Convention have not been met, the  Director -General shall inform the 
Executive Council without del ay. 
H. APPLICATION OF GENERAL PROVISIONS  
66. The provisions of this Part shall apply to all inspections conducted pursuant to this  Convention, 
except where the provisions of this Part differ from the provisions set  forth for specific types of 
inspections in Parts III to XI of this Annex, in which  case the latter provisions shall take precedence.  
  61 
 PART III  
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR VERIFICATION MEASURES  PURSUANT TO ARTICLES IV, V AND VI, 
PARAGRAPH 3 
A. I NITIAL INSPECTIONS AND FACILITY AGREEMENTS  
1. Each decla red facility subject to on -site inspection pursuant to Articles IV, V, and  VI, paragraph 3, 
shall receive an initial inspection promptly after the facility is  declared. The purpose of this inspection of 
the facility shall be to verify  information provided and to obtain any additional information needed for  
planning future verification activities at the facility, including on -site inspections  and continuous 
monitoring with on -site instruments, and to work on the facility  agreements.  
2. States Parties shall e nsure that the verification of declarations and the initiation of  the systematic 
verification measures can be accomplished by the Technical  Secretariat at all facilities within the 
established time -frames after this Convention  enters into force for them.  
3. Each State Party shall conclude a fac ility agreement with the Organization  for each  facility 
declared and subject to on -site inspection pursuant to Articles IV, V, and  VI, paragraph 3.  
4. Facility agreements shall be completed not later than 180 days aft er this  Convention enters into 
force for the State Party or after the facility has been  declared for the first time, except for a chemical 
weapons destruction facility to  which paragraphs 5 to 7 shall apply.  
5. In the case of a chemical weapons destruction  facility that begins operations more  than one year 
after this Convention enters into force for the State Party, the  facility agreement shall be completed not 
less than 180 days before the facility  begins operation.  
6. In the case of a chemical weapons des truction facility that is in operation when  this Convention 
enters into force for the State Party, or begins operation not later  than one year thereafter, the facility 
agreement shall be completed not later than  210 days after this Convention enters into f orce for the State 
Party, except that the  Executive Council may decide that transitional verification arrangements, approved  
in accordance with Part IV (A), paragraph 51, of this Annex and including a  transitional facility 
agreement, provisions for verifica tion through on -site inspection and monitoring with on -site instruments, 
and the time -frame for  application of the arrangements, are sufficient.  
7. In the case of a facility, referred to in paragraph 6, that will cease operations not  later than two 
years after this Convention enters into force for the State Party, the  Executive Council may decide that 
transitional verification arrangements, approved  in accordance with Par t IV(A), paragraph 51, of this 
Annex and including a  transitional facility agreement, provisions for verification through on -site 
inspection and monitoring with on -site instruments, and the time -frame for  application of the 
arrangements, are sufficient.  
8. Facility agreements shall be based on models for such agreements and provide for  detailed 
arrangements which shall govern inspections at each facility. The model  agreements shall include 
provisions to take into account future technological  developments and shall be considered and approved 
by the Conference pursuant  to Article VIII, paragra ph 21 ( i). 
9. The Technical Secretariat may retain at each site a sealed container for  photographs, plans and 
other information that it may wish to refer to in the  course of subsequent inspections.  
B. STANDING ARRANGEMENTS  
10. Where applicable, the Technic al Secretariat shall have the right to have continuous  monitoring 
instruments and systems and seals installed and to use them, in  conformity with the relevant provisions in 
this Convention and the facility  agreements betwee n States Parties and the Organiza tion. 
11. The inspected State Party shall, in accordance with agreed procedures, have the  right to inspect 
any instrument used or installed by the inspection team and to  have it tested in the presence of 
representatives of the inspected State Party. The  inspection team shall have the right to use the 
instruments that were installed by  the inspected State Party for its own monitoring of the technological 
process of the  destruction of chemical weapons. To this end, the inspection team shall have the  right t o 
inspect those instruments that it intends to use for purposes of verification  of the destruction of chemical 
weapons and to have them tested in its presence.  62 
 12. The inspected State Party shall provide the necessary preparation and support for  the 
establ ishment of continuous monitoring instruments and systems.  
13. In order to implement paragraphs 11 and 12, appropriate detailed procedures shall  be considered 
and approved by the Conference pursuant to Article VIII, paragraph  21 (i). 
14. The inspected State  Party shall immediately notify the Technical Secretariat if an  event occurs or 
may occur at a facility where monitoring instruments are installed,  which may have an impact on the 
monitoring system. The inspected State Party  shall coordinate subsequent act ions with the Technical 
Secretariat with a view to  restoring the operation of the monitoring system and establishing interim  
measures, if necessary, as soon as possible.  
15. The inspection team shall verify during each inspection that the monitoring system  functions 
correctly and that emplaced seals have not been tampered with. In  addition, visits to service the 
monitoring system may be required to perform any  necessary maintenance or replacement of equipment, 
or to adjust the coverage of  the monitoring sys tem as required.  
16. If the monitoring system indicates any anomaly, the Technical Secretariat shall  immediately take 
action to determine whether this resulted from equipment  malfunction or activities at the facility. If, after 
this examination, the proble m remains unresolved, the Technical Secretariat shall immediately ascertain 
the actual situation, including through immediate on -site inspection of, or visit to, the  facility if necessary.  
The Technical Secretariat shall report any such problem  immediately  after its detection to the inspected 
State Party which shall assist in its  resolution.  
C. PRE -INSPECTION ACTIVITIES  
17. The inspected State Party shall, except as specified in paragraph 18, be notified of  inspections not 
less than 24 hours in advance of the planned arrival of the  inspection team at the point of entry.  
18. The inspected State Party shall be notified of initial inspections not less than 72  hours in advance 
of the estimated time of arrival of the inspection team at the  point of entry.  
  63 
 PART  IV(A) 
DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND  ITS VERIFICATION  
PURSUANT TO ARTICLE IV  
A. DECLARATIONS  
Chemical weapons  
1. The declaration of chemical weapons by a State Party pursuant to Article III,  paragraph 1 ( a) (ii), 
shall include the following:  
(a) The  aggregate quantity of each chemical declared;  
(b) The precise location of each chemical weapons storage facility, expressed by:  
(i) Name;  
(ii) Geographical coordinates; and  
(iii) A detailed site diagram, including a boundary map and the location of  bunker s/storage 
areas within the facility;  
(c) The detailed inventory for each chemical weapons storage facility including:  
(i) Chemicals defined as chemical weapons in accordance with Article II;  
(ii) Unfilled munitions, sub -munitions, devices and equipment def ined as  chemical weapons;  
(iii) Equipment specially designed for use directly in connection with the  employment of 
munitions, sub -munitions, devices or equipment  specified in sub -paragraph ( ii); 
(iv) Chemicals specifically designed for use directly in conn ection with the  employment of 
munitions, sub -munitions, devices or equipment  specified in sub -paragraph ( ii). 
2. For the declaration of chemicals referred to in paragraph 1 ( c) (i) the following  shall apply:  
(a) Chemicals shall be declared in accordance with the Schedules specified in the  Annex on 
Chemicals;  
(b) For a chemical not listed in the Schedules in the Annex on Chemicals the  information required 
for possible assignment of the chemical to the  appropriate Schedule shall be provided, including the 
toxicity of the pure  compound. For a precursor, the toxicity and identity of the principal final  reaction 
product(s) shall be provided;  
(c) Chemicals shall be identified by chemical name in accordance with current  International 
Union of Pure and Applied Che mistry (IUPAC) nomenclature,  structural formula and Chemical 
Abstracts Service registry number, if  assigned. For a precursor, the toxicity and identity of the 
principal final  reaction product(s) shall be provided;  
(d) In cases involving mixtures of two or more chemicals, each chemical shall be  identified and 
the percentage of each shall be provided, and the mixture shall  be declared under the category of the 
most toxic chemical. If a component of  a binary chemical weapon consists of a mixture of two or 
more  chemicals,  each chemical shall be identified and the percentage of each provided;  
(e) Binary chemical weapons shall be declared under the relevant end product  within the 
framework of the categories of chemical weapons referred to in  paragraph 16. The foll owing 
supplementary information shall be provided for  each type of binary chemical munition , device:  
(i) The chemical name of the toxic end -product;  
(ii) The chemical composition and quantity of each component;  
(iii) The actual weight ratio between the com ponents;  
(iv) Which component is considered the key component;  
(v) The projected quantity of the toxic end -product calculated on a  stoichiometric basis from 
the key component, assuming 100 per cent . yield. A declared quantity (in tonnes) of the key 
component intended  for a specific toxic end -product shall be considered equivalent to the  64 
 quantity (in tonnes) of this toxic end -product calculated on a  stoichiometric ba sis assuming 100 
per cent . yield;  
(f) For multicomponent chemical weapons, the declara tion shall be analogous to  that envisaged 
for binary chemical weapons;  
(g) For each chemical the form of storage, i.e., munitions, sub -munitions, devices,  equipment or 
bulk containers and other containers shall be declared. For  each form of storage the fol lowing shall be 
listed:  
(i) Type;  
(ii) Size or calibre;  
(iii) Number of items; and  
(iv) Nominal w eight of chemical fill per item;  
(h) For each chemical the total weight present at the storage facility shall be  declared;  
(i) In addition, for chemicals stored in bulk, the percentage purity shall be  declared, if known.  
3. For each type of unfilled munitions, sub -munitions, devices or equipment, referred  to in paragraph 
1 (c) (ii), the information shall include:  
(a) The number of items;  
(b) The nominal fil l volume per item;  
(c) The intended chemical fill.  
Declarations of chemical weapons pursuant to Article III, paragraph 1 (a) (iii) 
4. The declaration of chemical weapons pursuant to Article III, paragraph 1 ( a) (iii), shall contain all 
information specified in paragraphs 1 to 3 above. It is the  responsibility of the State Party on whose 
territory the chemical weapons are  located to make appropriate arrangements with the other State to 
ensure that the  declarations are made. If the State Party on whos e territory the chemical weapons  are 
located is not able to fulfil its obligations under this paragraph, it shall state  the reasons therefor.  
Declarations of past transfers and receipts  
5. A State Party that has transferred or received chemical weapons sin ce 1 January  1946 shall declare 
these transfers or receipts pursuant to Article III, paragraph 1  (a) (iv), provided the amount transferred or 
received exceeded 1 tonne per  chemical per year in bulk and/or munition form. This declaration shall be 
made  accor ding to the inventory format specified in paragraphs 1 and 2. This declaration  shall also 
indicate the supplier and recipient countries, the dates of the transfers or  receipts and, as precisely as 
possible, the current location of the transferred items.  When not all the specified information is available 
for transfers or receipts of  chemical weapons for the period between 1 January 1946 and 1 January 1970, 
the State Party shall declare whatever information is still available to it and provide an  explanati on as to 
why it cannot submit a full declaration.  
Submission of the general plan for destruction of chemical weapons  
6. The general plan for destruction of chemical weapons submitted pursuant to  Article III, paragraph 
1 (a) (v), shall provide an overview of the entire national  chemical weapons destruction programme of the 
State Party and information on  the efforts of the State Party to fulfil the destruction requirements 
contained in  this Convention. The plan shall specify:  
(a) A general schedule for destr uction, giving types and approximate quantities  of chemical 
weapons planned to be destroyed in each annual destruction  period for each existing chemical 
weapons destruction facility and, if possible,  for each planned chemical weapons destruction facility;  
(b) The number of chemical weapons destruction facilities existing or planned to  be operated over 
the destruction period;  
(c) For each existing or planned chemical weapons destruction facility:  
(i) Name and location; and  65 
 (ii) The types and approximate quan tities of chemical weapons, and the  type (for example, 
nerve agent or blister agent) and approximate  quantity of chemical fill, to be destroyed;  
(d) The plans and programmes for training personnel for the operation of  destruction facilities;  
(e) The national standards for safety and emissions that the destruction facilities  must satisfy;  
(f) Information on the development of new methods for destruction of chemical  weapons and on 
the improvement of existing methods;  
(g) The cost estimates for destroyin g the chemical weapons; and  
(h) Any issues which could adversely impact on the national destruction  programme.  
B. MEASURES TO SECURE THE STORAGE FACILITY AND STORAGE  FACILITY 
PREPARATION  
7. Not later than when submitting its declaration of chemical weapons , a State Party  shall take such 
measures as it considers appropriate to secure its storage facilities  and shall prevent any movement of its 
chemical weapons out of the facilities,  except their removal for destruction.  
8. A State Party shall ensure that che mical weapons at its storage facilities are  configured to allow 
ready access for verification in accordance with paragraphs 37  to 49.  
9. While a storage facility remains closed for any movement of chemical weapons out  of the facility 
other than their remov al for destruction, a State Party may continue  at the facility standard maintenance 
activities, including standard maintenance of  chemical weapons; safety monitoring and physical security 
activities; and  preparation of chemical weapons for destruction.  
10. Maintenance activities of chemical weapons shall not include:  
(a) Replacement of agent or of munition bodies;  
(b) Modification of the original characteristics of munitions, or parts or  components thereof.  
11. All maintenance activities shall be subject to  monitoring by the Technical  Secretariat.  
C. DESTRUCTION  
Principles and methods for destruction of chemical weapons  
12. “Destruction of chemical weapons ” means a process by which chemicals are  converted in an 
essentially irreversible way to a form unsuitable for production of  chemical weapons, and which in an 
irreversible manner renders munitions and  other devices unusable as such.  
13. Each State Party shall determine how it shall destroy chemical weapons, except  that the following 
processes may not  be used: dumping in any body of water, land  burial or open -pit burning. It shall destroy 
chemical weapons only at specifically  designated and appropriately designed and equipped facilities.  
14. Each State Party shall ensure that its chemical weapons destruction facilities are  constructed and 
operated in a manner to ensure the destruction of the chemical  weapons; and that the destruction process 
can be verified under the provisions of  this Convention.  
Order of destruction  
15. The order of destruction o f chemical weapons is based on the obligations specified  in Article I 
and the other Articles, including obligations regarding systematic  on-site verification. It takes into 
account interests of States Parties for  undiminished security during the destructio n period; confidence -
building in the  early part of the destruction stage; gradual acquisition of experience in the course  of 
destroying chemical weapons; and applicability irrespective of the actual  composition of the stockpiles 
and the methods chosen for the destruction of the  chemical weapons. The order of destruction is based on 
the principle of levelling out. 
16. For the purpose of destruction, chemical weapons declared by each State Party  shall be divided 
into three categories:  
Category 1: Chemical wea pons on the basis of Schedule 1 chemicals and their  parts and 
components;  66 
 Category 2: Chemical weapons on the basis of all other chemicals and their  parts and 
components;  
Category 3: Unfilled munitions and devices, and equipment specifically  designed for u se directly 
in connection with employment of  chemical weapons.  
17. A State Party shall start:  
(a) The destruction of Category 1 chemical weapons not later than two years  after this 
Convention enters into force for it, and shall complete the  destruction not  later than 10 years after 
entry into force of this Convention.  A State Party shall destroy chemical weapons in accordance with 
the following destruction deadlines:  
(i) Phase 1: Not later than two years after entry into force of this  Convention, testing of  its 
first destruction facility shall be completed.  Not less than 1 per cent . of the Category 1 chemical 
weapons shall be  destroyed not later than three years after the entry into force of this  Convention;  
(ii) Phase 2: Not less than 20 per cent . of the Ca tegory 1 chemical  weapons shall be destroyed 
not later than five years after the entry into  force of this Convention;  
(iii) Phase 3: Not less than 45 per cent . of the Category 1 chemical  weapons shall be 
destroyed not later than seven years after the entry  into force of this Convention;  
(iv) Phase 4: All Category 1 chemical weapons shall be destroyed not later  than 10 years after 
the entr y into force of this Convention;  
(b) The destruction of Category 2 chemical weapons not later than one year after  this Co nvention 
enters into force for it and shall complete the destruction not  later than five years after the entry into 
force of this Convention. Category 2  chemical weapons shall be destroyed in equal annual increments 
throughout  the destruction period. The c omparison factor for such weapons is the weight  of the 
chemicals within Category 2; and  
(c) The destruction of Category 3 chemical weapons not later than one year after  this Convention 
enters into force for it, and shall complete the destruction  not later than five years after the entry into 
force of this Convention.  Category 3 chemical weapons shall be destroyed in equal annual increments  
throughout the destruction period. The comparison factor for unfilled  munitions and devices is 
expressed in nominal fil l volume (m3) and for  equipment in number of items.  
18. For the destruction of binary chemical weapons the following shall apply:  
(a) For the purposes of the order of destruction, a declared quantity (in tonnes)  of the key 
component intended for a specific  toxic end -product shall be  considered equivalent to the quantity            
(in tonnes) of this toxic end -product  calculated on a stoichiometric ba sis assuming 100 per cent . yield;  
(b) A requirement to destroy a given quantity of the key component shall en tail a  requirement to 
destroy a corresponding quantity of the other component,  calculated from the actual weight ratio of 
the components in the relevant  type of binary chemical munition  device;  
(c) If more of the other component is declared than is needed,  based on the  actual weight ratio 
between components, the excess shall be destroyed over  the first two years aft er destruction 
operations begin;  
(d) At the end of each subsequent operational year a State Party may retain an  amount of the other 
declared com ponent that is determined on the basis of  the actual weight ratio of the components in the 
relevant type of binary  chemical munition device.  
19. For multicomponent chemical weapons the order of destruction shall be analogous  to that 
envisaged for binary chemical weapons.  
Modification of intermediate destruction deadlines  
20. The Executive Council shall review the general plans for destruction of chemical  weapons, 
submitted pursuant to Article III, paragraph 1 ( a) (v), and in accordance  with paragraph 6, inter alia , to 
assess their conformity with the order of  destruction set forth in paragraphs 15 to 19. The Executive 
Council shall consult  with any State Party whose plan does not conform, with the objective of bringing  
the plan into conformity.  67 
 21. If a St ate Party, due to exceptional circumstances beyond its control, believes that  it cannot 
achieve the level of destruction specified for Phase 1, Phase 2 or Phase 3  of the order of destruction of 
Category 1 chemical weapons, it may propose  changes in those l evels. Such a proposal must be made not 
later than 120 days  after the entry into force of this Convention and shall contain a detailed  explanation of 
the reasons for the proposal.  
22. Each State Party shall take all necessary measures to ensure destruction  of Category 1 chemical 
weapons in accordance with the destruction deadlines set  forth in paragraph 17 (a) as changed pursuant to 
paragrap h 21. However, if a State  Party believes that it will be unable to ensure the destruction of the 
percentage of  Category  1 chemical weapons required by an intermediate destruction deadline, it  may 
request the Executive Council to recommend to the Conference to grant an  extension of its obligation to 
meet that deadline. Such a request must be made not  less than 180 days befo re the intermediate 
destruction deadline and shall contain a  detailed explanation of the reasons for the request and the plans 
of the State Party  for ensuring that it will be able to fulfil its obligation to meet the next intermediate  
destruction deadline.  
23. If an extension is granted, the State Party shall still be under the obligation to  meet the cumulative 
destruction requirements set forth for the next destruction  deadline. Exten sions granted pursuant to this 
section shall not, in any way, modify  the obligation of the State Party to destroy all Category 1 chemical 
weapons not  later than 10 years after the entry into force of this Convention.  
Extension of the deadline for completion of destruction  
24. If a State Party believes that it will be unable to ensure the destruction of all  Category 1 chemical 
weapons not later than 10 years after the entry into force of  this Convention, it may submit a request to 
the Executive Council for an extension  of the deadline for completing the destruction of such chemic al 
weapons. Such a  request must be made not later than nine years after the entry into force of this  
Convention.  
25. The request shall contain:  
(a) The duration of the proposed extension;  
(b) A detailed explanation of the reasons for the proposed extension; and  
(c) A detailed plan for destruction during the proposed extension and the  remaining portion of the 
original 10 -year period for destruction.  
26. A decision on the request shall be taken by the Conference at its next session, on  the 
recommenda tion of the Executive Council. Any extension shall be the  minimum necessary, but in no case 
shall the deadline for a State Party to complete  its destruction of all chemical weapons be extended 
beyond 15 years after the entry  into force of this Convention. The Executive Council shall set conditions 
for the  granting of the extension, including the specific verification measures deemed  necessary as well as 
specific actions to be taken by the State Party to overcome  problems in its destruction programme. Costs 
of verification during the extension  period shall be allocated in accordance with Article IV, paragraph 16.  
27. If an extension is granted, the State Party shall take appropriate measures to meet  all subsequent 
deadlines.  
28. The State Party shall continue  to submit detailed annual plans for destruction in  accordance with 
paragraph 29 and annual reports on the destruction of Category 1  chemical weapons in accordance with 
paragraph 36, until all Category 1 chemical  weapons are destroyed. In addition, not lat er than at the end 
of each 90 days of  the extension period, the State Party shall report to the Executive Council on its  
destruction activity. The Executive Council shall review progress towards  completion of destruction and 
take the necessary measures to document this  progress. All information concerning the destruction 
activities during the extension  period shall be provided by the Executive Council to States Parties, upon 
request.  
Detailed annual plans for destruction  
29. The detailed annual plans for de struction shall be submitted to the Technical  Secretariat not less 
than 60 days before each annual destruction period begins  pursuant to Article IV, paragraph 7 (a), and 
shall specify:  
(a) The quantity of each specific type of chemical weapon to be destroyed at  each destruction 
facility and the inclusive dates when the destruction of each  specific type of chemical weapon will be 
accomplished;  68 
 (b) The detailed site diagram for each chemical weapons destruction facility and  any changes to 
previously su bmitted diagrams; and  
(c) The detailed schedule of activities for each chemical weapons destruction  facility for the 
upcoming year, identifying time required for design,  construction or modification of the facility, 
installation of equipment,  equipment che ck-out and operator training, destruction operations for each  
specific type of chemical weapon, and scheduled periods of inactivity.  
30. A State Party shall provide, for each of its chemical weapons destruction facilities,  detailed 
facility information to assist the Technical Secretariat in developing  preliminary inspection procedures for 
use at the facility.  
31. The detailed facility information for each destruction facility shall include the  following 
information:  
(a) Name, address and location;  
(b) Detai led, annotated facility drawings;  
(c) Facility design drawings, process drawings, and piping and instrumentation  design drawings;  
(d) Detailed technical descriptions, including design drawings and instrument  specifications, for 
the equipment required for: removing the chemical fill  from the munitions, devices, and containers; 
temporarily storing the drained  chemical fill; destroying the chemical agent; and destroying the 
munitions,  devices, and containers;  
(e) Detailed technical descriptions of the destruct ion process, including material  flow rates, 
temperatures and pressures, and designed destruction efficiency;  
(f) Design capacity for each specific type of chemical weapon;  
(g) A detailed description of the products of destruction and the method of their  ultimate disposal;  
(h) A detailed technical description of measures to facilitate inspections in  accordance with this 
Convention;  
(i) A detailed description of any temporary holding area at the destruction  facility that will be 
used to provide chemical weapons directly to the  destruction facility, including site and facility 
drawings and information on  the storage capacity for each specific type of chemical weapon to be  
destroyed at the facility;  
(j) A detailed description of the safety and medical measu res in force at the  facility;  
(k) A detailed description of the living quarters and working premises for the  inspectors; and  
(l) Suggested measures for international verification.  
32. A State Party shall provide, for each of its chemical weapons destructio n facilities,  the plant 
operations manuals, the safety and medical plans, the laboratory  operations and quality assurance and 
control manuals, and the environmental  permits that have been obtained, except that this shall not include 
material  previously pro vided.  
33. A State Party shall promptly notify the Technical Secretariat of any developments  that could 
affect inspection activities at its destruction facilities.  
34. Deadlines for submission of the information specified in paragraphs 30 to 32 shall  be co nsidered 
and approved by the Conference pursuant to Article VIII, paragraph  21(i). 
35. After a review of the detailed facility information for each destruction facility, the  Technical 
Secretariat, if the need arises, shall enter into consultation with the State  Party concerned in order to 
ensure that its chemical weapons destruction facilities  are designed to assure the destruction of chemical 
weapons, to allow advanced  planning on how verification measures may be applied and to ensure that the  
application of verification measures is consistent with proper facility operation,  and that the facility 
operation allows appropriate verification.  
  69 
 Annual reports on destruction  
36. Information regarding the implementation of plans for destruction of chemical  weapon s shall be 
submitted to the Technical Secretariat pursuant to Article IV,  paragraph 7 (b), not later than 60 days after 
the end of each annual destruction  period and shall specify the actual amounts of chemical weapons 
which were  destroyed during the previo us year at each destruction facility. If appropriate,  reasons for not 
meeting destruction goals should be stated.  
D. VERIFICATION  
Verification of declarations of chemical weapons through on -site inspection  
37. The purpose of the verification of declarations of chemical weapons shall be to  confirm through 
on-site inspection the accuracy of the relevant declarations made  pursuant to Article III.  
38. The inspectors shall conduct this verification promptly after a declaration is  submitted. They shall , 
inter alia , verify the quantity and identity of chemicals,  types and number of munitions, devices and other 
equipment.  
39. The inspectors shall employ, as appropriate, agreed seals, markers or other  inventory control 
procedures to facilitate an accurate inventory of the chemical  weapons at each storage facility.  
40. As the inventory progresses, inspectors shall install such agreed seals as may be  necessary to 
clearly indicate if any stocks are removed, and to ensure the securing  of the storage facility du ring the 
inventory. After completion of the inventory, such  seals will be removed unless otherwise agreed.  
Systematic verification of storage facilities  
41. The purpose of the systematic verification of storage facilities shall be to ensure  that no 
undetec ted removal of chemical weapons from such facilities takes place.  
42. The systematic verification shall be initiated as soon as possible after the  declaration of chemical 
weapons is submitted and shall continue until all chemical  weapons have been removed from the storage 
facility. It shall in accordance with  the facility agreement, combine on -site inspection and monitoring with 
on-site instruments.  
43. When all chemical weapons have been removed from the storage facility, the  Technical 
Secretariat shall co nfirm the declaration of the State Party to that effect.  After this confirmation, the 
Technical Secretariat shall terminate the systematic  verification of the storage facility and shall promptly 
remove any monitoring  instruments installed by the inspectors . 
Inspections and visits  
44. The particular storage facility to be inspected shall be chosen by the Technical  Secretariat in such 
a way as to preclude the prediction of precisely when the  facility is to be inspected. The guidelines for 
determining the frequency of  systematic on -site inspections shall be elaborated by the Technical 
Secretariat,  taking into account the recommendations to be considered and approved by the  Conference 
pursuan t to Article VIII, paragraph 21 (i). 
45. The Technical Secretariat shall notify the inspected State Party of its decision to  inspect or visit 
the storage facility 48 hours before the planned arrival of the  inspection team at the facility for systematic 
inspections or visits. In cases of  inspections or visits to resolve ur gent problems, this period may be 
shortened. The  Technical Secretariat shall specify the purpose of the inspection or visit.  
46. The inspected State Party shall make any necessary preparations for the arrival of  the inspectors 
and shall ensure their expedi tious transportation from their point of  entry to the storage facility. The 
facility agreement will specify administrative  arrangements for inspectors.  
47. The inspected State Party shall provide the inspection team upon its arrival at the  chemical 
weapons  storage facility to carry out an inspection, with the following  data on the facility:  
(a) The number of storage buildings and storage locations;  
(b) For each storage building and storage location, the type and the  identification number or 
designation, sho wn on the site diagram; and  70 
 (c) For each storage building and storage location at the facility, the number of  items of each 
specific type of chemical weapon, and, for containers that are  not part of binary munitions, the actual 
quantity of chemical fill in  each container.  
48. In carrying out an inventory, within the time available, inspectors shall have the  right:  
(a) To use any of the following inspection techniques:  
(i) inventory all the chemical weapons stored at the facility;  
(ii) inventory all the chem ical weapons stored in specific buildings or  locations at the facility, 
as chosen by the inspectors; or  
(iii) inventory all the chemical weapons of one or more specific types stored  at the facility, as 
chosen by the inspectors; and  
(b) To check all items inventoried against agreed records.  
49. Inspectors shall, in accordance with facility agreements:  
(a) Have unimpeded access to all parts of the storage facilities including any  munitions, devices, 
bulk containers, or other containers therein. While  conduct ing their activity, inspectors shall comply 
with the safety regulations  at the facility. The items to be inspected will be chosen by the inspectors;  
and 
(b) Have the right, during the first and any subsequent inspection of each  chemical weapons 
storage fac ility, to designate munitions, devices, and  containers from which samples are to be taken, 
and to affix to such  munitions, devices, and containers a unique tag that will indicate an attempt  to 
remove or alter the tag. A sample shall be taken from a tagged item at a  chemical weapons storage 
facility or a chemical weapons destruction facility  as soon as it is practically possible in accordance 
with the corresponding  destruction programmes, and, in any case, not later than by the end of the  
destruction operati ons. 
Systematic verification of the destruction of chemical weapons  
50. The purpose of verification of destruction of chemical weapons shall be:  
(a) To confirm the identity and quantity of the chemical weapons stocks to be  destroyed; and  
(b) To confirm tha t these stocks have been destroyed.  
51. Chemical weapons destruction operations during the first 390 days after the entry  into force of 
this Convention shall be governed by transitional verification  arrangements. Such arrangements, 
including a transitional  facility agreement,  provisions for verification through on -site inspection and 
monitoring with on -site instruments, and the time -frame for application of the arrangements, shall be  
agreed between the Organization  and the inspected State Party. These  arran gements shall be approved by 
the Executive Council not later than 60 days  after this Convention enters into force for the State Party, 
taking into account the  recommendations of the Technical Secretariat, which shall be based on an  
evaluation of the detail ed facility information provided in accordance with  paragraph 31 and a visit to the 
facility. The Executive Council shall, at its first  session, establish the guidelines for such transitional 
verification arrangements,  based on recommendations to be consid ered and approved by the Conference  
pursuan t to Article VIII, paragraph 21 (i). The transitional verification  arrangements shall be designed to 
verify, throughout the entire transitional period,  the destruction of chemical weapons in accordance with 
the pur poses set forth in  paragraph 50, and to avoid hampering ongoing destruction operations.  
52. The provisions of paragraphs 53 to 61 shall apply to chemical weapons destruction  operations that 
are to begin not earlier than 390 days after the entry into force of this Convention.  
53. On the basis of this Convention and the detailed destruction facility information,  and as the case 
may be, on experience from previous inspections, the Technical  Secretariat shall prepare a draft plan for 
inspecting the destruction of chemical  weapons at each destruction facility. The plan shall be completed 
and provided to  the inspected State Party for comment not less than 270 days before the facility  begins 
destruction operations pursuant to this Convention. Any differences  betwee n the Technical Secretariat 
and the inspected State Party should be resolved  through consultations. Any unresolved matter shall be 
forwarded to the Executive  Council for appropriate action with a view to facilitating the full 
implementation of  this Convent ion. 71 
 54. The Technical Secretariat shall conduct an initial visit to each chemical weapons  destruction 
facility of the inspected State Party not less than 240 days before each  facility begins destruction 
operations pursuant to this Convention, to allow it to familiarize itself with the facility and assess the 
adequacy of the inspection plan.  
55. In the case of an existing facility where chemical weapons destruction operations  have already 
been initiated, the inspected State Party shall not be required to  decontaminate the facility before the 
Technical Secretariat conducts an initial visit.  The duration of the visit shall not exceed five days and the 
number of visiting  personnel shall not exceed 15.  
56. The agreed detailed plans for verification, with an ap propriate recommendation by  the Technical 
Secretariat, shall be forwarded to the Executive Council for review.  The Executive Council shall review 
the plans with a view to approving them,  consistent with verification objectives and obligations under this 
Convention. It  should also confirm that verification schemes for destruction are consistent with  
verification aims and are efficient and practical. This review should be completed  not less than 180 days 
before the destruction period begins.  
57. Each member o f the Executive Council may consult with the Technical Secretariat  on any issues 
regarding the adequacy of the plan for verification. If there are no  objections by any member of the 
Executive Council, the plan shall be put into  action.  
58. If there are any  difficulties, the Executive Council shall enter into consultations  with the State 
Party to reconcile them. If any difficulties remain unresolved they  shall be referred to the Conference.  
59. The detailed facility agreements for chemical weapons destructio n facilities shall  specify, taking 
into account the specific characteristics of the destruction facility  and its mode of operation:  
(a) Detailed on -site inspection procedures; and  
(b) Provisions for verification through continuous monitoring with on -site instruments and 
physical presence of inspectors.  
60. Inspectors shall be granted access to each chemical weapons destruction facility  not less than 60 
days before the commencement of the destruction, pursuant to  this Convention, at the facility. Such 
access  shall be for the purpose of supervising  the installation of the inspection equipment, inspecting this 
equipment and testing  its operation, as well as for the purpose of carrying out a final engineering review  
of the facility. In the case of an existing fa cility where chemical weapons  destruction operations have 
already been initiated, destruction operations shall be  stopped for the minimum amount of time required, 
not to exceed 60 days, for  installation and testing of the inspection equipment. Depending on  the results 
of the testing and review, the State Party and the Technical Secretariat may agree on  additions or changes 
to the detailed facility agreement for the facility.  
61. The inspected State Party shall notify, in writing, the inspection team leader at a chemical 
weapons destruction facility not less than four hours before the departure  of each shipment of chemical 
weapons from a chemical weapons storage facility to  that destruction facility. This notification shall 
specify the name of the storage  facility, the estimated times of departure and arrival, the specific types 
and quantities of chemical weapons being transported, whether any tagged items are  being moved, and 
the method of transportation. This notification may include  notification of more tha n one shipment. The 
inspection team leader shall be  promptly notified, in writing, of any changes in this information.  
Chemical weapons storage facilities at chemical weapons destruction  facilities  
62. The inspectors shall verify the arrival of the chemica l weapons at the destruction  facility and the 
storing of these chemical weapons. The inspectors shall verify the  inventory of each shipment, using 
agreed procedures consistent with facility safety  regulations, prior to the destruction of the chemical 
weapo ns. They shall employ,  as appropriate, agreed seals, markers or other inventory control procedures 
to facilitate an accurate inventory of the chemical weapons prior to destruction.  
63. As soon and as long as chemical weapons are stored at chemical weapons storage  facilities 
located at chemical weapons destruction facilities, these storage facilities  shall be subject to systematic 
verification in conformity with the relevant facility  agreements.  
64. At the end of an active destruction phase, inspectors shall  make an inventory of  the chemical 
weapons, that have been removed from the storage facility, to be  destroyed. They shall verify the 72 
 accuracy of the inventory of the chemical weapons  remaining, employing inventory control procedures as 
referred to in parag raph 62.  
Systematic on -site verification measures at chemical weapons destruction  facilities  
65. The inspectors shall be granted access to conduct their activities at the chemical  weapons 
destruction facilities and the chemical weapons storage facilities located  at such facilities during the entire 
active phase of destruction.  
66. At each chemical weapons destruction facility, to provide assurance that no  chemical weapons are 
diverted and that the destruction process has been  completed, inspectors shall ha ve the right to verify 
through their physical presence  and monitoring with on -site instruments:  
(a) The receipt of chemical weapons at the facility;  
(b) The temporary holding area for chemical weapons and the specific type and  quantity of 
chemical weapons stored in that area;  
(c) The specific type and quantity of chemical weapons being destroyed;  
(d) The process of destruction;  
(e) The end -product of destruction;  
(f) The mutilation of metal parts; and  
(g) The integrity of the destruction process and of the facility as a whole.  
67. Inspectors shall have the right to tag, for sampling, munitions, devices, or  containers located in the 
temporary holding areas at the chemical weapons  destruction facilities.  
68. To the extent that it meets inspection requirements,  information from routine  facility operations, 
with appropriate data authentication, shall be used for  inspection purposes.  
69. After the completion of each period of destruction, the Technical Secretariat shall  confirm the 
declaration of the State Party, reporting the completion of destruction  of the designated quantity of 
chemical weapons.  
70. Inspectors shall, in accordance with facility agreements:  
(a) Have unimpeded access to all parts of the chemical weapons destruction  facilities and the 
chemical wea pons storage facilities located at such facilities,  including any munitions, devices, bulk 
containers, or other containers,  therein. The items to be inspected shall be chosen by the inspectors in  
accordance with the verification plan that has been agreed t o by the  inspected State Party and 
approved by the Executive Council;  
(b) Monitor the systematic on -site analysis of samples during the destruction  process; and  
(c) Receive, if necessary, samples taken at their request from any devices, bulk  containers and  
other containers at the destruction facility or the storage  facility thereat.  
  73 
 PART IV  (B) 
OLD CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND  ABANDONED CHEMICAL WEAPONS  
A. GENERAL  
1. Old chemical weapons shall be destroyed as provided for in Section B.  
2. Abandoned chemical weapons, including those which also meet the definition of  Article II, 
paragraph 5  (b), shall be destroyed as provided for in Section C.  
B. REGIME FOR OLD CHEMICAL WEAPONS  
3. A State Party which has on its territory old chemical weapons as defined in Artic le II, paragraph    
5 (a), shall, not later than 30 days after this Convention enters into  force for it, submit to the Technical 
Secretariat all available relevant information,  including, to the extent possible, the location, type, quantity 
and the present  condition of these old chemical weapons.  
In the case of old chemical weapons as def ined in Article II, paragraph 5  (b), the  State Party shall 
submit to the Technical Secretariat a declaration pursuant to  Article III, paragraph 1  (b) (i), including, to 
the extent possible, the information  specified in Part IV (A), paragraphs 1 to 3, of this Annex.  
4. A State Party which discovers old chemical weapons after this Convention enters  into force for it 
shall submit to the Technical Secretariat the information spec ified in paragraph 3 not later than 180 days 
after the discovery of the old chemical  weapons.  
5. The Technical Secretariat shall conduct an initial inspection, and any further  inspections as may be 
necessary, in order to verify the information submitted  pursuant to paragraphs 3 and 4 and in particular to 
determine whether the  chemical weapons meet the definition of old chemical weapons as specified in  
Article II, paragraph 5. Guidelines to determine the usability of chemical weapons  produced between 
1925 an d 1946 shall be considered and approved by the  Conference pursuant to Article VIII, paragraph 
21 (i). 
6. A State Party shall treat old chemical weapons that have been confirmed by the  Technical 
Secretariat as meeting the defini tion in Article II, paragraph  5(a), as toxic waste. It shall inform the 
Technical Secretariat of the steps being taken to  destroy or otherwise dispose of such old chemical 
weapons as toxic waste in  accordance with its national legislation.  
7. Subject to paragraphs 3 to 5, a State Part y shall destroy old chemical weapons that  have been 
confirmed by the Technical Secretariat as meeting the definition in  Article II, paragraph 5  (b), in 
accorda nce with Article IV and Part IV  (A) of this  Annex. Upon request of a State Party, the Executive 
Council may, however, modify  the provisions on time -limit and order of destruction of these old chemical  
weapons, if it determines that doing so would not pose a risk to the object and  purpose of this Convention. 
The request shall contain specific proposal s for modification of the provisions and a detailed explanation 
of the reasons for the  proposed modification.  
C. REGIME FOR ABANDONED CHEMICAL WEAPONS  
8. A State Party on whose territory there are abandoned chemical weapons  (hereinafter referred to as 
the “Territorial State Party ”) shall, not later than 30  days after this Convention enters into force for it, 
submit to the Technical  Secretariat all available relevant information concerning the abandoned chemical  
weapons. This information shall include, to th e extent possible, the location, type,  quantity and the 
present condition of the abandoned chemical weapons as well as  information on the abandonment.  
9. A State Party which discovers abandoned chemical weapons after this Convention  enters into force 
for it shall, not later than 180 days after the discovery, submit to  the Technical Secretariat all available 
relevant information concerning the  discovered abandoned chemical weapons. This information shall 
include, to the  extent possible, the location, type, q uantity and the present condition of the  abandoned 
chemical weapons as well as information on the abandonment.  
10. A State Party which has abandoned chemical weapons on the territory of another  State Party 
(hereinafter referred to as the “Abandoning State Party ”) shall, not  later than 30 days after this 
Convention enters into force for it, submit to the  Technical Secretariat all available relevant information 
concerning the abandoned  chemical weapons. This information shall include, to the extent possible, the 
location, type, quantity as well as information on the abandonment, and the  condition of the abandoned 
chemical weapons.  74 
 11. The Technical Secretariat shall conduct an initial inspection, and any further  inspections as may 
be necessary, in order to ver ify all available relevant  information submitted pursuant to paragraphs 8 to 10 
and determine whether  systematic verification in accordance with Part I V (A), paragraphs 41 to 43, of this  
Annex is required. It shall, if necessary, verify the origin of the a bandoned  chemical weapons and 
establish evidence concerning the abandonment and the  identity of the Abandoning State.  
12. The report of the Technical Secretariat shall be submitted to the Executive Council,  the Territorial 
State Party, and to the Abandonin g State Party or the State Party  declared by the Territorial State Party or 
identified by the Technical Secretariat as  having abandoned the chemical weapons. If one of the States 
Parties directly  concerned is not satisfied with the report it shall have the  right to settle the matter  in 
accordance with provisions of this Convention or bring the issue to the  Executive Council with a view to 
settling the matter expeditiously.  
13. Pursuant to Article I, paragraph 3, the Territorial State Party shall have the ri ght to request the 
State Party which has been established as the Abandoning State  Party pursuant to paragraphs 8 to 12 to 
enter into consultations for the purpose of  destroying the abandoned chemical weapons in cooperation 
with the Territorial  State Party.  It shall immediately inform the Technical Secretariat of this request.  
14. Consultations between the Territorial State Party and the Abandoning State Party  with a view to 
establishing a mutually agreed plan for destruction shall begin not  later than 30 da ys after the Technical 
Secretariat has been informed of the request  referred to in paragraph 13. The mutually agreed plan for 
destruction shall be  transmitted to the Technical Secretariat not later than 180 days after the Technical  
Secretariat has been inf ormed of the request referred to in paragraph 13. Upon the  request of the 
Abandoning State Party and the Territorial State Party, the  Executive Council may extend the time -limit 
for transmission of the mutually  agreed plan for destruction.  
15. For the purp ose of destroying abandoned chemical weapons, the Abandoning State  Party shall 
provide all necessary financial, technical, expert, facility as well as other  resources. The Territorial State 
Party shall provide appropriate cooperation.  
16. If the Abandoning  State cannot be identified or is not a State Party, the Territorial  State Party, in 
order to ensure the destruction of these abandoned chemical  weapon s, may request the Organization  and 
other States Parties to provide  assistance in the destruction of these abandoned chemical weapons.  
17. Subject to paragraphs 8 to 16, Article IV and Part IV  (A) of this Annex shall also  apply to the 
destruction of abandoned chemical weapons. In the case of  abandoned chemical weapons which also meet 
the definition of old  chemical  weapons in Article II, paragraph 5  (b), the Executive Council, upon the 
request of  the Territorial State Party, individually or together with the Abandoning State  Party, may 
modify or in exceptional cases suspend the application of provisions on  destruction, if it determines that 
doing so would not pose a risk to the object and  purpose of this Convention. In the case of abandoned 
chemical weapons which do  not meet the definition of old chemical weapons in Article II, paragraph             
5 (b), the Executive Council, upon the request of the Territorial State Party, individually or  together with 
the Abandoning State Party, may in exceptional circumstances  modify the provisions on the time -limit 
and the order of destruction, if it  determines that do ing so would not pose a risk to the object and purpose 
of this  Convention. Any request as referred to in this paragraph shall contain specific  proposals for 
modification of the provisions and a detailed explanation of the  reasons for the proposed modificat ion. 
18. States Parties may conclude between themselves agreements or arrangements  concerning the 
destruction of abandoned chemical weapons. The Executive Council  may, upon request of the Territorial 
State Party, individually or together with the  Abandoning State Party, decide that selected provisions of 
such agreements or  arrangements take precedence over provisions of this Section, if it determines that  the 
agreement or arrangement ensures the destruction of the abandoned chemical  weapons in acco rdance with 
paragraph 17.  
  75 
 PART V  
DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS  PRODUCTION FACILITIES AND ITS 
VERIFICATION  PURSUANT TO ARTICLE V  
A. D ECLARATIONS  
Declarations of chemical weapons production facilities  
1. The declaration of chemical weapons production facilities by a State Party  pursu ant to Article III, 
paragraph 1 (c) (ii), shall contain for each facility:  
(a) The name of the facility, the names of the owners, and the names of the  companies or 
enterprises operating the facility since 1 January 1946;  
(b) The precise location of the facility, including the address, location of the  complex, location of 
the facility within the complex including the specific  building and structure number, if any;  
(c) A statement whether it is a facility for the manufacture of  chemicals that are  defined as 
chemical weapons or whether it is a facility for the filling of  chemical weapons, or both;  
(d) The date when the construction of the facility was completed and the periods  during which 
any modifications to the facility were m ade, including the  installation of new or modified equipment, 
that significantly changed the  production process characteristics of the facility;  
(e) Information on the chemicals defined as chemical weapons that were  manufactured at the 
facility; the muniti ons, devices, and containers that were  filled at the facility; and the dates of the 
beginning and cessation of such  manufacture or filling:  
(i) For chemicals defined as chemical weapons that were manufactured at  the facility, such 
information shall be expr essed in terms of the specific  types of chemicals manufactured, 
indicating the chemical name in  accordance with the current International Union of Pure and 
Applied  Chemistry (IUPAC) nomenclature, structural formula, and the Chemical  Abstracts 
Service regis try number, if assigned, and in terms of the  amount of each chemical expressed by 
weight of chemical in tonnes;  
(ii) For munitions, devices and containers that were filled at the facility,  such information 
shall be expressed in terms of the specific type of chemical weapons filled and the weight of the 
chemical fill per unit;  
(f) The production capacity of the chemical weapons production facility:  
(i) For a facility where chemical weapons were manufactured, production  capacity shall be 
expressed in terms o f the annual quantitative potential  for manufacturing a specific substance on 
the basis of the technological  process actually used or, in the case of processes not actually used,  
planned to be used at the facility;  
(ii) For a facility where chemical weapon s were filled, production capacity  shall be expressed 
in terms of the quantity of chemical that the facility  can fill into each specific type of chemical 
weapon a year;  
(g) For each chemical weapons production facility that has not been destroyed, a  descri ption of 
the facility including:  
(i) A site diagram;  
(ii) A process flow diagram of the facility; and  
(iii) An inventory of building s at the facility, and specializ ed equipment at  the facility and of 
any spare parts for such equipment;  
(h) The present stat us of the facility, stating:  
(i) The date when chemical weapons were last produced at the facility;  
(ii) Whether the facility has been destroyed, including the date and manner  of its destruction; 
and 
  76 
 (iii) Whether the facility has been used or modified before entry into force  of this Convention 
for an activity not related to the production of  chemical weapons, and if so, information on what 
modifications have  been made, the date such non -chemical weapons related activity began  and 
the nature of such acti vity, indicating, if applicable, the kind of  product;  
(i) A specification of the measures that have been taken by the State Party for  closure of, and a 
description of the measures that have been or will be taken  by the State Party to inactivate the facilit y; 
(j) A description of the normal pattern of activity for safety and security at the  inactivated facility; 
and 
(k) A statement as to whether the facility will be converted for the destruction of  chemical 
weapons and, if so, the dates for such conversions.  
Declarations of chemical weapons production facilities pursuant to Article  III, 
 paragraph 1  (c) (iii) 
2. The declaration of chemical weapons production facilities pursuant to Article III,  paragraph             
1 (c) (iii), shall contain all information specified in paragraph 1 above. It  is the responsibility of the State 
Party on whose territory the facility is or has been  located to make appropriate arrangements with the 
other State to ensure that the  declarations are made. If the State Party on whose t erritory the facility is or 
has been located is not able to fulfil this obligation, it shall state the reasons therefor.  
Declarations of past transfers and receipts  
3. A State Party that has transferred or received chemical weapons production  equipment since 1 
January 1946 shall declare these transfers and receipts pursuant  to Article III, paragraph 1 ( c) (iv), and in 
accordance with paragraph 5 below.  When not all the specified information is available for transfer and 
receipt of such  equipment for the period between 1 January 1946 and 1 January 1970, the State  Party shall 
declare whatever information is still available to it and provide an  explanation as to why it cannot submit 
a full declaration.  
4. Chemical weapons production equipment referred to in paragraph 3 means:  
(a) Specializ ed equipment;  
(b) Equipment for the production of equipment specifically designed for use  directly in 
connection with chemical weapons employment; and  
(c) Equipment designed or used exclusively for producing non -chemical par ts for  chemical 
munitions.  
5. The declaration concerning transfer and receipt of chemical weapons production  equipment shall 
specify:  
(a) Who received/transferred the chemical weapons production equipment;  
(b) The identity of such equipment;  
(c) The date o f transfer or receipt;  
(d) Whether the equipment was destroyed, if known; and  
(e) Current disposition, if known.  
Submission of general plans for destruction  
6. For each chemical weapons production facility, a State Party shall supply the  following 
information:  
(a) Envisaged time -frame for measures to be taken; and  
(b) Methods of destruction.  
7. For each chemical weapons production facility that a State Party intends to  convert temporarily 
into a chemical weapons destruction facility, the State Party  shall supply the following information:  
(a) Envisaged time -frame for conversion into a destruction facility;  
(b) Envisaged time -frame for utiliz ing the facility as a chemical weapons  destruction facility;  77 
 (c) Description of the new facility;  
(d) Method of  destruction of special equipment;  
(e) Time -frame for destruction of the converted f acility after it has been utiliz ed to destroy 
chemical weapons; and  
(f) Method of destruction of the converted facility.  
Submission of annual plans for destruction and annual reports on  destruction  
8. The State Party shall submit an annual plan for destruction not less than 90 days  before the 
beginning of the coming destruction year. The annual plan shall specify:  
(a) Capacity to be destroyed;  
(b) Name and location of th e facilities where destruction will take place;  
(c) List of buildings and equipment that will be destroyed at each facility; and  
(d) Planned method(s) of destruction.  
9. A State Party shall submit an annual report on destruction not later than 90 days  after the end of the 
previous destruction year. The annual report shall specify:  
(a) Capacity destroyed;  
(b) Name and location of each facility where destruction took place;  
(c) List of buildings and equipment that were destroyed at each facility;  
(d) Methods of destruction.  
10. For a chemical weapons production facility declared pursuant to Article III,  paragraph 1 (c) (iii), it 
is the responsibility of the State Party on whose territory  the facility is or has been located to make 
appropriate arrangements to ensure that  the declarations specified in paragraphs 6 to 9 above are made. If 
the State Party  on whose territory the facility is or has been located is not able to fulfil this  obligation, it 
shall state the reasons therefor.  
B. DESTRUCTION  
General princip les for destruction of chemical weapons production facilities  
11. Each State Party shall decide on methods to be applied for the destruction of  chemical weapons 
production facilities, according to the principles laid down in  Article V and in this Part.  
Principles and methods for closure of a chemical weapons production  facility  
12. The purpose of the closure of a chemical weapons production facility is to render it  inactive.  
13. Agreed measures for closure shall be taken by a State Party with due regard to the specific 
characteristics of each facility. Such measures shall include, inter alia : 
(a) Prohibitio n of occupation of the specializ ed buildings and standard buildings  of the facility 
except for agreed activities;  
(b) Disconnection of equipment directly related to the production of chemical  weapons, 
including, inter alia , process control equipment and utilities;  
(c) Decommissioning of protective installations and equipment used exclusively  for the safety of 
operations of the chemical weapons production fa cility;  
(d) Installation of blind flanges and other devices to prevent the addition of  chemicals to, or the 
removal of chemicals from, any specializ ed process  equipment for synthesis, separation or 
purification of chemicals defined as a  chemical weapon, an y storage tank, or any machine for filling 
chemical  weapons, the heating, cooling, or supply of electrical or other forms of power  to such 
equipment, storage tanks, or machines; and  
(e) Interruption of rail, road and other access routes for heavy transport  to the  chemical weapons 
production facility except those required for agreed  activities.  
  78 
 14. While the chemical weapons production facility remains closed, a State Party may  continue safety 
and physical security activities at the facility.  
Technical maintenance of chemical weapons production facilities prior to  their destruction  
15. A State Party may carry out standard maintenance activities at chemical weapons  production 
facilities only for safety reasons, including visual inspection, preventive  main tenance, and routine repairs.  
16. All planned maintenance activities shall be specified in the general and detailed  plans for 
destruction. Maintenance activities shall not include:  
(a) Replacement of any process equipment;  
(b) Modification of the characteristics of the chemical process equipment;  
(c) Production of chemicals of any type.  
17. All maintenance activities shall be subject to monitoring by the Technical  Secretariat.  
Principles and methods for temporary conversion of chemical weapons  production facilities into 
chemical weapons destruction facilities  
18. Measures pertaining to the temporary conversion of chemical weapons production  facilities into 
chemical weapons destruction facilities shall ensure that the regime  for the temporarily c onverted 
facilities is at least as stringent as the regime for  chemical weapons production facilities that have not 
been converted.  
19. Chemical weapons production facilities converted into chemical weapons  destruction facilities 
before entry into force of  this Convention shall be declared  under the category of chemical weapons 
production facilities.  
They shall be subject to an initial visit by inspectors, who shall confirm the  correctness of the 
information about these facilities. Verification that the  conversion of these facilities was performed in 
such a manner as to render them  inoperable as chemical weapons production facilities shall also be 
required, and  shall fall within the framework of measures provided for the facilities that are to  be rendered 
inoperable not later than 90 days after entry into force of this  Convention.  
20. A State Party that intends to carry out a conversion of chemical weapons  production facilities 
shall submit to the Technical Secretariat, not later than 30  days after this Conve ntion enters into force for 
it, or not later than 30 days after a  decision has been taken for temporary conversion, a general facility 
conversion  plan, and subsequently shall submit annual plans.  
21. Should a State Party have the need to convert to a chemi cal weapons destruction  facility an 
additional chemical weapons production facility that had been closed  after this Convention entered into 
force for it, it shall inform the Technical  Secretariat thereof not less than 150 days before conversion. The 
Techni cal Secretariat, in conjunction with the State Party, shall make sure that the necessary  measures are 
taken to render that facility, after its conversion, inoperable as a  chemical weapons production facility.  
22. A facility converted for the destruction of  chemical weapons shall not be more fit  for resuming 
chemical weapons production than a chemical weapons production  facility which has been closed and is 
under maintenance. Its reactivation shall  require no less time than that required for a chemical weapo ns 
production facility  that has been closed and is under maintenance.  
23. Converted chemical weapons production facilities shall be destroyed not later than  10 years after 
entry into force of this Convention.  
24. Any measures for the conversion of any give n chemical weapons production  facility shall be 
facility -specific and shall depend upon its individual characteristics.  
25. The set of measures carried out for the purpose of converting a chemical weapons  production 
facility into a chemical weapons destruction facility shall not be less  than that which is provided for the 
disabling of other chemical weapons  production facilities to be carried out not later than 90 days after this 
Convention  enters into force for the State Party.  
Principles and method s related to destruction of a chemical weapons  production facility  
26. A State Party shall destroy equipment and buildings covered by the definition of a  chemical 
weapons production facility as follows:  
(a) All specializ ed equipment and standard equipment shall be physically  destroyed;  
  79 
 (b) All specializ ed buildings and standard buildings shall be physically destroyed.  
27. A State Party shall destroy facilities for producing unfilled chemical munitions and  equipment for 
chemical weapons employment as follo ws: 
(a) Facilities used exclusively for production of non -chemical parts for chemical  munitions or 
equipment specifically designed for use directly in connection  with chemical weapons employment, 
shall be declared and destroyed. The  destruction process and  its verification shall be conducted 
according to the  provisions of Article V and this Part of this Annex that govern destruction of  
chemical weapons production facilities;  
(b) All equipment designed or used exclusively for producing non -chemical parts  for chemical 
munitions shall be physically destroyed. Such equipment, which  includes specially designed moulds 
and metal -forming dies, may be brought  to a special location for destruction;  
(c) All buildings and standard equipment used for such production acti vities  shall be destroyed or 
converted for purposes not prohibited under this  Convention, with confirmation, as necessary, 
through consultations and  inspections as provided for under Article IX;  
(d) Activities for purposes not prohibited under this Convent ion may continue  while destruction 
or conversion proceeds.  
Order of destruction  
28. The order of destruction of chemical weapons production facilities is based on the  obligations 
specified in Article I and the other Articles of this Convention,  including o bligations regarding s ystematic 
on-site verification. It takes into account  interests of States Parties for undiminished security during the 
destruction period;  confidence -building in the early part of the destruction stage; gradual acquisition  of 
experien ce in the course of destroying chemical weapons production facilities;  and applicability 
irrespective of the actual characteristics of the facilities and the  methods chosen for their destruction. The 
order of destruction is based on the  principle of levelling out.  
29. A State Party shall, for each destruction period, determine which chemical  weapons production 
facilities are to be destroyed and carry out the destruction in  such a way that not more than what is 
specified in paragraphs 30 and 31 remains  at the end of each destruction period. A State Party is not 
precluded from  destroying its facilities at a faster pace.  
30. The following provisions shall apply to chemical weapons production facilities that  produce 
Schedule 1 chemicals:  
(a) A State Party shall start the destruction of such facilities not later than one  year after this 
Convention enters into force for it, and shall complete it not  later than 10 years after entry into force 
of this Convention. For a State  which is a Party at the entry into f orce of this Convention, this overall 
period  shall be divided into three separate destruction periods, namely, years 2 -5, years 6 -8, and years 
9-10. For States which become a Party after entry into  force of this Convention, the destruction 
periods shall be  adapted, taking into  account paragraphs 28 and 29;  
(b) Production capacity shall be used as the comparison factor for such facilities.  It shall be 
expressed in agent tonnes, taking into account the rules specified  for binary chemical weapons;  
(c) Appropri ate agreed levels of production capacity shall be established for the  end of the eighth 
year after entry into force of this Convention. Production  capacity that exceeds the relevant level shall 
be destroyed in equal  increments during the first two destruct ion periods;  
(d) A requirement to destroy a given amount of capacity shall entail a  requirement to destroy any 
other chemical weapons production facility that  supplied the Schedule 1 facility or filled the Schedule 
1 chemical produced  there into munitions or devices;  
(e) Chemical weapons production facilities that have been converted temporarily  for destruction 
of chemical weapons shall continue to be subject to the  obligation to destroy capacity according to the 
provisions of this paragraph.  80 
 31. A State Party shall start the destruction of chemical weapons production facilities  not covered in 
paragraph 30 not later than one year after this Convention enters  into force for it, and complete it not later 
than five years after entry into force of  this Convention.  
Detailed plans for destruction  
32. Not less than 180 days before the destruction of a chemical weapons production  facility starts, a 
State Party shall provide to the Technical Secretariat the detailed  plans for destruction of the facility, 
including proposed measures for verification of  destruct ion referred to in paragraph 33  (f), with respect to, 
inter alia : 
(a) Timing of the presence of the inspectors at the facility to be destroyed; and  
(b) Procedures for verification of measures to be applie d to each item on the  declared inventory.  
33. The detailed plans for destruction of each chemical weapons production facility  shall contain:  
(a) Detailed time schedule of the destruction process;  
(b) Layout of the facility;  
(c) Process flow diagram;  
(d) Detailed inventory of equipment, buildings and other items to be destroyed;  
(e) Measures to be applied to each item on the inventory;  
(f) Proposed measures for verification;  
(g) Security/safety measures to be observed during the destruction of the facility ; and 
(h) Working and living conditions to be provided for inspectors.  
34. If a State Party intends to convert temporarily a chemical weapons production  facility into a 
chemical weapons destruction facility, it shall notify the Technical  Secretariat not le ss than 150 days 
before undertaking any conversion activities.  The notification shall:  
(a) Specify the name, address, and location of the facility;  
(b) Provide a site diagram indicating all structures and areas that will be  involved in the destruction of 
chemical weapons and also identify all  structures of the chemical weapons production facility that are to 
be temporarily converted;  
(c) Specify the types of chemical weapons, and the type and quantity of chemical  fill to be destroyed;  
(d) Specify the destru ction method;  
(e) Provide a process flow diagram, indicating which portions of the production  process and 
specializ ed equipment will be converted for the destruction of  chemical weapons;  
(f) Specify the seals and inspection equipment potentially affected b y the  conversion, if applicable; 
and 
(g) Provide a schedule identifying: The time allocated to design, temporary  conversion of the facility, 
installation of equipment, equipment check -out, destruction operations, and closure.  
35. In relation to the destruction of a facility that was temporarily converted for  destruction of 
chemical weapons, information shall be provided in accordance with  paragraphs 32 and 33.  
Review  of detailed plans  
36. On the basis of the detailed plan for destruction and proposed  measures for  verification submitted 
by the State Party, and on experience from previous  inspections, the Technical Secretariat shall prepare a 
plan for verifying the  destruction of the facility, consulting closely with the State Party. Any differences  
between the Technical Secretariat and the State Party concerning appropriate  measures should be resolved 
through consultations. Any unresolved matters shall  be forwarded to the Executive Council for 
appropriate action with a view to  facilitating the full impl ementation of this Convention.  
37. To ensure that the provisions of Article V and this Part are fulfilled, the combined  plans for 
destruction and verification shall be agreed upon between the Executive  Council and the State Party. This 
agreement should be completed, not less than 60  days before the planned initiation of destruction.  81 
 38. Each member of the Executive Council may consult with the Technical Secretariat  on any issues 
regarding the adequacy of the combined plan for destruction and  verification. If there are no objections by 
any member of the Executive Council,  the plan shall be put into action.  
39. If there are any difficulties, the Executive Council shall enter into consultations  with the State 
Party to reconcile them. If any difficulties remain  unresolved they  shall be referred to the Conference. The 
resolution of any differences over methods  of destruction shall not delay the execution of other parts of 
the destruction plan  that are acceptable.  
40. If agreement is not reached with the Executive  Council on aspects of verification,  or if the 
approved verification plan cannot be put into action, verification of  destruction shall proceed through 
continuous monitoring with on -site instruments  and physical presence of inspectors.  
41. Destruction and v erification shall proceed according to the agreed plan. The  verification shall not 
unduly interfere with the destruction process and shall be  conducted through the presence of inspectors 
on-site to witness the destruction.  
42. If required verification or d estruction actions are not taken as planned, all States  Parties shall be 
so informed.  
C. VERIFICATION  
Verification of declarations of chemical weapons production facilities  through on -site inspection  
43. The Technical Secretariat shall conduct an initial inspection of each chemical  weapons production 
facility in the period between 90 and 120 days after this  Convention enters into force for the State Party.  
44. The purposes of the initial inspection shall be:  
(a) To confirm that the production of chemical w eapons has ceased and that the  facility has been 
inactivated in accordance with this Convention;  
(b) To permit the Tec hnical Secretariat to familiariz e itself with the measures  that have been 
taken to cease production of chemical weapons at the facility;  
(c) To permit the inspectors to install temporary seals;  
(d) To permit the inspectors to confirm the inventory of buildings and  specializ ed equipment;  
(e) To obtain information necessary for planning inspection activities at the  facility, including use 
of tamper -indicating seals and other agreed equipment,  which shall be installed pursuant to the 
detailed facility agreement for the  facility; and  
(f) To conduct preliminary discussions regarding a detailed agreement on  inspection procedures at 
the facility.  
45. Inspectors shall employ, as appropriate, agreed seals, markers or other inventory  control 
procedures to facilitate an accurate inventory of the declared items at each  chemical weapons production 
facility.  
46. Inspectors shall install such agreed device s as may be necessary to indicate if any  resumption of 
production of chemical weapons occurs or if any declared item is  removed. They shall take the necessary 
precaution not to hinder closure activities  by the inspected State Party. Inspectors may return t o maintain 
and verify the  integrity of the devices.  
47. If, on the basis of the initial inspection, the Director -General believes that  additional measures are 
necessary to inactivate the facility in accordance with this  Convention, the Director -General may  request, 
not later than 135 days after this  Convention enters into force for a State Party, that such measures be 
implemented  by the inspected State Party not later than 180 days after this Convention enters  into force 
for it. At its discretion, the inspected State Party may satisfy the request.  If it does not satisfy the request, 
the inspected State Party and the  Director -General shall consult to resolve the matter.  
Systematic verification of chemical weapons production facilities and  cessation of th eir activities  
48. The purpose of the systematic verification of a chemical weapons production  facility shall be to 
ensure that any resumption of production of chemical weapons  or removal of declared items will be 
detected at this facility.  
  82 
 49. The detai led facility agreement for each chemical weapons production facility shall  specify:  
(a) Detailed on -site inspection procedures, which may include:  
(i) Visual examinations;  
(ii) Checking and servicing of seals and other agreed devices; and  
(iii) Obtaining a nd analysing samples;  
(b) Procedures for using tamper -indicating seals and other agreed equipment to  prevent the 
undetected reactivation of the facility, which shall specify:  
(i) The type, placement, and arrangements for installation; and  
(ii) The maintenance of such seals and equipment; and  
(c) Other agreed measures.  
50. The seals or other approved equipment provided for in a detailed agreement on  inspection 
measures for that facility shall be placed not later than 240 days after  this Convention en ters into force for 
a State Party. Inspectors shall be permitted to  visit each chemical weapons production facility for the 
installation of such seals or  equipment.  
51. During each calendar year, the Technical Secretariat shall be permitted to conduct  up to four 
inspections of each chemical weapons production facility.  
52. The Director -General shall notify the inspected State Party of his decision to  inspect or visit a 
chemical weapons production facility 48 hours before the  planned arrival of the inspectio n team at the 
facility for systematic inspections or  visits. In the case of inspections or visits to resolve urgent problems, 
this period  may be shortened. The Director -General shall specify the purpose of the inspection  or visit.  
53. Inspectors shall, in accordance with the facility agreements, have unimpeded  access to all parts of 
the chemical weapons production facilities. The items on the  declared inventory to be inspected shall be 
chosen by the inspectors.  
54. The guidelines for determining the frequen cy of systematic on -site inspections  shall be considered 
and approved by the Conference pursuant to Article VIII,  paragraph 21 (i). The particular production 
facility to be inspected shall be chosen  by the Technical Secretariat in such a way as to preclude the 
prediction of  precisely when the facility is to be inspected.  
Verification of destruction of chemical weapons production facilities  
55. The purpose of systematic verification of the destruction of chemical weapons  production 
facilities shall be to confirm that the facility is destroyed in accordance  with the obligations under this 
Convention and that each item on the declared  inventory is destroyed in accordance with the agreed 
detailed plan for destruction.  
56. When all items on the declared invent ory have been destroyed, the Technical  Secretariat shall 
confirm the declaration of the State Party to that effect. After this  confirmation, the Technical Secretariat 
shall terminate the systematic verification  of the chemical weapons production facility a nd shall promptly 
remove all devices  and monitoring instruments installed by the inspectors.  
57. After this confirmation, the State Party shall make the declaration that the facility  has been 
destroyed.  
Verification of temporary conversion of a chemical we apons production  facility into a chemical weapons 
destruction facility  
58. Not later than 90 days after receiving the initial notification of the intent to  convert temporarily a 
production facility, the inspectors shall have the right to visit  the facility  to familiariz e themselves with 
the proposed temporary conversion and  to study possible inspection measures that will be required during 
the conversion.  
59. Not later than 60 days after such a visit, the Technical Secretariat and the  inspected State Party 
shall conclude a transition agreement containing additional  inspection measures for the temporary 
conversion period. The transition  agreement shall specify inspection procedures, including the use of 
seals,  monitoring equipment, and inspections, that will provide confidence that no  chemical weapons 
production takes place during the conversion process. This  agreement shall remain in force from the 83 
 beginning of the temporary conversion  activity until the facility begins operation as a chemical weapons 
destruction  facility.  
60. The inspected State Party shall not remove or convert any portion of the facility,  or remove or 
modify any seal or other agreed inspection equipment that may have  been installed pursuant to this 
Convention until the transition agr eement has been  concluded.  
61. Once the facility begins operation as a chemical weapons destruction facility, it  shall be subje ct to 
the provisions of Part IV (A) of this Annex applicable to  chemical weapons destruction facilities. 
Arrangements for the pre -operation period  shall be governed by the transition agreement.  
62. During destruction operations the inspectors shall have access to all portions of  the temporarily 
converted chemical weapons production facilities, including those  that are not directly in volved with the 
destruction of chemical weapons.  
63. Before the commencement of work at the facility to convert it temporarily for  chemical weapons 
destruction purposes and after the facility has ceased to  function as a facility for chemical weapons 
destru ction, the facility shall be subject  to the provisions of this Part applicable to chemical weapons 
production facilities.  
D. C ONVERSION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS PRODUCTION FACILITIES  TO PURPOSES NOT PROHIBITED 
UNDER THIS CONVENTION  
Procedures for requesting conversion  
64. A request to use a chemical weapons production facility for purposes not  prohibited under this 
Convention may be made for any facility that a State Party is  already using for such purposes before this 
Convention enters into force for it, or  that it plans to use for such purposes.  
65. For a chemical weapons production facility that is being used for purposes not  prohibited under 
this Convention when this Convention enters into force for the  State Party, the request shall be submitted 
to the Di rector -General not later than  30 days after this Convention enters into force for the State Party. 
The request  shall contain, in addition to data submitted  in accordance with paragraph 1 (h) (iii), the 
following information:  
(a) A detailed justification for  the request;  
(b) A general facility conversion plan that specifies: — 
(i) The nature of the activity to be conducted at the facility;  
(ii) If the planned activity involves production, processing, or consumption  of chemicals: the 
name of each of the chemica ls, the flow diagram of  the facility, and the quantities planned to be 
produced, processed, or  consumed annually;  
(iii) Which buildings or structures are proposed to be used and what  modifications are 
proposed, if any;  
(iv) Which buildings or structures ha ve been destroyed or are proposed to  be destroyed and 
the plans for destruction;  
(v) What equipment is to be used in the facility;  
(vi) What equipment has been removed and destroyed and what equipment  is proposed to be 
removed and destroyed and the plans f or its  destruction;  
(vii) The proposed schedule fo r conversion, if applicable;  
(viii) The nature of the activity of each other facility operating at the site;  and 
(c) A detailed explanation of how measures set forth in sub -paragraph ( b), as well as any other 
measures proposed by the State Party, will ensure the  prevention of standby chemical weapons 
production capability at the facility.  
66. For a chemical weapons production facility that is not being used for purposes not  prohibited 
under this Conventio n when this Convention enters into force for the  State Party, the request shall be 
submitted to the Director -General not later than  30 days after the decision to convert, but in no case   later   84 
 than four years after this  Convention enters into force for the State Party. The request shall contain the  
following information:  
(a) A detailed justification for the request, including its economic needs;  
(b) A general facility conversion plan that specifies:  
(i) The nature of the activity planned to be conducted at the facility;  
(ii) If the planned activity involves production, processing, or consumption  of chemicals: the 
name of each of the chemicals, the flow diagram of  the facility, and the quantities planned to be 
produced, processed, or  consumed annually;  
(iii) Which buildings or structures are proposed to be retained and what  modifications are 
proposed, if any;  
(iv) Which buildings or structures have been destroyed or are proposed to  be destroyed and 
the plans for destruction;  
(v) What equipment is proposed for use in the facility;  
(vi) What equipment is proposed to be removed and destroyed and the  plans for its 
destruction;  
(vii) The proposed schedule for conversion; and  
(viii) The nature of the activity of each other facility operating at the site;  and 
(c) A detailed explanation of how the measures set forth in sub -paragraph ( b), as well as any other 
measures proposed by the State Party, will ensure the  prevention of standby chemical weapons 
production capability at the facilit y. 
67. The State Party may propose in its request any other measures it deems  appropriate to build 
confidence.  
Actions pending a decision  
68. Pending a decision of the Conference, a State Party may continue to use for  purposes not 
prohibited under this Con vention a facility that was being used for  such purposes before this Convention 
enters into force for it, but only if the State  Party certifies in its request that no specialized  equipment and 
no specialized  buildings are being used and that the specialize d equipment and specialized  buildings have 
been rendered inactive using the methods specified in paragraph 13.  
69. If the facility, for which the request was made, was not being used for purposes  not prohibited 
under this Convention before this Convention enters into force for  the State Party, or if the certification 
required in paragraph 68 is not made, the  State Party shall cease immediately all activity pursuant to 
Article V, paragraph 4.  The State Party shall close the facility in accordance with paragr aph 13 not later  
than 90 days after this Convention enters into force for it.  
Conditions for conversion  
70. As a condition for conversion of a chemical weapons production facility for  purposes not 
prohibited under this Convention, all specialized  equipment  at the  facility must be destroyed and all 
special features of buildings and structures that  distinguish them from buildings and structures normally 
used for purposes not  prohibited under this Convention and not involving Schedule 1 chemicals must be  
elimi nated.  
71. A converted facility shall not be used:  
(a) For any activity involving production, processing, or consumption of a  Schedule 1 chemical 
or a Schedule 2 chemical; or  
(b) For the production of any highly toxic chemical, including any highly toxic  phosphorus 
chemical, or for any other activity that would require  special equipment for handling highly toxic or 
highly corrosive chemicals,  unless the Executive Council decides that such production or activity 
would  pose no risk to the object and purpose o f this Convention, taking into  account criteria for 
toxicity, corrosiveness and, if applicable, other technical  factors, to be considered and approved by 
the Conference pursuant to Article  VIII, paragraph 21 (i). 85 
 72. Conversion of a chemical weapons production facility shall be completed not later  than six years 
after entry into force of this Convention.  
Decisions by the Executive Council and the Conference  
73. Not later than 90 days after receipt of the request by  the Director -General, an  initial inspection of 
the facility shall be conducted by the Technical Secretariat.  The purpose of this inspection shall be to 
determine the accuracy of the  information provided in the request, to obtain information on the technic al 
characteristics of the proposed converted facility, and to assess the conditions  under which use for 
purposes not prohibited under this Convention may be  permitted. The Director -General shall promptly 
submit a report to the Executive  Council, the Confer ence, and all States Parties containing his 
recommendations on  the measures necessary to convert the facility to purposes not prohibited under  this 
Convention and to provide assurance that the converted facility will be used  only for purposes not 
prohibite d under this Convention.  
74. If the facility has been used for purposes not prohibited under this Convention  before this 
Convention enters into force for the State Party, and is continuing to be  in operation, but the measures 
required to be certified under  paragraph 68 have  not been taken, the Director -General shall immediately 
inform the Executive  Council, which may require implementation of measures it deems appropriate,  inter 
alia, shut -down of the f acility and removal of specialized  equipment and  modification of buildings or 
structures. The Executive Council shall stipulate the  deadline for implementation of these measures and 
shall suspend consideration of  the request pending their satisfactory completion. The facility shall be 
inspected  promptly after the expiration of the deadline to determine whether the measures  have been 
implemented. If not, the State Party shall be required to shut down  completely all facility operations.  
75. As soon as possible after receiving the report of the Director -Gene ral, the  Conference, upon 
recommendation of the Executive Council, shall decide, taking  into account the report and any views 
expressed by States Parties, whether to  approve the request, and shall establish the conditions upon which 
approval is  contingent.  If any State Party objects to approval of the request and the associated  conditions, 
consultations shall be undertaken among interested States Parties for  up to 90 days to seek a mutually 
acceptable solution. A decision on the request  and associated condi tions, along with any proposed 
modifications thereto, shall be  taken, as a matter of substance, as soon as possible after the end of the  
consultation period.  
76. If the request is approved, a facility agreement shall be completed not later than  90 days aft er such 
a decision is taken. The facility agreement shall contain the  conditions under which the conversion and 
use of the facility is permitted,  including measures for verification. Conversion shall not begin before the 
facility  agreement is concluded.  
Detailed plans for conversion  
77. Not less than 180 days before conversion of a chemical weapons production facility  is planned to 
begin, the State Party shall provide the Technical Secretariat with the  detailed plans for conversion of the 
facility, includin g proposed measures for  verification of conversion, with respect to, inter alia : 
(a) Timing of the presence of the inspectors at the facility to be converted; and  
(b) Procedures for verification of measures to be applied to each item on the  declared inventory.  
78. The detailed plan for conversion of each chemical weapons production facility shall  contain:  
(a) Detailed time schedule of the conversion process;  
(b) Layout of the facility before and after conversion;  
(c) Process flow diagram of the facility before, and as appropriate, after the  conversion;  
(d) Detailed inventory of equipment, buildings and structures and other items to  be destroyed and 
of the buildings and structures to be modified;  
(e) Measures to be applied to each item on the inve ntory, if any;  
(f) Proposed measures for verification;  
(g) Security/safety measures to be observed during the conversion of the facility;  and 
(h) Working and living conditions to be provided for inspectors.  86 
 Review  of detailed plans  
79. On the basis of the detailed plan for conversion and proposed measures for  verification submitted 
by the State Party, and on experience from previous  inspections, the Technical Secretariat shall prepare a 
plan for verifying the  conversion of the facility, consulting closely w ith the State Party. Any differences  
between the Technical Secretariat and the State Party concerning appropriate  measures shall be resolved 
through consultations. Any unresolved matters shall be  forwarded to the Executive Council for 
appropriate action wi th a view to facilitate  the full implementation of this Convention.  
80. To ensure that the provisions of Article V and this Part are fulfilled, the combined  plans for 
conversion and verification shall be agreed upon between the Executive  Council and the St ate Party. This 
agreement shall be completed not less than 60  days before conversion is planned to begin.  
81. Each member of the Executive Council may consult with the Technical Secretariat  on any issue 
regarding the adequacy of the combined plan for conve rsion and  verification. If there are no objections by 
any member of the Executive Council,  the plan shall be put into action.  
82. If there are any difficulties, the Executive Council should enter into consultations  with the State 
Party to reconcile them. I f any difficulties remain unresolved, they  should be referred to the Conference. 
The resolution of any differences over  methods of conversion should not delay the execution of other 
parts of the  conversion plan that are acceptable.  
83. If agreement is not reached with the Executive Council on aspects of verification,  or if the 
approved verification plan cannot be put into action, verification of  conversion shall proceed through 
continuous monitoring with on -site instruments  and physical presence of inspecto rs. 
84. Conversion and verification shall proceed according to the agreed plan. The  verification shall not 
unduly interfere with the conversion process and shall be  conducted through the presence of inspectors to 
confirm the conversion.  
85. For the 10 year s after the Director -General certifies that conversion is complete,  the State Party 
shall provide to inspectors unimpeded access to the facility at any  time. The inspectors shall have the right 
to observe all areas, all activities, and all  items of equipme nt at the facility. The inspectors shall have the 
right to verify that  the activities at the facility are consistent with any conditions established under  this 
Section, by the Executive Council and the Conference. The inspectors shall  also have the right, in 
accordance with provisions of Part II, Section E, of this  Annex to receive samples from any area of the 
facility and to analyse them to  verify the absence of Schedule 1 chemicals, their stable by -products and  
decomposition products and of Schedule 2 chemicals and to verify that the  activities at the facility are 
consistent with any other conditions on chemical  activities established under this Section, by the 
Executive Council and the  Conference. The inspectors shall also have the right to managed acc ess, in  
accordance with Part X, Section C, of this Annex, to the plant site at which the  facility is located. During 
the 10 -year period, the State Party shall report annually  on the activities at the converted facility. Upon 
completion of the 10 -year perio d, the Executive Council, taking into account recommendations of the 
Technical  Secretariat, shall decide on the nature of continued verification measures.  
86. Costs of verification of the converted facility shall be allocated in accordance with  Article V, 
paragraph 19.  
  87 
 PART VI  
ACTIVITIES NOT PROHIBITED UNDER THIS CONVENTION  IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
ARTICLE VI  REGIME FOR SCHEDULE 1 CHEMICALS AND FACILITIES  RELATED TO SUCH  
CHEMICALS  
A. GENERAL PROVISIONS  
1. A State Party shall not produce, acquire, retain or use Schedule 1 chemicals  outside the territories 
of States Parties and shall not transfer such chemicals  outside its territory except to another State Party.  
2. A State Party shall not produce, acquire, retain, transfer or use Schedule 1  chemicals unless:  
(a) The chemicals are applied to research, medical, pharmaceutical or protective  purposes; and  
(b) The types and quantities of chemicals are strictly limited to those which can  be justified for 
such purposes; and  
(c) The aggregate amount of such chemicals at a ny given time for such purposes  is equal to or 
less than 1 tonne; and  
(d) The aggregate amount for such purposes acquired by a State Party in any  year through 
production, withdrawal from chemical weapons stocks and  transfer is equal to or less than 1 tonne . 
B. TRANSFERS  
3. A State Party may transfer Schedule 1 chemicals outside its territory only to  another State Party 
and only for research, medical, pharmaceutical or protective  purposes in accordance with paragraph 2.  
4. Chemicals transferred shall not be retransferred to a third State.  
5. Not less than 30 days before any transfer to another State Party both States  Parties shall notify the 
Technical Secretariat of the transfer.  
6. Each State Party shall make a detailed annual declaration regarding transfers  during the previous 
year. The declaration shall be submitted not later than 90  days after the end of that year and shall for each 
Schedule 1 chemical that has  been transferred include the following information:  
(a) The chemical name, structural formula an d Chemical Abstracts Service  registry number, if 
assigned;  
(b) The quantity acquired from other States or transferred to other States Parties.  For each transfer 
the quantity, recipient and purpose shall be included.  
C. PRODUCTION  
General principles for production  
7. Each State Party, during production under paragraphs 8 to 12, shall assign the  highest priority to 
ensuring the safety of people and to protecting the environment.  Each State Party shall conduct such 
production in accordance with its national  standards for safety and emissions.  
Single small -scale facility  
8. Each State Party that produces Schedule 1 chemicals for research, medical,  pharmaceutical or 
protective purposes shall carry out the production at a single  small -scale facility approved by  the State 
Party, except as set forth in paragraphs  10, 11 and 12.  
9. The production at a single small -scale facility shall be carried out in reaction  vessels in production 
lines not configurated for continuous operation. The volume  of such a reaction vessel shall not exceed 
100 litres, and the total volume of all  reaction vessels with a volume exceeding 5 litres shall not be more 
than 500 litres.  
Other facilities  
10. Production of Schedule 1 chemicals in aggregate quantities not exce eding 10 kg per  year may be 
carried out for protective purposes at one facility outside a single  small -scale facility. This facility shall be 
approved by the State Party.  88 
 11. Production of Schedule 1 chemicals  in quantities of more than 100 g per year may  be carried out 
for research, medical or pharmaceutical purposes outside a single  small -scale facility in aggregate 
quantities not exceeding 10 kg per year per facility.  These facilities shall be approved by the State Party.  
12. Synthesis of Schedule 1 chem icals for research, medical or pharmaceutical  purposes, but not for 
protective purposes, may be carried out at laboratories in  aggregate quantities less than 100 g per year per 
facility. These facilities shall not  be subject to any obligation relating to de claration and verification as 
specified in  Sections D and E.  
D. DECLARATIONS  
Single small -scale facility  
13. Each State Party that plans to operate a single small -scale facility shall provide the  Technical 
Secretariat with the precise location and a detail ed technical description  of the facility, including an 
inventory of equipment and detailed diagrams. For  existing facilities, this initial declaration shall be 
provided not later than 30 days  after this Convention enters into force for the State Party. Ini tial 
declarations on  new facilities shall be provided not less than 180 days before operations are to  begin.  
14. Each State Party shall give advance notification to the Technical Secretariat of  planned changes 
related to the initial declaration. The notification shall be  submitted not less than 180 days before the 
changes are to take place.  
15. A State Party producing Schedule 1 chemicals at a single small -scale facility shall  make a detailed 
annual declaration regarding the activities of the facility  for the  previous year. The declaration shall be 
submitted not later than 90 days after the  end of that year and shall include:  
(a) Identification of the facility;  
(b) For each Schedule 1 chemical produced, acquired, consumed or stored at the  facility, the  
following information: — 
(i) The chemical name, structural formula and Chemical Abstracts Service  registry number, if 
assigned;  
(ii) The methods employed and quantity produced;  
(iii) The name and quantity of precursors listed in Schedules 1, 2, or 3 used  for production of 
Schedule 1 chemicals;  
(iv) The quantity consumed at the facility and the purpose(s) of the  consumption;  
(v) The quantity received from or shipped to other facilities in the State  Party. For each 
shipment the quantity, recipient and purpose  should be  included;  
(vi) The maximum quantity stored at any time during the year; and  
(vii) The quantity stored at the end of the year; and  
(c) Information on any changes at the facility during the year compared to  previously submitted  
detailed technical descriptions of the facility including  inventories of equipment and detailed 
diagrams.  
16. Each State Party producing Schedule 1 chemicals at a single small -scale facility  shall make a 
detailed annual declaration regarding the projected  activities and the  anticipated production at the facility 
for the coming year. The declaration shall be  submitted not less than 90 days before the beginning of that 
year and shall  include: — 
(a) Identification of the facility;  
(b) For each Schedule 1 chemi cal anticipated to be produced, consumed or  stored at the facility, 
the following information:  
(i) The chemical name, structural formula and Chemical Abstracts Service  registry number, if 
assigned;  
(ii) The quantity anticipated to be produced and the purpo se of the  production; and  89 
 (c) Information on any anticipated changes at the facility during the year  compared to previously 
submitted detailed technical descriptions of the  facility including inventories of equipment and 
detailed diagrams.  
Other facilities  referred to in paragraphs 10 and 11 
17. For each facility, a State Party shall provide the Technical Secretariat with the  name, location and 
a detailed technical description of the facility or its relevant  part(s) as requested by the Technical 
Secretariat. The facility producing Schedule 1  chemicals for protective purposes shall be specifically 
identified. For existing  facilities, this initial declaration shall be provided not later than 30 days after this  
Convention enters into force for the St ate Party. Initial declarations on new  facilities shall be provided not 
less than 180 days before operations are to begin.  
18. Each State Party shall give advance notification to the Technical Secretariat of  planned changes 
related to the initial declarati on. The notification shall be  submitted not less than 180 days before the 
changes are to take place.  
19. Each State Party shall, for each facility, make a detailed annual declaration  regarding the activities 
of the facility for the previous year. The decla ration shall  be submitted not later than 90 days after the end 
of that year and shall include:  
(a) Identification of the facility;  
(b) For each Schedule 1 chemical the following information:  
(i) The chemical name, structural formula and Chemical Abstracts Service  registry number, if 
assigned;  
(ii) The quantity produced and, in case of production for protective  purposes, methods 
employed;  
(iii) The name and quantity of precursors listed in Schedules 1, 2, or 3, used  for production of 
Schedule 1 chemicals;  
(iv) The quantity consumed at the facility and the purpose of the  consumption;  
(v) The quantity transferred to other facilities within the State Party. For  each transfer the 
quantity, recipient and purpose should be included;  
(vi) The  maximum quantity stored at any time during the year; and  
(vii) The quantity stored at the end of the year; and  
(c) Information on any changes at the facility or its relevant parts during the  year compared to 
previously submitted detailed technical descrip tion of the  facility.  
20. Each State Party shall, for each facility, make a detailed annual declaration  regarding the 
projected activities and the anticipated production at the facility for  the coming year. The declaration shall 
be submitted not less than 90 days before  the beginning of that year and shall include:  
(a) Identification of the facility;  
(b) For each Schedule 1 chemical the following information:  
(i) The chemical name, structural formula and Chemical Abstracts Service  registry number, if 
assign ed; and  
(ii) The quantity anticipated to be produced, the time periods when the  production is 
anticipated to take place and the purposes of the  production; and  
(c) Information on any anticipated changes at the facility or its relevant parts,  during the yea r 
compared to previously submitted detailed technical  descriptions of the facility.  
E. V ERIFICATION  
Single small -scale facility  
21. The aim of verification activities at the single small -scale facility shall be to verify  that the 
quantities of Schedule 1 chemicals produced are correctly declared and, in  particular, that their aggregate 
amount does not exceed 1 tonne.  90 
 22. The facility shall be subject to systematic verification through on -site inspection  and monitoring 
with on -site instruments.  
23. The numb er, intensity, duration, timing and mode of inspections for a particular  facility shall be 
based on the risk to the object and purpose of this Convention  posed by the relevant chemicals, the 
characteristics of the facility and the nature of  the activities carried out there. Appropriate guidelines shall 
be considered and  approved by the Conference pursuan t to Article VIII, paragraph 21 (i). 
24. The purpose of the initial inspection shall be to verify information provided  concerning the 
facility, including ver ification of the limits on reaction vessels set  forth in paragraph 9.  
25. Not later than 180 days after this Convention enters into force for a State Party, it  shall conclude a 
facility agreement, based on a model agreement, with the  Organization , covering  detailed inspection 
procedures for the facility.  
26. Each State Party planning to establish a single small -scale facility after this  Convention enters 
into force for it shall conclude a facility agreement, based on a  model agreement, with the Organization , 
covering detailed inspection procedures  for the facility before it begins operation or is used.  
27. A model for agreements shall be considered and approved by the Conference  pursuan t to Article 
VIII, paragraph 21 (i). 
Other facilities referred to in parag raphs 10 and 11 
28. The aim of verification activities at any facility referred to in paragraphs 10 and 11  shall be to 
verify  that: 
(a) The facility is not used to produce any Schedule 1 chemical, except for the  declared 
chemicals;  
(b) The quantities of Schedule 1 chemicals produced, processed or consumed are  correctly 
declared and consistent with needs for the declared purpose; and  
(c) The Schedule 1 chemical is not diverted or used for other purposes.  
29. The facility shall be subject  to systematic verification through on -site inspection  and monitoring 
with on -site instruments.  
30. The number, intensity, duration, timing and mode of inspections for a particular  facility shall be 
based on the risk to the object and purpose of this Conve ntion  posed by the quantities of chemicals 
produced, the characteristics of the facility  and the nature of the activities carried out there. Appropriate 
guidelines shall be  considered and approved by the Conference pursuant to Article VIII, paragraph 21(i) . 
31. Not later than 180 days after this Convention enters into force for a State Party, it  shall conclude 
facility agreements with the Organization , based on a model  agreement covering detailed inspection 
procedures for each facility.  
32. Each State Party  planning to establish such a facility after entry into force of this  Convention shall 
conclude a fac ility agreement with the Organization  before the  facility begins operation or is used.  
  91 
 PART VII  
ACTIVITIES NOT PROHIBITED UNDER THIS CONVENTION  IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
ARTICLE VI  REGIME FOR SCHEDULE 2 CHEMICALS AND FACILITIES  RELATED TO SUCH  
CHEMICALS  
A. DECLARATIONS  
Declarations of aggregate national data  
1. The initial and annual declarations to be provided by each State Party pursuant to  Article VI, 
paragraphs 7 and 8, shall include aggregate national data for the  previous calendar year on the quantities 
produced, processed, consumed, imported  and exported of each Schedule 2 chemical, as well as a 
quantitative specification of  import and export for each  country involved.  
2. Each State Party shall submit:  
(a) Initial declarations pursuant to paragraph 1 not later than 30 days after this  Convention enters 
into force for it; and, starting in the following calendar  year,  
(b) Annual declarations not later than 90 days after the end of the previous  calendar year.  
Declarations of plant sites producing, processing or consuming Schedule 2  chemicals  
3. Initial and annual declarations are required for all plant sites that comprise one or  more plant(s) 
which produced, processed or consumed during any of the previous  three calendar years or is anticipated 
to produce, process or consume in the next  calendar year more than:  
(a) 1 kg of a chemical designated “*” in Schedule 2, part A;  
(b) 100 kg of any other chemi cal listed in Schedule 2, part A; or  
(c) 1 tonne of a chemical listed in Schedule 2, part B.  
4. Each State Party shall submit:  
(a) Initial declarations pursuant to paragraph 3 not later than 30 days after this  Convention enters 
into force for it; and, starting in the following calendar  year;  
(b) Annual declarations on past activities not later than 90 days after the end of  the previous 
calendar year;  
(c) Annual declarations on anticipated activities not later than 60 days before  the beginning of the 
following calendar year. Any such activity additionally  planned after the annual declaration has been 
submitted shall be declared  not later than five days before this activity begins.  
5. Declarations pursuant to paragraph 3 are generally not required for mixt ures containing a low 
concentration of a Schedule 2 chemical. They are only required,  in accordance with guidelines, in cases 
where the ease of recovery from the  mixture of the Schedule 2 chemical and its total weight are deemed 
to pose a risk  to the objec t and purpose of this Convention. These guidelines shall be considered  and 
approved by the Conference pursuant to Article VIII, paragraph 21 (i).  
6. Declarations of a plant site pursuant to paragraph 3 shall include:  
(a) The name of the plant site and the name of the owner, company, or  enterprise operating it;  
(b) Its precise location including the address; and  
(c) The number of plants within the plant site which are declared pursuant to  Part VIII of this 
Annex.  
7. Declarations of a plant site pursuant to p aragraph 3 shall also include, for each  plant which is 
located within the plant site and which falls under the specifications  set forth in paragraph 3, the 
following information:  
(a) The name of the plant and the name of the owner, company, or enterprise  operating it;  
(b) Its precise location within the plant site including the specific building or  structure number, if 
any; 
(c) Its main activities;  92 
 (d) Whether the plant:  
(i) Produces, processes, or consumes the declared Schedule 2 chemical(s);  
(ii) Is dedicated to such activities or multi -purpose; and  
(iii) Performs other activities with regard to the declared Schedule 2  chemical(s), including a 
specification of that other activity ( e.g. storage); and  
(e) The production capacity of the plant for each de clared Schedule 2 chemical.  
8. Declarations of a plant site pursuant to paragraph 3 shall also include the  following information on 
each Schedule 2 chemical above the declaration  threshold, — 
(a) The chemical name, common or trade name used by the facility,  structural  formula, and 
Chemical Abstracts Service registry number, if assigned;  
(b) In the case of the initial declaration: the total amount produced, processed,  consumed, 
imported and exported by the plant site in each of the three  previous calendar yea rs; 
(c) In the case of the annual declaration on past activities: the total amount  produced, processed, 
consumed, imported and exported by the plant site in  the previous calendar year;  
(d) In the case of the annual declaration on anticipated activities: th e total  amount anticipated to 
be produced, processed or consumed by the plant site  in the following calendar year, including the 
anticipated time periods for  production, processing or consumption; and  
(e) The purposes for which the chemical was or will be produced, processed or  consumed:  
(i) Processing and consumption on site with a specification of the product  types;  
(ii) Sale or transfer within the territory or to any other place under the  jurisdiction or control 
of the State Party, with a specification w hether to  other industry, trader or other destination and, if 
possible, of final  product types;  
(iii) Direct export, with a specification of the States involved; or  
(iv) Other, including a specification of these other purposes.  
Declarations on past production of Schedule 2 chemicals for chemical  weapons purposes  
9. Each State Party shall, not later than 30 days after this Convention enters into  force for it, declare 
all plant sites comprising plants that produced at any time  since 1 January 1946 a Sc hedule 2 chemical for 
chemical weapons purposes.  
10. Declarations of a plant site pursuant to paragraph 9 shall include:  
(a) The name of the plant site and the name of the owner, company, or  enterprise operating it;  
(b) Its precise location including the address;  
(c) For each plant which is located within the plant site, and which falls under  the specifications 
set forth in paragraph 9, the same information as required  under paragraph 7, sub -paragraphs ( a) to 
(e); and  
(d) For each Schedule 2 chemical produ ced for chemical weapons purposes:  
(i) The chemical name, common or trade name used by the plant site for  chemical weapons 
production purposes, structural formula, and  Chemical Abstracts Service registry number, if 
assigned;  
(ii) The dates when the chemical was produced and the quantity produced;  and 
(iii) The location to which the chemical was delivered and the final product  produced there, if 
known.  
Information to States Parties  
11. A list of plant sites declared under this Section together with th e information  provided under 
paragraphs 6, 7( a), 7(c), 7(d)(i), 7(d)(iii), 8(a) and 10 shall be  transmitted by the Technical Secretariat to 
States Parties upon request.  93 
 B. VERIFICATION  
General  
12. Verification provided for in Article VI, paragraph 4, shall  be carried out through  on-site 
inspection at those of the declared plant sites that comprise one or more  plants which produced, processed 
or consumed during any of the previous three  calendar years or are anticipated to produce, process or 
consume in the next calendar year more than — 
(a) 10 kg of a chemical designated “*” in Schedule 2, part A;  
(b) 1 tonne of any other chemical listed in Schedule 2, part A; or  
(c) 10 tonnes of a chemical listed in Schedule 2, part B.  
13. The pro gramme and budget of the Organization  to be adopted by the Conference  pursuan t to 
Article VIII, paragraph 21 (a) shall contain, as a separate item, a  programme and budget for verification 
under this Section. In the allocation of  resources made available for verification under Artic le VI, the 
Technical Secretariat  shall, during the first three years after the entry into force of this Convention, give  
priority to the initial inspections of plant sites declared under Section A. The  allocation shall thereafter be 
reviewed on the basis o f the experience gained.  
14. The Technical Secretariat shall conduct initial inspections and subsequent  inspections in 
accordance with paragraphs 15 to 22.  
Inspection aims  
15. The general aim of inspections shall be to verify that activities are in accorda nce with obligations 
under this Convention and consistent with the information to be  provided in declarations. Particular aims 
of inspections at plant sites declared  under Section A shall include verification of — 
(a) The absence of any Schedule 1 chemical,  especially its production, except if in  accordance 
with Part VI of this Annex;  
(b) Consistency with declarations of levels of production, processing or  consumption of Schedule 
2 chemicals; and  
(c) Non -diversion of Schedule 2 chemicals for activities prohi bited under this  Convention.  
Initial inspections  
16. Each plant site to be inspected pursuant to paragraph 12 shall receive an initial  inspection as soon 
as possible but preferably not later than three years after entry  into force of this Convention. Plant  sites 
declared after this period shall receive an  initial inspection not later than one year after production, 
processing or  consumption is first declared. Selection of plant sites for initial inspections shall be  made by 
the Technical Secretariat in such  a way as to preclude the prediction of  precisely when the plant site is to 
be inspected.  
17. During the initial inspection, a draft facility agreement for the plant site shall be  prepared unless 
the inspected State Party and the Technical Secretariat agre e that  it is not needed.  
18. With regard to frequency and intensity of subsequent inspections, inspectors shall  during the 
initial inspection assess the risk to the object and purpose of this  Convention posed by the relevant 
chemicals, the characteristics of the plant site  and the nature of the activities carried out there, taking into 
account, inter alia , the following criteria:  
(a) The toxicity of the scheduled chemicals and of the end -products produced  with it, if any;  
(b) The quantity of the scheduled chemicals typically stored at the inspected site;  
(c) The quantity of feedstock chemicals for the scheduled chemicals typically  stored at the 
inspected site;  
(d) The production capacity of the Schedule 2 plants; and  
(e) The capability and convertibility fo r initiating production, storage and filling  of toxic 
chemicals at the inspected site.  
 94 
 Inspections  
19. Having received the initial inspection, each plant site to be inspected pursuant to  paragraph 12 
shall be subject to subsequent inspections.  
20. In selecting particular plant sites for inspection and in deciding on the frequency  and intensity of 
inspections, the Technical Secretariat shall give due consideration  to the risk to the object and purpose of 
this Convention posed by the relevant  chemical, t he characteristics of the plant site and the nature of the 
activities  carried out there, taking into account the respective facility agreement as well as  the results of 
the initial inspections and subsequent inspections.  
21. The Technical Secretariat shall  choose a particular plant site to be inspected in  such a way as to 
preclude the prediction of exactly when it will be inspected.  
22. No plant site shall receive more than two inspections per calendar year under the  provisions of 
this Section. This, howeve r, shall not limit inspections pursuant to  Article IX.  
Inspection procedures  
23. In addition to agreed guidelines, other relevant provisions of this Annex and the  Confidentiality 
Annex, paragraphs 24 to 30 below shall apply.  
24. A facility agreement for th e declared plant site shall be concluded not later than  90 days after 
completion of the initial inspection between the inspected State Party  and the Organization  unless the 
inspected State Party and the Technical  Secretariat agree that it is not needed. It  shall be based on a model 
agreement and  govern the conduct of inspections at the declared plant site. The agreement shall  specify 
the frequency and intensity of inspections as well as detailed inspection  procedures, consistent with 
paragraphs 25 to 29.  
25. The focus of the inspection shall be the declared Schedule 2 plant(s) within the  declared plant site. 
If the inspection team requests access to other parts of the  plant site, access to these areas shall be granted 
in accordance with the obligation  to pro vide clarification pursuant to Part II, paragraph 51, of this Annex 
and in  accordance with the facility agreement, or, in the absence of a facility agreement,  in accordance 
with the rules of managed access as specified in Part X, Section C,  of this Annex.  
26. Access to records shall be provided, as appropriate, to provide assurance that there  has been no 
diversion of the declared chemical and that production has been  consistent with declarations.  
27. Sampling and analysis shall be undertaken to check for th e absence of undeclared  scheduled 
chemicals.  
28. Areas to be inspected may include:  
(a) Areas where feed chemicals (reactants) are delivered or stored;  
(b) Areas where manipulative processes are performed upon the reactants prior  to addition to the 
reactio n vessels;  
(c) Feed lines as appropriate from the areas referred to in sub -paragraph ( a) or sub-paragraph ( b) 
to the reaction vessels together with any associated valves,  flow meters, etc.;  
(d) The external aspect of the reaction vessels and ancillary equipment;  
(e) Lines from the r eaction vessels leading to long  or short -term storage or to  equipment further 
processing the declared Schedule 2 chemicals;  
(f) Control equipment associated with any of the items under sub -paragraphs ( a) to (e); 
(g) Equipment  and areas for waste and effluent handling;  
(h) Equipment and areas for disposition of chemicals not up to specification.  
29. The period of inspection shall not last more than 96 hours; however, extensions  may be agreed 
between the inspection team and the inspected State Party.  
Notification of inspection  
30. A State Party shall be notified by the Technical Secretariat of the inspection not  less than 48 hours 
before the arrival of the inspection team at the plant site to be  inspected.  95 
  
C. TRANSFERS TO STATES  NOT PARTY TO THIS CONVENTION  
31. Schedule 2 chemicals shall only be transferred to or received from States Parties.  This obligation 
shall take effect three years after entry into force of this  Convention.  
32. During this interim three -year period, each St ate Party shall require an end -use certificate, as 
specified below, for transfers of Schedule 2 chemicals to States not  Party to this Convention. For such 
transfers, each State Party shall adopt the  necessary measures to ensure that the transferred chemica ls 
shall only be used for  purposes not prohibited under this Convention. Inter alia , the State Party shall  
require from the recipient State a certificate stating, in relation to the transferred  chemicals:  
(a) That they will only be used for purposes not pr ohibited under this  Convention;  
(b) That they will not be re -transferred;  
(c) Their types and quantities;  
(d) Their end -use(s); and  
(e) The name(s) and address(es) of the end -user(s).  
  96 
 PART VIII  
ACTIVITIES NOT PROHIBITED UNDER THIS CONVENTION  IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
ARTICLE VI  
REGIME FOR SCHEDULE 3 CHEMICALS AND FACILITIES  RELATED TO SUCH  CHEMICALS  
A. DECLARATIONS  
Declarations of aggregate national data  
1. The initial and annual declarations to be provided by a State Party pursuant to  Article VI, 
parag raphs 7 and 8, shall include aggregate national data for the  previous calendar year on the quantities 
produced, imported and exported of each  Schedule 3 chemical, as well as a quantitative specification of 
import and export  for each country involved.  
2. Each State Party shall submit:  
(a) Initial declarations pursuant to paragraph 1 not later than 30 days after this  Convention enters 
into force for it; and, starting in the following calendar  year;  
(b) Annual declarations not later than 90 days after the en d of the previous  calendar year.  
Declarations of plant sites producing Schedule  3 chemicals  
3. Initial and annual declarations are required for all plant sites that comprise one or  more plants 
which produced during the previous calendar year or are anticip ated to produce in the next calendar year 
more than 30 tonnes of a Schedule 3  chemical.  
4. Each State Party shall submit:  
(a) Initial declarations pursuant to paragraph 3 not later than 30 days after this  Convention enters 
into force for it; and, starting in the following calendar  year;  
(b) Annual declarations on past activities not later than 90 days after the end of  the previous 
calendar year;  
(c) Annual declarations on anticipated activities not later than 60 days before  the beginning of the 
following calendar year. Any such activity additionally  planned after the annual declaration has been 
submitted shall be declared  not later than five days before this activity begins.  
5. Declarations pursuant to paragraph 3 are generally not required for mixtures  containing a low 
concentration of a Schedule 3 chemical. They are only required,  in accordance with guidelines, in such 
cases where the ease of recovery from the  mixture of the Schedule 3 chemical and its total weight are 
deemed to pose a risk  to the object and purpose of this Convention. These guidelines shall be considered  
and approved by the Conference pursuan t to Article VIII, paragraph 21 (i). 
6. Declarations of a plant site pursuant to paragraph 3 shall include:  
(a) The name of the plant site and the nam e of the owner, company, or  enterprise operating it;  
(b) Its precise location including the address; and  
(c) The number of plants within the plant site which are declared pursuant to  Part VII of this 
Annex.  
7. Declarations of a plant site pursuant to paragraph 3 shall also include, for each  plant which is 
located within the plant site and which falls under the specifications  set forth in paragraph 3, the 
following information:  
(a) The name of the plant and the name of the owner, company, or enterprise  operating it;  
(b) Its precise location within the plant site, including the specific building or  structure number, if 
any; 
(c) Its main activities.  
8. Declarations of a plant site pursuant to paragraph 3 shall also include the  following information on 
each Schedule 3 chemical above the declaration  threshold:  97 
 (a) The chemical name, common or trade name used by the facility, structural  formula, and 
Chemical Abstracts Service registry number, if assigned;  
(b) The approximate amount of production of the chemica l in the previous  calendar year, or, in 
case of declarations on anticipated activities, anticipated  for the next calendar year, expressed in the 
ranges: 30 to 200 tonnes, 200 to  1,000 tonnes, 1,000 to 10,000 tonnes, 10,000 to 100,000 tonnes, and 
above  100,000 tonnes; and  
(c) The purposes for which the chemical was or will be produced.  
Declarations on past production of Schedule 3 chemicals for chemical  weapons purposes  
9. Each State Party shall, not later than 30 days after this Convention enters into  force  for it, declare 
all plant sites comprising plants that produced at any time  since 1 January 1946 a Schedule 3 chemical for 
chemical weapons purposes.  
10. Declarations of a plant site pursuant to paragraph 9 shall include:  
(a) The name of the plant site an d the name of the owner, company, or  enterprise operating it;  
(b) Its precise location including the address;  
(c) For each plant which is located within the plant site, and which falls under  the specifications 
set forth in paragraph 9, the same information  as required  under paragraph 7, sub -paragraphs ( a) to 
(c); and  
(d) For each Schedule 3 chemical produced for chemical weapons purposes:  
(i) The chemical name, common or trade name used by the plant site for  chemical weapons 
production purposes, structural formula, and  Chemical Abstracts Service registry number, if 
assigned;  
(ii) The dates when the chemical was produced and the quantity produced;  and 
(iii) The location to which the chemical was delivered and the final product  produced there, if 
known.  
Inform ation to States Parties  
11. A list of plant sites declared under this Section together with the information  provided under 
paragraphs 6, 7 (a), 7(c), 8(a) and 10 shall be transmitted by the  Technical Secretariat to States Parties 
upon request.  
B. VERIFICATION  
General  
12. Verification provided for in paragraph 5 of Article VI shall be carried out through  on-site 
inspections at those declared plant sites which produced during the  previous calendar year or are 
anticipated to produce in the next calend ar year in  excess of 200 tonnes aggregate of any Schedule 3 
chemical above the declaration  threshold of 30 tonnes.  
13. The programme and budget of the Organization  to be adopted by the Conference  pursuant to 
Article VIII, paragraph 21 (a), shall contain, a s a separate item, a  programme and budget for verification 
under this Section taking into account Part  VII, paragraph 13, of this Annex.  
14. Under this Section, the Technical Secretariat shall randomly select plant sites for  inspection 
through appropriate mechanisms, such as the use of specially designed  computer software, on the basis of 
the following weighting factors:  
(a) Equitable geographical distribution of inspections; and  
(b) The information on the declared plant sites available to the Technical  Secretariat, related to 
the relevant chemical, the characteristics of the plant  site and the nature of the activities carried out 
there.  
15. No plant site shall receive more than two inspections per year under the  provisions of this Section. 
This, however, sh all not limit inspections pursuant to  Article IX.  98 
 16. In selecting plant sites for inspection under this Section, the Technical Secretariat  shall observe 
the following limitation for the combined number of inspections to  be received by a State Party per 
calendar year under this Part and Part IX of this  Annex: the combined number of inspections shall not 
exceed three plus 5 per cent . of the total number of plant sites declared by a State Party under both this 
Part and Part IX of this Annex, or 20 inspectio ns, whichever of these two figures is  lower.  
Inspection aims  
17. At plant sites declared under Section A, the general aim of inspections shall be to  verify that 
activities are consistent with the information to be provided in  declarations. The particular a im of 
inspections shall be the verification of the  absence of any Schedule 1 chemical, especially its production, 
except if in  accordance with Part VI of this Annex.  
Inspection procedures  
18. In addition to agreed guidelines, other relevant provisions of t his Annex and the  Confidentiality 
Annex, paragraphs 19 to 25 below shall apply.  
19. There shall be no facility agreement, unless requested by the inspected State Party.  
20. The focus of the inspections shall be the declared Schedule 3 plant(s) within the  declared plant 
site. If the inspection team, in accordance with Part II, paragraph  51, of this Annex, requests access to 
other parts of the plant site for clarification of  ambiguities, the extent of such access shall be agreed 
between the inspection team  and the inspected State Party.  
21. The inspection team may have access to records in situations in which the  inspection team and the 
inspected State Party agree that such access will assist in  achieving the objectives of the inspection.  
22. Sampling and on -site analysis may be undertaken to check for the absence of  undeclared 
scheduled chemicals. In case of unresolved ambiguities, samples may  be analysed in a designated off -site 
laboratory, subject to the inspected State  Party ’s agreement.  
23. Areas to be inspected may include:  
(a) Areas where feed chemicals (reactants) are delivered or stored;  
(b) Areas where manipulative processes are performed upon the reactants prior  to addition to the 
reaction vessel;  
(c) Feed lines as appropriate from the areas referr ed to in sub -paragraph ( a) or sub-paragraph ( b) 
to the reaction vessel together with any associated valves,  flow meters, etc.;  
(d) The external aspect of the reaction vessels and ancillary equipment;  
(e) Lines from the reaction vessels leading to long - or short -term storage or to  equipment further 
processing the declared Schedule 3 chemicals;  
(f) Control equipment associated with any of the items under sub -paragraphs ( a) to (e); 
(g) Equipment and areas for waste and effluent handling;  
(h) Equipment and areas for disposition of chemicals not up to specification.  
24. The period of inspection shall not last more than 24 hours; however, extensions  may be agreed 
between the inspection team and the inspected State Party.  
Notification of inspection  
25. A State Party shall be notified by the Technical Secretariat of the inspection not  less than 120 
hours before the arrival of the inspection team at the plant site to be  inspected.  
C. TRANSFERS TO STATES NOT PARTY TO THIS CONVENTION  
26. When transferring Schedule 3  chemicals to States not Party to this Convention,  each State Party 
shall adopt the necessary measures to ensure that the transferred  chemicals shall only be used for purposes 
not prohibited under this Convention.  Inter alia , the State Party shall require from the recipient State a 
certificate stating,  in relation to the transferred chemicals:  
(a) That they will only be used for purposes not prohibited under this  Convention;  
  99 
 (b) That they will not be re -transferred;  
(c) Their types and quantities;  
(d) Their end -use(s); and  
(e) The name(s) and address(es) of the end -user(s).  
27. Five years after entry into force of this Convention, the Conference shall consider  the need to 
establish other measures regarding transfers of Schedule 3 chemicals  to States not  Party to this 
Convention.  
  100 
 PART IX  
ACTIVITIES NOT PROHIBITED UNDER THIS CONVENTION  IN ACCORDANCE WITH 
ARTICLE VI  
REGIME FOR OTHER CHEMICAL PRODUCTION FACILITIES   
A. DECLARATIONS  
List of other chemical production facilities  
1. The initial declaration to be provided by each State Party pursuant to Article VI,  paragraph 7, shall 
include a list of all plant sites that:  
(a) Produced by synthesis during the previous calendar year more than 200  tonnes of unscheduled 
discrete organic chemicals; or  
(b) Comprise o ne or more plants which produced by synthesis during the  previous calendar year 
more than 30 tonnes of an unscheduled discrete  organic chemical containing the elements 
phosphorus, sulfur or fluorine  (hereinafter referred to as “PSF-plants ” and “PSF-chemical ”). 
2. The list of other chemical production facilities to be submitted pursuant to  paragraph 1 shall not 
include plant sites that exclusively produced explosives or  hydrocarbons.  
3. Each State Party shall submit its list of other chemical prod uction facilities  pursuant to paragraph 1 
as part of its initial declaration not later than 30 days  after this Convention enters into force for it. Each 
State Party shall, not later than  90 days after the beginning of each following calendar year, provide 
annually the  information necessary to update the list.  
4. The list of other chemical production facilities to be submitted pursuant to  paragraph 1 shall 
include the following information on each plant site:  
(a) The name of the plant site and the name of th e owner, company, or  enterprise operating it;  
(b) The precise location of the plant site including its address;  
(c) Its main activities; and  
(d) The approximate number of plants producing the chemicals specified in  paragraph 1 in the 
plant site.  
5. With re gard to plant sites  listed pursuant to paragraph 1  (a), the list shall also  include information 
on the approximate aggregate amount of production of the  unscheduled discrete organic chemicals in the 
previous calendar year expressed in  the ranges: under 1,0 00 tonnes, 1,000 to 10,000 tonnes and above 
10,000 tonnes.  
6. With regard to plant sites listed pursuant to parag raph 1  (b), the list shall also  specify the number of 
PSF-plants within the plant site and include information on  the approximate aggregate amount of 
production of PSF -chemicals produced by  each PSF -plant in the previous calendar year expressed in the 
ranges: under 200  tonnes, 200 to 1,000 tonnes, 1,000 to 10,000 tonnes and above 10,000 tonnes.  
Assistance by the Technical Secretariat  
7. If a State Party, for administrative reasons, deems it necessary to ask for  assistance in compiling its 
list of chemical production facilities pursuant to  paragraph 1, it may request the Technical Secretariat to 
provide such assistance.  Questions as to the comp leteness of the list shall then be resolved through  
consultations between the State Party and the Technical Secretariat.  
Information to States Parties  
8. The lists of other chemical production facilities submitted pursuant to paragraph 1,  including the 
information provided under paragraph 4, shall be transmitted by the  Technical Secretariat to States Parties 
upon request.  
B. VERIFICATION  
General  
9. Subject to the provisions of Section C, verification as provided for in Article VI,  paragraph 6, shall 
be carr ied out through on -site inspection at:  
(a) Plant sites  listed pursuant to paragraph 1  (a); and  101 
 (b) Plant sites liste d pursuant to paragraph 1  (b) that comprise one or more  PSF-plants which 
produced during the previous calendar year more than 200  tonnes  of a PSF -chemical.  
10. The programme and budget of the Organization  to be adopted by the Conference  pursuant to 
Article  VIII, paragraph 21  (a), shall contain, as a separate item, a  programme and budget for verification 
under this Section after its impleme ntation  has started.  
11. Under this Section, the Technical Secretariat shall randomly select plant sites for  inspection 
through appropriate mechanisms, such as the use of specially designed  computer software, on the basis of 
the following weighting factors : 
(a) Equitable geographical distribution of inspections;  
(b) The information on the listed plant sites available to the Technical  Secretariat, related to the 
characteristics of the plant site and the activities  carried out there; and  
(c) Proposals by States Parties on a basis to be agreed upon in accordance with  paragraph 25.  
12. No plant site shall receive more than two inspections per year under the  provisions of this Section. 
This, however, shall not limit inspections pursuant to  Article IX.  
13. In selecting plant sites for inspection under this Section, the Technical Secretariat  shall observe 
the following limitation for the combined number of inspections to  be received by a State Party per 
calendar year under this Part and Part VIII of this  Annex: the combined number of inspections shall not 
exceed three plus 5 per cent . of the total number of plant sites declared by a State Party under both this 
Part and Part VIII of this Annex, or 20 inspections, whichever of these two figures is  lower.  
Inspection  aims 
14. At plant sites listed under Section A, the general aim of inspections shall be to  verify that 
activities are consistent with the information to be provided in  declarations. The particular aim of 
inspections shall be the verification of the  absenc e of any Schedule 1 chemical, especially its production, 
except if in  accordance with Part VI of this Annex.  
Inspection procedures  
15. In addition to agreed guidelines, other relevant provisions of this Annex and the  Confidentiality 
Annex, paragraphs 16 to  20 below shall apply.  
16. There shall be no facility agreement, unless requested by the inspected State Party.  
17. The focus of inspection at a plant site selected for inspection shall be the plant(s)  producing the 
chemicals specified in paragraph 1, in particular the PSF -plants  listed pursuant to paragraph 1  (b). The 
inspected State Party shall have the right to  manage access to these plants in accordance with the rules of 
managed access as  specified in Part X, Section C, of this Annex. If the inspection  team, in accordance  
with Part II, paragraph 51, of this Annex, requests access to other parts of the  plant site for clarification of 
ambiguities, the extent of such access shall be agreed  between the inspection team and the inspected State 
Party.  
18. The inspection team may have access to records in situations in which the  inspection team and the 
inspected State Party agree that such access will assist in  achieving the objectives of the inspection.  
19. Sampling and on -site analysis may be undertaken to che ck for the absence of  undeclared 
scheduled chemicals. In cases of unresolved ambiguities, samples may  be analysed in a designated off -
site laboratory, subject to the inspected State  Party ’s agreement.  
20. The period of inspection shall not last more than 2 4 hours; however, extensions  may be agreed 
between the inspection team and the inspected State Party.  
Notification of inspection  
21. A State Party shall be notified by the Technical Secretariat of the inspection not  less than 120 
hours before the arrival o f the inspection team at the plant site to be  inspected.  
  102 
 C. IMPLEMENTATION AND REVIEW  OF SECTION B  
Implementation  
22. The implementation of Section B shall start at the beginning of the fourth year  after entry into 
force of this Convention unless the Conference, at its regular  session in the third year after entry into 
force of this Convention, decides  otherwise.  
23. The Director -General shall, for the regular session of the Conference in the third  year after entry 
into force of this Convention, prepar e a report which outlines the  experience of the Technical Secretariat 
in implementing the provisions of Parts VII  and VIII of this Annex as well as of Section A of this Part.  
24. At its regular session in the third year after entry into force of this Conve ntion, the  Conference, on 
the basis of a report of the Director -General, may also decide on  the distribution of resources available for 
verification under Section B between  “PSF-plants ” and other chemical production facilities. Otherwise, 
this distribution  shall be left to the expertise of the Technical Secretariat and be added to the  weighting 
factors in paragraph 11.  
25. At its regular session in the third year after entry into force of this Convention, the  Conference, 
upon advice of the Executive Council, shall decide on which basis (e.g.  regional) proposals by States 
Parties for inspections should be presented to be  taken into account as a weighting factor in the selection 
process specified in  paragraph 11.  
Review  
26. At the first special session of the Conference convened pursuant to Article VIII,  paragraph 22, the 
provisions of this Part of the Verification Annex shall be  re-examined in the light of a comprehensive 
review of the overall verification  regime for the chemical industry (Article VI, P arts VII to IX of this 
Annex) on the  basis of the experience gained. The Conference shall then make recommendations  so as to 
improve the effectiveness of the verification regime.  
  103 
 PART X  
CHALLENGE INSPECTIONS PURSUANT TO ARTICLE IX  
A. DESIGNATION AND SELECTION OF INSPECTORS AND INSPECTION  ASSISTANTS  
1. Challenge inspections pursuant to Article IX shall only be performed by inspectors  and inspection 
assistants especially designated for this function. In order to  designate inspectors and inspection assis tants 
for challenge inspections pursuant  to Article IX, the Director -General shall, by selecting inspectors and 
inspection  assistants from among the inspectors and inspection assistants for routine  inspection activities, 
establish a list of proposed inspec tors and inspection  assistants. It shall comprise a sufficiently large 
number of inspectors and  inspection assistants having the necessary qualification, experience, skill and  
training, to allow for flexibility in the selection of the inspectors, taking into account their availability, 
and the need for rotation. Due regard shall be paid also  to the importance of selecting inspectors and 
inspection assistants on as wide a  geographical basis as possible. The designation of inspectors and 
inspection  assistan ts shall follow the procedures provided for under Part II, Section A, of this  Annex.  
2. The Director -General shall determine the size of the inspection team and select its  members taking 
into account the circumstances of a particular request. The size of  the inspection team shall be kept to a 
minimum necessary for the proper  fulfilment of the inspection mandate. No national of the requesting 
State Party or  the inspected State Party shall be a member of the inspection team.  
B. PRE -INSPECTION ACTIVITIES  
3. Be fore submitting the inspection request for a challenge inspection, the State Party  may seek 
confirmation from the Director -General that the Technical Secretariat is  in a position to take immediate 
action on the request. If the Director -General  cannot provi de such confirmation immediately, he shall do 
so at the earliest  opportunity, in keeping with the order of requests for confirmation. He shall also  keep 
the State Party informed of when it is likely that immediate action can be  taken. Should the Director -
General reach the conclusion that timely action on  requests can no longer be taken, he may ask the 
Executive Council to take  appropriate action to improve the situation in the future.  
Notification  
4. The inspection request for a challenge inspection to be s ubmitted to the Executive  Council and the 
Director -General shall contain at least the following information:  
(a) The State Party to be inspected and, if applicable, the Host State;  
(b) The point of entry to be used;  
(c) The size and type of the inspection site; 
(d) The concern regarding possible non -compliance with this Convention  including a 
specification of the relevant provisions of this Convention about  which the concern has arisen, and of 
the nature and circumstances of the  possible non -compliance as w ell as all appropriate information on 
the basis  of which the concern has arisen; and  
(e) The name of the observer of the requesting State Party.  
The requesting State Party may submit any additional information it deems  necessary.  
5. The Director -General sh all within one hour acknowledge to the requesting State  Party receipt of its 
request.  
6. The requesting State Party shall notify the Director -General of the location of the  inspection site in 
due time for the Director -General to be able to provide this  information to the inspected State Party not 
less than 12 hours before the planned  arrival of the inspection team at the point of entry.  
7. The inspection site shall be designated by the requesting State Party as specifically  as possible by 
providing a site d iagram related to a reference point with  geographic coordinates, specified to the nearest 
second if possible. If possible, the  requesting State Party shall also provide a map with a general 
indication of the  inspection site and a diagram specifying as prec isely as possible the requested  perimeter 
of the site to be inspected.  
8. The requested perimeter shall:  
(a) Run at least a 10 metre distance outside any buildings or other structures;  104 
 (b) Not cut through existing security enclosures; and  
(c) Run at least a 10 metre distance outside any existing security enclosures that  the requesting 
State Party intends to include within the requested perimeter.  
9. If the requested perimeter does not conform with the specifications of paragraph 8,  it shall be 
redrawn by the inspection team so as to conform with that provision.  
10. The Director -General shall, not less than 12 hours before the planned arrival of the  inspection 
team at the point of entry, inform the Executive Council about the  location of the inspection site  as 
specified in paragraph 7.  
11. Contemporaneously with informing the Executive Council according to paragraph  10, the 
Director -General shall transmit the inspection request to the inspected  State Party including the location 
of the inspection site as spe cified in paragraph 7.  This notification shall also include the information 
specified in Part II, paragraph  32, of this Annex.  
12. Upon arrival of the inspection team at the point of entry, the inspected State Party  shall be 
informed by the inspection team  of the inspection mandate.  
Entry into the territory of the inspected State Party or the Host State  
13. The Director -General shall, in accordance with Article IX, paragraphs 13 to 18,  dispatch an 
inspection team as soon as possible after an inspection requ est has  been received. The inspection team 
shall arrive at the point of entry specified in  the request in the minimum time possible, consistent with the 
provisions of  paragraphs 10 and 11.  
14. If the requested perimeter is acceptable to the inspected State  Party, it shall be  designated as the 
final perimeter as early as possible, but in no case later than 24  hours after the arrival of the inspection 
team at the point of entry. The inspected  State Party shall transport the inspection team to the final 
perime ter of the  inspection site. If the inspected State Party deems it necessary, such transportation  may 
begin up to 12 hours before the expiry of the time period specified in this  paragraph for the designation of 
the final perimeter. Transportation shall, in any case, be completed not later than 36 hours after the arrival 
of the inspection team  at the point of entry.  
15. For all declared facilities, the procedures in subparagraphs ( a) and ( b) shall apply.  [For the 
purposes of this Part, “declared facility ” means all facilities declared  pursuant to Articles III, IV, and V. 
With regard to Article VI, “declared facility ” means only facilities declared pursuant to Part VI of this 
Annex, as well as  declared plants specified by declarations pursuant to Part VII, paragraphs 7 and 10  (c), 
and Part VIII, paragraphs 7 and 10( c), of this  Annex]:  
(a) If the requested perimeter is contained within or conforms with the declared  perimeter, the 
declared perimeter shall be considered the final perimeter.  The final perimeter may, however, if 
agreed by the inspected State Party, be  made smaller in order to conform with the perimeter requested 
by the  requesting State Party.  
(b) The inspected State Party shall transport the inspection team to the final  perimeter as soon as 
practi cable, but in any case shall ensure their arrival at  the perimeter not later than 24 hours after the 
arrival of the inspection team  at the point of entry.  
Alternative determination of final perimeter  
16. At the point of entry, if the inspected State Party cannot accept the requested  perimeter, it shall 
propose an alternative perimeter as soon as possible, but in any  case not later than 24 hours after the 
arrival of the inspection team at the point of  entry. In case of differences of opinion, the inspected State 
Party and the  inspection team shall engage in negotiations with the aim of reaching agreement  on a final 
perimeter.  
17. The alternative perimeter should be designated as specifically as possible in  accordance with 
paragraph 8. It shall include the wh ole of the requested perimeter  and should, as a rule, bear a close 
relationship to the latter, taking into account  natural terrain features and man -made boundaries. It should 
normally run close to  the surrounding security barrier if such a barrier   exists . The    inspected State Party    105 
 should seek to establish such a relationship between the perimeters by a  combination of at least two of the 
following means:  
(a) An alternative perimeter that does not extend to an area significantly greater  than that of th e 
requested perimeter;  
(b) An alternative perimeter that is a short, uniform distance from the requested  perimeter;   
(c) At least part of the requested perimeter is visible from the alternative  perimeter.  
18. If the alternative perimeter is acceptable to the inspection team, it shall become  the final perimeter 
and the inspection team shall be transported from the point of  entry to that perimeter. If the inspected 
State Party deems it necessary, such  transportation may begin up to 12 hours before the expiry  of the time 
period  specified in paragraph 16 for proposing an alternative perimeter. Transportation  shall, in any case, 
be completed not later than 36 hours after the arrival of the  inspection team at the point of entry.  
19. If a final perimeter is not ag reed, the perimeter negotiations shall be concluded as  early as 
possible, but in no case shall they continue more than 24 hours after the  arrival of the inspection team at 
the point of entry. If no agreement is reached, the  inspected State Party shall tran sport the inspection team 
to a location at the  alternative perimeter. If the inspected State Party deems it necessary, such  
transportation may begin up to 12 hours before the expiry of the time period  specified in paragraph 16 for 
proposing an alternative perimeter. Transportation  shall, in any case, be completed not later than 36 hours 
after the arrival of the  inspection team at the point of entry.  
20. Once at the location, the inspected State Party shall provide the inspection team  with prompt 
access to t he alternative perimeter to facilitate negotiations and  agreement on the final perimeter and 
access within the final perimeter.  
21. If no agreement is reached within 72 hours after the arrival of the inspection team  at the location, 
the alternative perimet er shall be designated the final perimeter.  
Verification of location  
22. To help establish that the inspection site to which the inspection team has been  transported 
corresponds to the inspection site specified by the requesting State  Party, the inspection  team shall have 
the right to use approved location -finding  equipment and have such equipment installed according to its 
directions. The  inspection team may verify its location by reference to local landmarks identified  from 
maps. The inspected State Party  shall assist the inspection team in this task.  
Securing the site, exit monitoring  
23. Not later than 12 hours after the arrival of the inspection team at the point of  entry, the inspected 
State Party shall begin collecting factual information of all  vehic ular exit activity from all exit points for 
all land, air, and water vehicles of the  requested perimeter. It shall provide this information to the 
inspection team upon  its arrival at the alternative or final perimeter, whichever occurs first.  
24. This obli gation may be met by collecting factual information in the form of traffic  logs, 
photographs, video recordings, or data from chemical evidence equipment  provided by the inspection 
team to monitor such exit activity. Alternatively, the  inspected State Party  may also meet this obligation 
by allowing one or more  members of the inspection team independently to maintain traffic logs, take  
photographs, make video recordings of exit traffic, or use chemical evidence  equipment, and conduct 
other activities as may be agreed between the inspected  State Party and the inspection team.  
25. Upon the inspection team ’s arrival at the alternative perimeter or final perimeter,  whichever 
occurs first, securing the site, which means exit monitoring procedures  by the inspection  team, shall 
begin.  
26. Such procedures shall include: the identification of vehicular exits, the making of  traffic logs, the 
taking of photographs, and the making of video recordings by the  inspection team of exits and exit traffic. 
The inspection team ha s the right to go,  under escort, to any other part of the perimeter to check that there 
is no other exit  activity.  
27. Additional procedures for exit monitoring activities as agreed upon by the  inspection team and the 
inspected State Party may include, inter alia : 
(a) Use of sensors;  
(b) Random selective access;  
(c) Sample analysis.  106 
 28. All activities for securing the site and exit monitoring shall take place within a  band around the 
outside of the perimeter, not exceeding 50 metres in width,  measured outwa rd. 
29. The inspection team has the right to inspect on a managed access basis vehicular  traffic exiting 
the site. The inspected State Party shall make every reasonable effort  to demonstrate to the inspection 
team that any vehicle, subject to inspection, t o which the inspection team is not granted full access, is not 
being used for purposes  related to the possible non -compliance concerns raised in the inspection request.  
30. Personnel and vehicles entering and personnel and personal passenger vehicles  exiting the site are 
not subject to inspection.  
31. The application of the above procedures may continue for the duration of the  inspection, but may 
not unreasonably hamper or delay the normal operation of the  facility.  
Pre-inspection briefing and inspection plan 
32. To facilitate development of an inspection plan, the inspected State Party shall  provide a safety 
and logistical briefing to the inspection team prior to access.  
33. The pre -inspection briefing shall be held in accordance with Part II, paragraph 3 7, of this Annex. 
In the course of the pre -inspection briefing, the inspected State  Party may indicate to the inspection team 
the equipment, documentation, or areas  it considers sensitive and not related to the purpose of the 
challenge inspection. In  addit ion, personnel responsible for the site shall brief the inspection team on the  
physical layout and other relevant characteristics of the site. The inspection team  shall be provided with a 
map or sketch drawn to scale showing all structures and  significant geographic features at the site. The 
inspection team shall also be briefed  on the availability of facility personnel and records.  
34. After the pre -inspection briefing, the inspection team shall prepare, on the basis of  the information 
available and approp riate to it, an initial inspection plan which  specifies the activities to be carried out by 
the inspection team, including the  specific areas of the site to which access is desired. The inspection plan 
shall also  specify whether the inspection team will be  divided into subgroups. The inspection  plan shall be 
made available to the representatives of the inspected State Party and  the inspection site. Its 
implementation shall be consistent with the provisions of  Section C, including those related to access and  
activities.  
Perimeter activities  
35. Upon the inspection team ’s arrival at the final or alternative perimeter, whichever  occurs first, the 
team shall have the right to commence immediately perimeter  activities in accordance with the procedures 
set forth u nder this Section, and to  continue these activities until the completion of the challenge 
inspection.  
36. In conducting the perimeter activities, the inspection team shall have the right to:  
(a) Use monitoring instruments in accordance with Part II, paragraphs 27 to 30,  of this Annex;  
(b) Take wipes, air, soil or effluent samples; and  
(c) Conduct any additional activities which may be agreed between the  inspection team and the 
inspected State Party.  
37. The perimeter activities of the inspection team may be conducted within a band  around the 
outside of the perimeter up to 50 metres in width measured outward  from the perimeter. If the inspected 
State Party agrees, the inspection team may  also have access to any building or structure within the 
perimeter  band. All  directional monitoring shall be oriented inward. For declared facilities, at the  
discretion of the inspected State Party, the band could run inside, outside, or on  both sides of the declared 
perimeter.  
C. CONDUCT OF INSPECTIONS  
General rules  
38. The inspected State Party shall provide access within the requested perimeter as  well as, if 
different, the final perimeter. The extent and nature of access to a  particular place or places within these 
perimeters shall be negotiated between the  inspection  team and the inspected State Party on a managed 
access basis.  107 
 39. The inspected State Party shall provide access within the requested perimeter as  soon as possible, 
but in any case not later than 108 hours after the arrival of the  inspection team at the point of entry in 
order to clarify the concern regarding  possible non -compliance with this Convention raised in the 
inspection request.  
40. Upon the request of the inspection team, the inspected State Party may provide  aerial access to the 
inspection site.  
41. In meeting the requirement to provide access as specified in paragraph 38, the  inspected State 
Party shall be under the obligation to allow the greatest degree of  access taking into account any 
constitutional obligations it may have with regard  to pro prietary rights or searches and seizures. The 
inspected State Party has the  right under managed access to take such measures as are necessary to protect  
national security. The provisions in this paragraph may not be invoked by the  inspected State Party to 
conceal evasion of its obligations not to engage in  activities prohibited under this Convention.  
42. If the inspected State Party provides less than full access to places, activities, or  information, it 
shall be under the obligation to make every reasonabl e effort to  provide alternative means to clarify the 
possible non -compliance concern that  generated the challenge inspection.  
43. Upon arrival at the final perimeter of facilities declared pursuant to Articles IV, V  and VI, access 
shall be granted followin g the pre -inspection briefing and  discussion of the inspection plan which shall be 
limited to the minimum necessary  and in any event shall not exceed three hours. For facilities declared 
pursuant to  Article III, paragraph 1 ( d), negotiations shall be condu cted and managed access  commenced 
not later than 12 hours after arrival at the final perimeter.  
44. In carrying out the challenge inspection in accordance with the inspection request,  the inspection 
team shall use only those methods necessary to provide su fficient  relevant facts to clarify the concern 
about possible non -compliance with the  provisions of this Convention, and shall refrain from activities 
not relevant thereto.  It shall collect and document such facts as are related to the possible  non-complia nce 
with this Convention by the inspected State Party, but shall  neither seek nor document information which 
is clearly not related thereto, unless  the inspected State Party expressly requests it to do so. Any material 
collected and  subsequently found not to be relevant shall not be retained.  
45. The inspection team shall be guided by the principle of conducting the challenge  inspection in the 
least intrusive manner possible, consistent with the effective and  timely accomplishment of its mission. 
Wherever p ossible, it shall begin with the  least intrusive procedures it deems acceptable and proceed to 
more intrusive  procedures only as it deems necessary.  
Managed access  
46. The inspection team shall take into consideration suggested modifications of the  inspection plan 
and proposals which may be made by the inspected State Party, at  whatever stage of the inspection 
including the pre -inspection briefing, to ensure  that sensitive equipment, information or areas, not related 
to chemical weapons,  are protecte d. 
47. The inspected State Party shall designate the perimeter entry/exit points to be  used for access. The 
inspection team and the inspected State Party shall negotiate:  the extent of access to any particular place 
or places within the final and requested  perimeters as provided in paragraph 48; the particular inspection 
activities,  including sampling, to be conducted by the inspection team; the performance of  particular 
activities by the inspected State Party; and the provision of particular  information by  the inspected State 
Party.  
48. In conformity with the relevant provisions in the Confidentiality Annex the  inspected State Party 
shall have the right to take measures to protect sensitive  installations and prevent disclosure of 
confidential information an d data not  related to chemical weapons. Such measures may include, inter 
alia: 
(a) Removal of sensitive papers from office spaces;  
(b) Shrouding of sensitive displays, stores, and equipment;  
(c) Shrouding of sensitive pieces of equipment, such as computer or electronic  systems;  
(d) Logging off of computer systems and turning off of data indicating devices;  108 
 (e) Restriction of sample analysis to presence or absence of chemicals listed in  Schedules 1, 2 and 
3 or appropriate degradation products;  
(f) Using rand om selective access techniques whereby the inspectors are  requested to select a 
given percentage or number of buildings of their choice  to inspect; the same principle can apply to the 
interior and content of  sensitive buildings;  
(g) In exceptional cases, g iving only individual inspectors access to certain parts  of the inspection 
site. 
49. The inspected State Party shall make every reasonable effort to demonstrate to the  inspection 
team that any object, building, structure, container or vehicle to which  the inspection team has not had full 
access, or which has been protected in  accordance with paragraph 48, is not used for purposes related to 
the possible  non-compliance concerns raised in the inspection request.  
50. This may be accomplished by means of, inter  alia, the partial removal of a shroud  or 
environmental protection cover, at the discretion of the inspected State Party,  by means of a visual 
inspection of the interior of an enclosed space from its  entrance, or by other methods.  
51. In the case of facili ties declared pursuant to Articles IV, V and VI, the following  shall apply:  
(a) For facilities with facility agreements, access and activities within the final  perimeter shall be 
unimpeded within the boundaries established by the  agreements;  
(b) For facili ties without facility agreements, negotiation of access and activities  shall be 
governed by the applicable general inspection guidelines established  under this Convention;  
(c) Access beyond that granted for inspections under Articles IV, V and VI shall  be managed in 
accordance with procedures of this section.  
52. In the case of facilities declared pursuant to Article III, paragraph 1 ( d), the  following shall apply: 
if the inspected State Party, using procedures of paragraphs  47 and 48, has not granted full access to areas 
or structures not related to  chemical weapons, it shall make every reasonable effort to demonstrate to the  
inspection team that such areas or structures are not used for purposes related to  the possible non -
compliance concerns raised in the  inspection request.  
Observer  
53. In accordance with the provisions of Article IX, paragraph 12, on the participation  of an observer 
in the challenge inspection, the requesting State Party shall liaise  with the Technical Secretariat to 
coordinate the arriv al of the observer at the same  point of entry as the inspection team within a reasonable 
period of the inspection  team ’s arrival.  
54. The observer shall have the right throughout the period of inspection to be in  communication with 
the embassy of the reque sting State Party located in the  inspected State Party or in the Host State or, in 
the case of absence of an embassy,  with the requesting State Party itself. The inspected State Party shall 
provide  means of communication to the observer.  
55. The observer s hall have the right to arrive at the alternative or final perimeter of  the inspection 
site, wherever the inspection team arrives first, and to have access  to the inspection site as granted by the 
inspected State Party. The observer shall  have the right to make recommendations to the inspection team, 
which the team  shall take into account to the extent it deems appropriate. Throughout the  inspection, the 
inspection team shall keep the observer informed about the  conduct of the inspection and the findings.  
56. Throughout the in -country period, the inspected State Party shall provide or  arrange for the 
amenities necessary for the observer such as communication  means, interpretation services, 
transportation, working space, lodging, meals and  medical care. All the costs in connection with the stay 
of the observer on the  territory of the inspected State Party or the Host State shall be borne by the  
requesting State Party.  
Duration of inspection  
57. The period of inspection shall not exceed 84 hours, unless extend ed by agreement  with the 
inspected State Party.  
  109 
 D. POST -INSPECTION ACTIVITIES  
Departure  
58. Upon completion of the post -inspection procedures at the inspection site, the  inspection team and 
the observer of the requesting State Party shall proceed  promptl y to a point of entry and shall then leave 
the territory of the inspected  State Party in the minimum time possible.  
Reports  
59. The inspection report shall summarize in a general way the activities conducted by  the inspection 
team and the factual findings of the inspection team, particularly  with regard to the concerns regarding 
possible non -compliance with this  Convention cited in the request for the challenge inspection, and shall 
be limited  to information directly related to this Convention. It shall als o include an  assessment by the 
inspection team of the degree and nature of access and  cooperation granted to the inspectors and the 
extent to which this enabled them to  fulfil the inspection mandate. Detailed information relating to the 
concerns  regarding possible non -compliance with this Convention cited in the request for  the challenge 
inspection shall be submitted as an Appendix to the final report and  be retained within the Technical 
Secretariat under appropriate safeguards to  protect sensitive informat ion. 
60. The inspection team shall, not later than 72 hours after its return to its primary  work location, 
submit a preliminary inspection report, having taken into account,  inter alia , paragraph 17 of the 
Confidentiality Annex, to the Director -General. Th e Director -General shall promptly transmit the 
preliminary inspection report to the  requesting State Party, the inspected State Party and to the Executive 
Council.  
61. A draft final inspection report shall be made available to the inspected State Party  not later than 
20 days after the completion of the challenge inspection. The  inspected State Party has the right to 
identify any information and data not related  to chemical weapons which should, in its view, due to its 
confidential character,  not be circulat ed outside the Technical Secretariat. The Technical Secretariat shall  
consider proposals for changes to the draft final inspection report made by the  inspected State Party and, 
using its own discretion, wherever possible, adopt them.  The final report shall  then be submitted not later 
than 30 days after the  completion of the challenge inspection to the Director -General for further  
distribution and consideration in accordance with Article IX, paragraphs 21 to 25.  
  110 
 PART XI  
INVESTIGATIONS IN CASES OF ALLEGED USE  OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS  
A. GENERAL  
1. Investigations of alleged use of chemical weapons, or of alleged use of riot control  agents as a 
method of warfare, initiated pursuant to Articles IX or X, shall be  conducted in accordance with this 
Annex and detailed procedures to be established  by the Director -General.  
2. The following additional provisions address specific procedures required in cases  of alleged use of 
chemical weapons.  
B. PRE -INSPECTION ACTIVITIES  
Request for an investigation  
3. The request for an i nvestigation of an alleged use of chemical weapons to be  submitted to the 
Director -General, to the extent possible, should include the  following information:  
(a) The State Party on whose territory use of chemical weapons is alleged to  have taken place;  
(b) The point of entry or other suggested safe routes of access;  
(c) Location and characteristics of the areas where chemical weapons are alleged  to have been 
used;  
(d) When chemical weapons are alleged to have been used;  
(e) Types of chemical weapons believed to have been used;  
(f) Extent of alleged use;  
(g) Characteristics of the possible toxic chemicals;  
(h) Effects on humans, animals and vegetation;  
(i) Request for specific assistance, if applicable.  
4. The State Party which has requested an investi gation may submit at any time any  additional 
information it deems necessary.  
Notification  
5. The Director -General shall immediately acknowledge receipt to the requesting  State Party of its 
request and inform the Executive Council and all States Parties.  
6. If applicable, the Director -General shall notify the State Party on whose territory  an investigation 
has been requested. The Director -General shall also notify other  States Parties if access to their territories 
might be required during the  investigation.  
Assignment of inspection team  
7. The Director -General shall prepare a list of qualified experts whose particular field  of expertise 
could be required in an investigation of alleged use of chemical  weapons and constantly keep this list 
updated. This list s hall be communicated, in  writing, to each State Party not later than 30 days after entry 
into force of this  Convention and after each change to the list. Any qualified expert included in this  list 
shall be regarded as designated unless a State Party, not later than 30 days  after its receipt of the list, 
declares its non -acceptance in writing.  
8. The Director -General shall select the leader and members of an inspection team  from the inspectors 
and inspection assistants already designated for challenge  inspe ctions taking into account the 
circumstances and specific nature of a  particular request. In addition, members of the inspection team 
may be selected  from the list of qualified experts when, in the view of the Director -General,  expertise not 
available amon g inspectors already designated is required for the  proper conduct of a particular 
investigation.  
9. When briefing the inspection team, the Director -General shall include any  additional information 
provided by the requesting State Party, or any other  sourc es, to ensure that the inspection can be carried 
out in the most effective and  expedient manner.  111 
 Dispatch of inspection team  
10. Immediately upon the receipt of a request for an investigation of alleged use of  chemical weapons 
the Director -General shall, t hrough contacts with the relevant  States Parties, request and confirm 
arrangements for the safe reception of the  team.  
11. The Director -General shall dispatch the team at the earliest opportunity, taking  into account the 
safety of the team.  
12. If the insp ection team has not been dispatched within 24 hours from the receipt of  the request, the 
Director -General shall inform the Executive Council and the States  Parties concerned about the reasons 
for the delay.  
Briefings  
13. The inspection team shall have the right to be briefed by representatives of the  inspected State 
Party upon arrival and at any time during the inspection.  
14. Before the commencement of the inspection the inspection team shall prepare an  inspection plan 
to serve, inter alia , as a basis for logistic and safety arrangements.  The inspection plan shall be updated as 
need arises.  
C. CONDUCT OF INSPECTIONS  
Access  
15. The inspection team shall have the right of access to any and all areas which could  be affected by 
the alleged use of chemical weapo ns. It shall also have the right of  access to hospitals, refugee camps and 
other locations it deems relevant to the  effective investigation of the alleged use of chemical weapons. For 
such access, the  inspection team shall consult with the inspected State Party.  
Sampling  
16. The inspection team shall have the right to collect samples of types, and in  quantities it considers 
necessary. If the inspection team deems it necessary, and if  so requested by it, the inspected State Party 
shall assist in the collecti on of  samples under the supervision of inspectors or inspection assistants. The 
inspected  State Party shall also permit and cooperate in the collection of appropriate control  samples from 
areas neighbouring the site of the alleged use and from other areas  as requested by the inspection team.  
17. Samples of importance in the investigation of alleged use include toxic chemicals,  munitions and 
devices, remnants of munitions and devices, environmental samples  (air, soil, vegetation, water, snow, 
etc.) and biomedical samples from human or  animal sources (blood, urine, excreta, tissue , etc.).  
18. If duplicate samples cannot be taken and the analysis is performed at off -site laboratories, any 
remaining sample shall, if so requested, be returned to the  inspecte d State Party after the completion of 
the analysis.  
Extension of inspection site  
19. If the inspection team during an inspection deems it necessary to extend the  investigation into a 
neighbouring State Party, the Director -General shall notify that  State Pa rty about the need for access to its 
territory and request and confirm  arrangements for the safe reception of the team.  
Extension of inspection duration  
20. If the inspection team deems that safe access to a specific area relevant to the  investigation is n ot 
possible, the requesting State Party shall be informed  immediately. If necessary, the period of inspection 
shall be extended until safe  access can be provided and the inspection team will have concluded its 
mission.  
Interviews  
21. The inspection team sh all have the right to interview and examine persons who  may have been 
affected by the alleged use of chemical weapons. It shall also have  the right to interview eyewitnesses of 
the alleged use of chemical weapons and  medical personnel, and other persons wh o have treated or have 
come into contact  with persons who may have been affected by the alleged use of chemical weapons.  The 
inspection team shall have access to medical histories, if available, and be  permitted to participate in 
autopsies, as appropriate,  of persons who may have  been affected by the alleged use of chemical 
weapons.  112 
 D. REPORTS  
Procedures  
22. The inspection team shall, not later than 24 hours after its arrival on the territory  of the inspected 
State Party, send a situation report to the Director -General. It  shall further throughout the investigation 
send progress reports as necessary.  
23. The inspection team shall, not later than 72 hours after its return to its primary  work location, 
submit a preliminary report to the Director -General. T he final  report shall be submitted to the Director -
General not later than 30 days after its  return to its primary work location. The Director -General shall 
promptly transmit  the preliminary and final reports to the Executive Council and to all States Parti es. 
Contents  
24. The situation report shall indicate any urgent need for assistance and any other  relevant 
information. The progress reports shall indicate any further need for  assistance that might be identified 
during the course of the investigation.  
25. The final report shall summarize the factual findings of the inspection, particularly  with regard to 
the alleged use cited in the request. In addition, a report of an  investigation of an alleged use shall include 
a description of the investigation  process , tracing its various stages, with special reference to:  
(a) The locations and time of sampling and on -site analyses; and  
(b) Supporting evidence, such as the records of interviews, the results of medical  examinations 
and scientific analyses, and the docum ents examined by the  inspection team.  
26. If the inspection team collects through, inter alia , identification of any impurities  or other 
substances during laboratory analysis of samples taken, any information  in the course of its investigation 
that might serve to identify the origin of any  chemical weapons used, that information shall be included in 
the report.  
E. STATES NOT PARTY TO THIS CONVENTION  
27. In the case of alleged use of chemical weapons involving a State not Party to this  Convention or 
in terr itory not controlled by a State Party, the Organization  shall  closely cooperate with the Secretary -
General of the United Nations. If so requested,  the Organization  shall put its resources at the disposal of 
the Secretary -General of  the United Nations.  
  113 
 ANNEX ON THE PROTECTION OF  CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION  
(“CONFIDENTIALITY ANNEX ”) 
A. GENERAL PRINCIPLES FOR THE HANDLING OF CONFIDENTIAL  INFORMATION  
1. The obligation to protect confidential information shall pertain to the verification  of both civil and 
military activities and facilities. Pursuant to the general  obligations set forth in Article VIII, the 
Organization  shall:  
(a) Require only the minimum amount of information and data necessary for the  timely and 
efficient carrying out of its responsibiliti es under this Convention;  
(b) Take the necessary measures to ensure that inspectors and other staff  members of the 
Technical Secretariat meet the highest standards of efficiency,  competence, and integrity;  
(c) Develop agreements and regulations to implement the provisions of this  Convention and shall 
specify as precisely as possible the information to  which the Organization  shall be given access by a 
State Party.  
2. The Director -General shall have the primary responsibility for ensuring the  protecti on of 
confidential information. The Director -General shall establish a  stringent regime governing the handling 
of confidential information by the  Technical Secretariat, and in doing so, shall observe the following 
guidelines:  
(a) Information shall be considered confidential if:  
(i) It is so designated by the State Party from which the information was  obtained and to 
which the information refers; or  
(ii) In the judgment of the Director -General, its unauthoriz ed disclosure  could reasonably be 
expected to  cause damage to the State Party to  which it refers or to the mechanisms for 
implementation of this  Convention;  
(b) All data and documents obtained by the Technical Secretariat shall be  evaluated by the 
appropriate unit of the Technical Secretariat in orde r to establish whether they contain confidential 
information. Data required by  States Parties to be assured of the continued compliance with this  
Convention by other States Parties shall be routinely provided to them. Such  data shall encompass:  
(i) The ini tial and annual reports and declarations provided by States  Parties under Articles 
III, IV, V and VI, in accordance with the  provisions set forth in the Verification Annex;  
(ii) General reports on the results and effectiveness of verification activities;  and 
(iii) Information to be supplied to all States Parties in accordance with the  provisions of this 
Convention;  
(c) No information obtained by the Organization  in connection with the  implementation of this 
Convention shall be published or otherwise release d, except, as follows:  
(i) General information on the implementation of this Convention may be  compiled and 
released publicly in accordance with the decisions of the  Conference or the Executive Council;  
(ii) Any information may be released with the express  consent of the State  Party to which the 
information refers;  
(iii) Information classified as confidential shall be released by the  Organization  only through 
procedures which ensure that the release of  information only occurs in strict conformity with the 
needs of this  Convention. Such procedures shall be considered and approved by the  Conference 
pursuant to Article VIII, paragraph 21 (i); 
(d) The level of sensitivity of confidential data or documents shall be established,  based on 
criteria to be applied uni formly in order to ensure their appropriate  handling and protection. For this 
purpose, a classification system shall be  introduced, which by taking account of relevant work 
undertaken in the  preparation of this Convention shall provide for clear criteria e nsuring the  inclusion 
of information into appropriate categories of confidentiality and the  justified durability of the 
confidential nature of information. While providing  for the necessary flexibility in its implementation 
the classification system  shall protect the rights of States Parties providing confidential information. 114 
 A classification system shall be considered and approved by the Conference  pursuan t to Article VIII, 
paragraph 21  (i); 
(e) Confidential information shall be stored securely at the premises of the  Organization . Some 
data or documents may also be stored with the National  Authority of a State Party. Sensitive 
information, including, inter alia , photographs, plans and other documents required only for the 
inspection of  a specific facili ty may be kept under lock and key at this facility;  
(f) To the greatest extent consistent with the effective implementation of the  verification 
provisions of this Convention, information shall be handled and  stored by the Technical Secretariat in 
a form th at precludes direct  identification of the facility to which it pertains;  
(g) The amount of confidential information removed from a facility shall be kept  to the minimum 
necessary for the timely and effective implementation of the  verification provisions of  this 
Convention; and  
(h) Access to confidential information shall be regulated in accordance with its  classification. The 
dissemination of confidential information within the  Organization  shall be strictly on a need -to-know 
basis.  
3. The Director -General shall report annually to the Conference on the  implementation of the regime 
governing the handling of confidential information  by the Technical Secretariat.  
4. Each State Party shall treat information which it receives from the Organization  in accordance w ith 
the level of confidentiality established for that information. Upon  request, a State Party shall provide 
details on the handling of information provided  to it by the Organization . 
B. EMPLOYMENT AND CONDUCT OF PERSONNEL IN THE TECHNICAL  SECRETARIAT  
5. Conditions of staff employment shall be such as to ensure that access to and  handling of 
confidential information shall be in conformity with the procedures  established by the Director -General in 
accordance with Section A.  
6. Each position in the Technical  Secretariat shall be governed by a formal position  description that 
specifies the scope of access to confidential information, if any,  needed in that position.  
7. The Director -General, the inspectors and the other members of the staff shall not  disclose e ven 
after termination of t heir functions to any un authoriz ed persons any  confidential information coming to 
their knowledge in the performance of their  official duties. They shall not communicate to any State, 
Organization  or person  outside the Technical S ecretariat any information to which they have access in  
connection with their activities in relation to any State Party.  
8. In the discharge of their functions inspectors shall only request the information  and data which are 
necessary to fulfil their manda te. They shall not make any  records of information collected incidentally 
and not related to verification of  compliance with this Convention.  
9. The staff shall enter into individual secrecy agreements with the Technical  Secretariat covering 
their period o f employment and a period of five years after it  is terminated.  
10. In order to avoid improper disclosures, inspectors and staff members shall be  appropriately 
advised and reminded about security considerations and of the  possible penalties that they would  incur in 
the event of improper disclosure.  
11. Not less than 30 days before an employee is given clearance for access to  confidential information 
that refers to activities on the territory or in any other  place under the jurisdiction or control of a State  
Party, the State Party concerned  shall be notified of the proposed clearance. For inspectors the notification 
of a proposed designation shall fulfil this requirement.  
12. In evaluating the performance of inspectors and any other employees of the  Technical  Secretariat, 
specific attention shall be given to the employee ’s record  regarding protection of confidential information.  
C. MEASURES TO PROTECT SENSITIVE INSTALLATIONS AND PREVENT  DISCLOSURE OF 
CONFIDENTIAL DATA IN THE COURSE OF ON -SITE  VERIFICATION ACTI VITIES  
13. States Parties may take such measures as they deem necessary to protect  confidentiality, provided 
that they fulfil their obligations to demonstrate  compliance in accordance with the relevant Articles and 
the Verification Annex.  When receiving an  inspection, the State Party may indicate to the inspection team  115 
 the equipment, documentation or areas that it considers sensitive and not related  to the purpose of the 
inspection.  
14. Inspection teams shall be guided by the principle of conducting on -site inspections  in the least 
intrusive manner possible consistent with the effective and timely  accomplishment of their mission. They 
shall take into consideration proposals  which may be made by the State Party receiving the inspection, at 
whatever stage  of the inspection, to ensure that sensitive equipment or information, not related to  
chemical weapons, is protected.  
15. Inspection teams shall strictly abide by the provisions set forth in the relevant  Articles and 
Annexes governing the conduct of inspection s. They shall fully respect  the procedures designed to protect 
sensitive installations and to prevent the  disclosure of confidential data.  
16. In the elaboration of arrangements and facility agreements, due regard shall be  paid to the 
requirement of protec ting confidential information. Agreements on  inspection procedures for individual 
facilities shall also include specific and  detailed arrangements with regard to the determination of those 
areas of the  facility to which inspectors are granted access, the s torage of confidential  information on -site, 
the scope of the inspection effort in agreed areas, the taking  of samples and their analysis, the access to 
records and the use of instruments and  continuous monitoring equipment.  
17. The report to be prepared af ter each inspection shall only contain facts relevant to  compliance 
with this Convention. The report shall be handled in accordance with  the regulations established by the 
Organization  governing the handling of  confidential information. If necessary, the i nformation contained 
in the report  shall be processed into less sensitive forms before it is transmitted outside the  Technical 
Secretariat and the inspected State Party.  
D. PROCEDURES IN CASE OF BREACHES OR ALLEGED BREACHES OF  CONFIDENTIALITY  
18. The Director -General shall establish necessary procedures to be followed in case of  breaches or 
alleged breaches of confidentiality, taking into account  recommendations to be considered and approved 
by the Conference pursuant to  Article VIII, paragraph 21  (i). 
19. The Director -General shall oversee the implementation of individual secrecy  agreements. The 
Director -General shall promptly initiate an investigation if, in his  judgment, there is sufficient indication 
that obligations concerning the protection  of con fidential information have been violated. The Director -
General shall also  promptly initiate an investigation if an allegation concerning a breach of  confidentiality 
is made by a State Party.  
20. The Director -General shall impose appropriate punitive and di sciplinary measures  on staff 
members who have violated their obligations to protect confidential  information. In cases of serious 
breaches, the immunity from jurisdiction may be  waived by the Director -General.  
21. States Parties shall, to the extent possib le, cooperate and support the  Director -General in 
investigating any breach or alleged breach of confidentiality  and in taking appropriate action in case a 
breach has been established.  
22. The Organization  shall not be held liable for any breach of confiden tiality  committed by members 
of the Technical Secretariat.  
23. For breaches involving both a State Party and the Organization , a “Commission for  the settlement 
of disputes related to confidentiality ”, set up as a subsidiary organ  of the Conference, shall c onsider the 
case. This Commission shall be appointed by  the Conference. Rules governing its composition and 
operating procedures shall be  adopted by the Conference at its first session.  
 
--------------------------The Coal India (Regulation of Transfers and Validation Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE COAL INDIA (REGULATION OF TRANSFERS AND VALIDATION) ACT, 2000  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Power of Central Government to direct transfer of land, rights, title or interest . 
4. Validation of certain transfers . 
  2 
  
THE COAL INDIA (REGULATION OF TRANSFERS AND VALIDATION) ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 45 OF 2000  
[8th Decembe r, 2000 .]  
An Act to empower the Central Government to direct the transfer of the land, or of the rights in 
or over land or of the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine, coking coal mine or 
coke oven plant, vested in t he Coal India Limited or in a su bsidiary company to any 
subsidiary company of Coal India Limited or a ny other subsidiary company and to validate 
certain transfers of such land or rights.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Coal India (Regulation of Transfers a nd Validation) Act, 
2000.  
2. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise  requires,— 
(a) “Coal India ” means the Coal India Limited, a Government company incorporated under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) having its registered office at Calcutta and includes its predecessor 
Government company, namely, the Coal Mines Authority Limited;  
(b) “subsidiary c ompany” means the following subsidiary c ompanies of Coal India, namely: — 
(i) the Central Coal Fields Limited, Ranchi and includes its predecessor Government 
company, namely, the National Coal Development Corporation Limited, Ranchi;  
(ii) the Bharat Coking  Coal Limited, Dhanbad;  
(iii) the Western Coal Fields Limited, Nagpur;  
(iv) the Eastern Coal Fields Limited, Sanctoria;  
(v) the Central Mine Planning and Design Institute Limited, Ranchi;  
(vi) the South -Eastern Coal Fields Limited, Bilaspur;  
(vii) the Northern Coal Fields Limited, Singrauli;  
(viii) the Mahanadi  Coal Fields Limited, Sambalpur ; 
and includes such other subsidiary company of Coal India as may be incorporated under the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) from time to time;  
(c) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Coking Coal Mines 
(Nationalisation) Act, 1972 (36 of 1972) or the Coal Mines (Nationalisation) Act, 1973 (26 of 1973), 
shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in tho se Acts.  
3. Powe r of Central Government to  direct transfer of land, rights, title or interes t.—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Central Government 
may, if it is satisfied that a subsidia ry company is willing to compl y, or has complied, with such terms 
and conditions as that Government think fit to impose, direct, by notification in the Official Gazette, that 
the land or rights in or over such land or the right, title and interest in relation to a coal mine, coking coa l 
mine or a coke over plant vested in the Coal India shall, instead of continuing to vest in the Coal India, 
vest in that subsidiary company or, where such land or right, title or interest vests in subsidiary company, 
in another subsidiary company.  
(2) Whe re the land or right in or over such land or the right, title and interest in relation to a coal 
mine, coking coal mine or a coke over plant vest in a subsidiary company under sub -section( 1), such 
subsidiary company shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed to have become the lessee in 
relation to such coal mine or coking coal mine a s if a fresh mining lease in re lation to such coal mine or 
coking coal mine had been granted to it under the Mineral Concession Rules, 1960 made under section 1 3 3 
 of the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957) for the maximum 
period for which such lease could have been granted under those rules, and all the rights and liabilities of 
Coal India or, as the case may be, the subsidiary c ompany i n relation to such coal mine or  coking coal 
mine shall, on and from the date of such vesting, be deemed  to have become the rights and liabilities, 
respectively, of subsidiary company first -mentioned.  
4. Validation of certain transfers .—A subsidiary  company which was operating, or was in control 
of, any coal mine, coking coal mine, or coke oven plant which was vested in the Coal India or any other 
subsidiary company immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall be deemed to have been 
vested with the land or rights in or over such land or the right, title and interest in relation to such coal 
mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant and such vesting shall be deemed to have been valid and 
effective at all material times as if a direction had b een made by the Central Government under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 and accordingly no suit or other proceeding shall be instituted, maintained or 
continued in any court on the ground that such subsidi ary company was not competent to op erate or 
control such coal mine, coking coal mine or coke oven plant.  
 
--------------------------The Designs Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE DESIGNS ACT, 200 0 
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTI ONS  
_______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF DESIGNS  
3. Controller and other officers . 
4. Prohibition of registration of certain designs.  
5. Application for registration of designs.  
6. Registration to be in respect of particular article.  
7. Publication of particulars of registered design s. 
8. Power of Controller to make orders regarding substitution of application, etc.  
9. Certificate of registration.  
10. Register of designs . 
 
CHAPTER III  
COPYRIGHT IN REGISTERED DESIGNS  
11. Copyright on registration.  
12. Restoration of lapsed designs.  
13. Procedure for disposal of applications for restoration of lapsed designs.  
14. Rights of proprietor of lapsed design which have been restored.  
15. Requirements before delivery on sales.  
16. Effect of disclosure on copyright.  
17. Inspection of registered designs.  
18. Information as to existence of copyright . 
19. Cancellation of registration.  
20. Designs to bind Government.  
 
CHAPTER IV 
INDUSTRIAL AND I NTERNATIONAL EXHIBITIONS  
21. Provisions as to exhibitions.  
 
CHAPTER V  
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS  
22. Piracy of registered design.  
23. Application of certain provisions  of the Act as to patents to designs.  
  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
GENERAL  
Fees  
SECTIONS  
24. Fees.  
Provisions as to registers and other documents in the patent office  
25. Notice of trust not to be entered in registers.  
26. Inspection of and extracts from registers.  
27. Privilege of reports of Controller.  
28. Prohibition and publication of specification, drawings, etc ., where application abandoned, etc.  
29. Power of Controller to correct c lerical errors.  
30. Entry of assignment and transmissions in registers.  
31. Rectification of register.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
POWER S AND DUTIES OF  CONTROLLER  
32. Powers of Controller in proceedings under Act.  
33. Exercise of discretionary power by Controller . 
34. Power of Controller to take directions of the Central Government.  
35. Refusal to register a design in certain cases.  
36. Appeals to the High Court.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
EVIDENCE, ETC . 
37. Evidence before the Controller.  
38. Certificate of Controller to be evidence.  
39. Evidence of documents in patent office.  
40. Applications and notices by post . 
41. Declaration by infant, lunatic, etc.  
42. Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
AGENCY  
43. Agency.  
CHAPTER X  
POWERS , ETC. , OF CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
44. Reciprocal arrangement with the United Kingdom and other convention countries or group of 
countries of inter -governmental organisations.  
45. Report of the Controller to be placed before Parliament.  
46. Protection of security of India.  
47. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
 
CHAPTER XI  
REPEAL AND SAVING S 
48. Repeal and saving s. 3 
 THE DESIGNS ACT, 200 0 
ACT NO. 16 OF 2000  
[25th May , 2000 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to protection of designs.  
BE it ena cted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Design s Act, 2000.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by  notification  in the 
Official Gazette , appoint ; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions  of this Act , and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this  Act shall be construed as a ref erence to 
the coming into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless there is anything repugnant in the subject or  contex t,— 
(a) “article” means any article of manufacture and any substance, artificial, or partly  artificial and 
partly natural ; and includes any part of an article capable of being  made and sold separately;  
(b) “Controller” means the Controller -General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks  referred to in 
section 3;  
(c) “copyright” means the exclusive right to apply a design to any article in any  class in which the 
design is registered;  
(d) “design” means only the features of shape, configuration, pattern, ornament or  composition of 
lines or colours applied to any article whether in two dimensional or  three dimensional or in b oth 
forms, by any industrial process or means, whether  manual, mechanical or chemical, separate or 
combined, which in the finished article  appeal to and are judged solely by the eye; but does not 
include any mode or  principle of construction or anything wh ich is in substance a mere mechanical  
device, and does not include any trade mark as defined in clause ( v) of sub -section  (1) of section 2 of 
the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958  (43 of 1958)  or property mark as  defined in section 479 
of the Indian Pe nal Code (45 of 1860) or any artistic work as defined in  clause ( c) of section 2 of the 
Copyright Act, 1957  (14 of 1957 ). 
(e) “High Court” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in  clause ( i) of section 2 of the 
Patents Act, 1970  (39 of 1970) ; 
(f) “legal representative” means a person who in law represents the estate of a  deceased person;  
(g) “original”, in relation to a design, means originating from the  author of such design and 
includes the cases which though old in  themselves yet are new in their  application ; 
(h) “Patent Office” means the patent office referred to in section 74  of the Patents Act, 1970                     
(39 of 1970);  
(i) “prescribed” means prescri bed by rules  made under this Act;  
(j) “proprieto r of a new or original design”, — 
(i) where the author of the design, for good  consideration, executes the work for some other 
person, means the  person for whom the design is so executed;  
(ii) where any person acquires the design or the right to apply the  design to any article, either 
exclusi vely of any other person or otherwise, means, in  the respect and to the extent in and to 
which the design or right has been so  acquired, the person by whom the design or right is so 
acquired; and  
                                                           
1. 11th May, 2001, vide notification No. S.O. 414(E), dated 11th May, 2001, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II,         
sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (iii) in any other case, means the author of the design; and  where the property in or the right 
to apply, the design has devolved  from the original proprietor upon any other person, includes 
that other person.  
CHAPTER II  
REGISTRATION OF DESIGNS  
3. Controller and other  officers .—(1) The Controller -General of Patents, Designs and Trade Marks 
appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of section 4 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958  (43 of 1958 ) 
shall  be the Controller of Designs for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) For the purposes of this Act, the Central Government may appoint  as many examiners and other 
officers with such designations as  it thinks fit.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the officers appointed under  sub-section (2) shall discharge 
under the superintendence and  directions of the Con troller such functions of the Controller under this  Act 
as he may, from time to time , by general or special order in  writing, authorise them to discharge.  
(4) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 3), the  Controller may , by 
order in writing and for reasons to be recorded therein, withdraw  any matter pending before an officer 
appointed under sub -section (2) and deal with  such mat ter himself either de novo or from the stage it was 
so withdrawn or transfer  the same to anothe r officer appointed under sub -section (2) who may, subject to  
special directions in the order of transfer, proceed with the matter either de novo or from the stage it was 
so transferred.  
4. Prohibition of registration of certain designs. —A design which — 
(a) is not new or original; or  
(b) has been disclosed to the public anywhere in India or in any other  country by publication in 
tangible form or by use or in any other way  prior to the filing date, or where applicable, the priority 
date of the  application fo r registration; or  
(c) is not significantly distinguishable from known designs or combination of  known designs; or  
(d) comprises or contains scandalous or obscene matter , 
shall not be registered.  
5. Application for registration of designs. —(1) The Controller may, on the application of any 
person claiming to be the  proprietor of any new or original design not previously published in any country  
and which is not contrary to public order or morality, register the design under  this Act : 
Provided that th e Controller shall before such registration refer the application for  examination, by an 
examiner appointed under sub -section ( 2) of section 3, as to  whether such design is capable of being 
registered under this Act and the rules  made thereunder and consid er the report of the examiner on such 
reference.  
(2) Every application under sub-section ( 1) shall be in the prescribed form and  shall be filed in the 
patent office in the prescribed manner and shall be  accompanied by the prescribed fee.  
(3) A design may b e registered in not more than one class, and, in case of doubt as  to the class in 
which a design ought to be registered, the Controller may decide the  question.  
(4) The Controller may, if he thinks fit, refuse to register any design presented to  him fo r registration; 
but any person aggrieved by any such refusal may  appeal to the High Court.  
(5) An application which, owing to any default or neglect on the part of the  applicant, has not been 
completed so as to enable registration to be effected within  the prescribed time shall be deemed to be 
abandoned.  
(6) A design when registered shall be registered as of the date of the application for  registration.  
6. Registration to be in respect of particular article .—(1) A design may be registered in respect of 
any o r all of the articles comprised  in a prescribed class of articles.  
(2) Any question arising as to the class within which any article falls shall be  determined by the 
Controller whose decision in the matter shall be final.  5 
 (3) Where a design has been regist ered in respect of any article comprised in a class  of article, the 
application of the proprietor of the design to register it in respect of  some one or more other articles 
comprised in that class of articles shall not be  refused, nor shall the registratio n thereof invalidated — 
(a) on the ground of the design not being a new or original design, by reason  only that it was so 
previously registered; or  
(b) on the ground of the design having been previously published in India  or in any other country, 
by reason only that it has been applied to article in respect  of which it was previously registered:  
Provided that such subsequent registration shall not extend the period of copyright  in the design 
beyond that arising from previous registration.  
(4) Where any person makes an application for the registration of a design in  respect of any article 
and either — 
(a) that design has been previously registered by another person in  respect of some other article; 
or 
(b) the design to which the application relates consist s of a design  previously registered by 
another person in respect of the same or  some other article with modifications or variations not 
sufficient to  alter the character or substantially to affect the identity thereof,  
then, if at any time while the applic ation is pending the applicant becomes the  registered proprietor of the 
design previously registered, the foregoing provisions of  this section shall apply as if at the time of 
making the application , the applicant , had been the registered proprietor of tha t design.  
7. Publication of  particulars of registered  design s.—The Controller shall, as soon as may be after 
the registration of a design, cause  publication of the prescribed particulars of the design to be published in 
such manner as may be prescribed and  thereafter the design shall be open to public  inspection . 
8. Power of Controller to  make orders regarding  substitution of  application , etc.—(1) If the 
Controller is satisfied on a claim made in the prescribed manner  at any time before a design has been 
registered that by virtue of any assignment  or agreement in writing made by the applicant or one of the 
applicants for  registration of the design or by operation of law, the claimant would, if  the design were 
then registered, be entitled thereto or to the in terest of the  applicant therein,  or to an undivided share of 
the design or of that interest, the  Controller may, subject to the provisions of this section, direct that the  
application shall proceed in the name of the claimant or in the names of the  claiman ts and the applicant or 
the other joint applicant or applicants, accordingly , as the case may require.  
(2) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any assignment or  agreement made by 
one of two or more joint applicants for registration of a design  except with the consent of the other joint 
applicant or applicants.  
(3) No such direction as aforesaid shall be given by virtue of any  assignment or agreement for the 
assignment of  the benefit of a design unless — 
(a) the design is identified th erein by reference to the  number of the application for the 
registration; or  
(b) there is produced to the Controller an acknowledgement  by the person by whom the 
assignment or agreement was made that  the assignment or agreement relates to the design in res pect 
of which  that application is made; or  
(c) the rights of the claimant in respect of the design have  been finally established by the decision 
of a court; or  
(d) the Controller gives directions for enabling the  application to proceed or for regulating th e 
manner in which it  should be proceeded with under sub -section (5). 
(4) Where one of two or more joint applicants for registration of a design dies at  any time before the 
design has been registered, the Controller may, upon a request  in that behalf made b y the survivor or 
survivors, and with the consent of the legal  representative of the deceased, direct that the application shall 
proceed in the name  of the survivor or survivors alone.  
(5) If any dispute arises between joint applicants for registration of a design  whether or in what 
manner the application should be proceeded with, the  Controller may, upon application made to him in 6 
 the prescribed manner by any of  the parties, and after giving to all parties concerned an opportunity to be 
heard,  give such di rections as he thinks fit for enabling the application to proceed in the  name of one or 
more of the parties alone or for regulating the manner in which it  should be proceeded with, or for both 
those purposes, as the case may require.  
9. Certificate of regi stration. —(1) The Controller shall grant a certificate of registration to the  
proprietor of the design when registered . 
(2) The Controller may, in case of loss of the original certificate, or in  any other case in which he 
deems it expedient, furnish one or  more  copies of the certificate.  
10. Register of designs. —(1) There shall be kept at the patent office a book called the  register of 
designs, wherein shall be entered the names and addresses  of proprietors of registered designs, 
notifications of assignment s and of transmissions of registered designs, and such other matter as  may be 
prescribed and such register may be maintained wholly or  partly on computer, floppies or diskettes, 
subject to such safeguards  as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where the register is mai ntained wholly or partly on computer  floppies and diskettes under              
sub-section ( 1), any reference in this Act  to any entry in the register shall be construed as the reference to 
entry  so maintained on computer floppies or diskettes.  
(3) The register of designs existing at the commencement of this Act  shall be incorporated with and 
form part of the register of designs  under this Act.  
(4) The register of designs shall be prima facie evidence of any  matter by this Act directed or 
authorized to b e entered therein.  
CHAPTER III  
COPYRIGHT IN REGISTERED DESIGNS  
11. Copyright on registration .—(1) When a design is registered, the registered proprietor of the 
design shall,  subject to the provisions of this Act, have copyright in the design during ten  years from the 
date of registration.  
(2) If, before the expiration of the said ten years, application for the  extension of the period of 
copyright is made to the Controller in the  prescribed manner, the Controller shall, on payment of the 
prescribed  fee, e xtend the period of copy -right for a second period of five years  from the expiration of the 
original period of ten years.  
12. Restoration of lapsed designs. —(1) Where a design has ceased to have effect by reason of 
failure  to pay the fee for the extension of copyright under sub -section (2) of section 11, the proprietor of 
such design or his legal representative  and where the design was held by two or more persons jointly, 
then,  with the leave of the Controller one or more of them without joining  the others,  may, within one 
year from the date on which the design  ceased to have effect, make an application for the restoration of 
the design in the prescribed manner on payment of such fee as may be  prescribed.  
(2) An application under this section shall contain a  statement,  verified in the prescribed manner, fully 
setting out the circumstances  which led to the failure to pay the prescribed fee, and the Controller  may 
require from the applicant such further evidence as he may  think necessary.  
13. Procedure for disp osal of applications for restoration of lapsed designs. —(1) If, after hearing 
the applicant in cases where the applicant  so desires or the Controller thinks fit, the Controller is satisfied 
that the failure to pay the fee for extension of the period of cop yright  was unintentional and that there has 
been no undue delay in the  making of the application, the Controller shall upon payment of any  unpaid 
fee for extension of the period of copyright together with  prescribed additional fee restore the registration 
of design.  
(2) The Controller may, if he thinks fit as a condition of restoring the  design, require that any entry 
shall be made in the register of any  document or matter which under the provision s of this Act, has to be  
entered in the register but which h as not been so entered.  
14. Rights of proprietor of lapsed design which have been restored .—(1) Where the registration 
of a design is restored, the rights  of the registered proprietor shall be subject to such provisions as  may be 
prescribed and to such other provisions as the Controller  thinks fit to impose for the protection or 
compensation of persons  who may have begun to avail themselves of, or have taken definite  steps by 7 
 contract or otherwise to avail themselves of, the benefit  of applying the desig n between the date when the 
registration of the  design ceased to have effect and the date of restoration of the  registration of the  design.  
(2) No suit or other proceeding shall be commenced in respect of  piracy of a registered design or 
infringement of th e copyright in such  design committed between the date on which the registration of the  
design ceased to have effect and the date of the restoration of the  design.  
15. Requirements before  delivery on sales .—(1) Before delivery on sale of any articles to whi ch a 
registered  design has bee n applied, the proprietor shall — 
(a) (if exact representations or specimens were not finished on the  application for registration) 
furnish to the Controller the prescribed  number of exact representations or specimens of the design; 
and, if  he fails to do so, the Controller may, after giving notice thereof to  the proprietor, erase his 
name from the register and thereupon the  copyright in the design shall cease; and  
(b) causes each such article to be marked with the prescribed mark,  or with the prescribed words 
or figures denoting that the design is  registered; and, if he fails to do so, the proprietor shall not be 
entitled  to recover any penalty or damages in respect of any infringement of  his copyright in the 
design unless he shows that he took all proper  steps to ensure the marking of the article, or unless he 
shows that the  infringement took place after the person guilty thereof knew or had  received notice of 
the existence of the copyright in the design.  
(2) Where a represent ation is made to the Central Government by or  on behalf of any trade or 
industry that in the interest of the trade or  industry it is expedient to dispense with or modify as regards 
any class or description of articles any of the requirements of this sectio n as to marking, the Central 
Government may, if it thinks fit, by rule  under this Act, dispense with or modify such requirements as 
regards  any such class or description of articles to such extent and subject to  such conditions as it thinks 
fit. 
16. Effect  of disclosure on  copyright. —The disclosure of a design by the proprietor to any other 
person,  in such circumstances as would make it contrary to good faith for  that other person to use or 
publish the design, and the disclosure of a  design in breach of goo d faith by any person, other than the  
proprietor of the design, and the acceptance of a first and  confidential order for articles bearing a new or 
original textile  design intended for registration, shall not be deemed to be a  publication of the design 
sufficient to invalidate the copyright  thereof if registration thereof is obtained subsequently to the  
disclosure or acceptance.  
17. Inspection of registered designs. —(1) During the existence of copyright in a design, any person 
on furnishing such informat ion as may enable the Controller to identify  the design and on payment of the 
prescribed fee may inspect the  design in the prescribed manner.  
(2) Any person may, on  an application to the Controller and on payment  of such fee as may be 
prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any  registered design.  
18. Information as to exist ence of copyright .—On the request of any person fu rnishing such 
information  as may enable the Controller to identify the design, and on  payment of the prescribed fee, the 
Controller shall inform such  person whether the registration still exists in respect of the design,  and, if so, 
in respect of what classes of articles, and shall state the  date of registration, and the name and address of 
the registered  proprietor.  
19. Cancellation of regi stration. —(1) Any person interested may present a petition for the  
cancellation of the registration of a design at any time after the  registration of the design, to the Controller 
on any of the following  grounds, namel y:— 
(a) that the design has been previ ously registered in India; or  
(b) that it has been published in India or in any other country prior  to the date of registration; or  
(c) that the design is not a new or original design; or  
(d) that the design is not registrable under this Act; or  
(e) that it is not a design as defined under clause ( d) of section 2.  8 
  (2) An appeal shall lie from any order of the Controller under this  section to the High Court, and the 
Controller may at any time refer  any such petition to the High Court, and the High Court s hall decide  any 
petition so referred.  
20. Designs to bind Government .—A registered design shall have to all intents the like effect as  
against the Government as it has against any person and the  provisions of Chapter XVII of the Patents 
Act, 1970  (39 of 19 70) shall apply to  registered designs as they apply to patents.   
CHAPTER IV  
INDUSTRIAL AND INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITIONS  
21. Provisions as to exhibitions .—The exhibition of a design, or of any article to which a design is  
applied, at an industrial or other exhibition to which the provisions  of this section have been extended by 
the Central Government by  notification in the Official Gazette, or the publication of a description  of the 
design, during or after the period of the holding of the  exhibition, or the exhibition of the design or the 
article or the  publication of a description of the design by any person elsewhere  during or after the period 
of the holding of the exhibition, without  the privity or consent of the proprietor, shall not prevent the  
design fr om being registered or invalidate the registration thereof:  
Provided that — 
(a) the exhibitor exhibiting the design or article, or publishing a  description of the design, gives to 
the Controller previous notice in  the prescribed form; and  
(b) the application for registration is made within six months from the  date of first exhibiting the 
design or article or publishing a description  of the design.  
CHAPTER V  
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS  
22. Piracy of registered design. —(1) During  the existence of copyright in any design it shall not be 
lawful for any  person — 
 (a) for the purpose of sale to apply or cause to be applied to any article in any class  of articles in 
which the design is registered, the design or any fraudulent or obvious  imitation thereof, except with 
the license or written consent of the registered  proprietor, or to do anything with a view to enable the 
design to be so applied; or  
(b) to import for the purposes of sale, without the consent of the registered  proprietor, any article 
belonging to the class in which the design has been  registered, and having applied to it the design or 
any fraudulent or obvious  imitation thereof ; or 
(c) knowing that the design or any fraudulent or obvious imitation thereof has been  applied t o any 
article in any class of articles in which the design is registered  without the consent of the registered 
proprietor, to publish or expose or cause to be  published or exposed for sale that article.  
(2) If any person acts in contravention of this secti on, he shall be liable for  every contravention — 
(a) to pay to the registered proprietor of the design a sum not  exceeding twenty -five thousand 
rupees recoverable as a contract  debt, or  
(b) if the proprietor elects to bring a suit for the recovery of  damage s for any such contravention, 
and for an injunction against  the repetition thereof, to pay such damages as may be awarded and to  be 
restrained by injunction accordingly:  
Provided that the total sum recoverable in respect of any one  design under clause ( a) shall not exceed 
fifty thousand rupees:  
Provided further that no suit or any other proceeding for relief  under this sub -section shall be 
instituted in any court below the court  of District Judge.  
(3) In any suit or any other proceeding for relief under sub -section  (2), ever ground on which the 
registration of a design may be  cancelled under section 19 shall be a vailable as a ground of defence.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the second proviso to  sub-section ( 2), where any ground or 
which the registration of a  design may be cancelled under section 19 has been availed of as a  ground of 9 
 defence under sub-section ( 3) in any suit or other proceeding  for relief under sub -section ( 2), the suit or 
such other proceedings  shall be transferred by the Cou rt, in which the suit or such other  proceeding is 
pending, to the High Court for decision.  
(5) When the court makes a decree in a suit under sub -section ( 2), it shall send a copy of the decree to 
the Controller, who shall cause  an entry thereof to be made in the register of designs.  
23. Application of certain provisions of the Act as to patents to designs .—The provisions of the 
Patents Act, 1970  (39 of 1970)  with regard to certificates  of the validity of a patent, and to the remedy in 
case of groundless  threats of legal proceedings by a patentee shall apply in the case  of registered designs 
in like manner as they apply in the case of  patents, with the substitution of references to the copyright in a  
design for reference to a patent, and of references to t he proprietor of  a design for references to patentee, 
and of references to the design for  references to the invention.  
CHAPTER VI  
GENERAL  
Fees  
24. Fees .—(1) There shall be paid in respect of the registration of designs  and applications therefor 
and in respect of other matters relating to  designs under this Act such fees  as may be prescribed.  
 (2) A proceeding in respect of which a fee is payable under this Act  or the rules made thereunder 
shall be of no effect unless the fee has  been paid.  
Provisions as  to registers and other documents in the patent office  
25. Notice of trust not to be entered in registers .—There shall not be entered in any register kept 
under this  Act, or be receivable by the Controller, any notice of any trust  expressed, implied or 
constructive.  
26. Inspection of and extracts from registers .—Every register kept under this Act shall at all 
convenient times  be open to the inspection of the public, subject to the provisions of  this Act; and 
certified copies, sealed with the seal of the Patent  Office, of any entry in any such register shall be given 
to any person  requiring the same on payment of the prescribed fee:  
Provided that where such register is maintained wholly or partly on  computer, the inspection of such 
register under this sect ion shall be  made b y inspecting the computer print out of the relevant entry in the  
register so maintained on computer.  
27. Privilege of reports of Controller .—Reports of or to the Controller made under this Act other 
than the report referred to in section 45 shall not in any case be published  or be open to public inspection.  
28. Prohibition and publication of specification, drawings, etc ., where application abandoned, 
etc.—Where an application for a design has been abandoned or refused,  the application and any drawings, 
photographs, tracings,  representations or specimens left in connection with the  application shall not at any 
time be open to public inspection or be  published by the Controller.  
29. Power of Controller to correct c lerical errors .—The Controll er may, on request in writing 
accompanied by the  prescribed fee , correct any clerical error in the representation of a  design or in the 
name or address of the proprietor of any design, or in  any other matter, which is entered upon the register 
of designs.  
30. Entry of assignment and transmissions in registers .—(1) Where a person becomes entitled by 
assignments,  transmission or other operation of law to the copyright in a registered  design, he may make 
application in the prescribed form to the  Controller to register his title, and the Controller shall, on receipt 
of such application and on proof of title to his satisfaction, register  him as the proprietor of such design, 
and shall cause an entry to be  made in the prescribed manner in the register of the assig nment,  
transmission or other instrument affecting the title.  
 (2) Where any person becomes entitled as mortgage e, licensee or  otherwise to any interest in a 
registered design, he may make  an application in the prescribed form to the Controller to register his title, 
and the Controller  shall, on receipt of such application and on proof of title to his  satisfaction, cause 
notice of the interest to be entered in the prescribed  manner in the register of designs, with particulars of 
the instrument, if  any, creating such interest.  10 
 (3) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), an assignment of a design or of a share in a 
design, a mortgage, licence  or the creation of any other interest in a design shall not be valid  unless the 
same were in writin g and the agreement between the  parties concerned is reduced to the form of an 
instrument  embodying all the terms and conditions governing their rights and  obligation and the 
application for registration of title under such  instrument is filed in the presc ribed manner with the 
Controller  within six months from the execution of the instrument or within such  further period not 
exceeding six months in the aggregate as the  Controller on application made in the prescribed manner 
allows:  
Provided that the instrum ent shall, on entry of its particulars in the  register under sub -section ( 1) or 
sub-section ( 2), have the effect from  the date of its execution.  
(4) The person registered as the proprietor of a design shall, subject to  the provisions of this Act and 
to any  rights appearing from the  register to be vested in any other person, have power absolutely to  
assign, grant licenses as to, or otherwise deal with, the design and to  give effectual receipts for any 
consideration for any such assignment,  licence or dealing : 
Provided that any equities in respect of the design may be enforced in  like manner  as in respect of any 
other mov able property.  
(5) Except in the case of an application made under section 31, a  document or instrument in respect of 
which no entry has been  made  in the register in accordance with the provisions of sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) 
shall not be admitted in evidence in any court in proof of the  title to copyright in a design or to any 
interest therein, unless the  court, for reasons to be recorded in wr iting, otherwise directs.  
31. Rectification of register.—(1) The Controller may, on the application in the prescribed  manner 
of any person aggrieved by the non -insertion in or omission  from the register of designs of any entry, or 
by any entry made  in such  register without sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly  remaining on such 
register, or by an error or defect in any entry in  such register, make such order for making, expunging or 
varying such  entry as he thinks fit and rectify the register accordingl y. 
 (2) The Controller may , in any proceeding under this section, decide  any question that may be 
necessary or expedient to decide in  connection with the rectification of a register.  
(3) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from any order of the  Controller under this section and the 
Controller may refer any  application under this section to the High Court for decision, and the  High Court 
shall dispose of any application so referred.  
(4) Any order of the Court rectifying a register shall direct tha t notice  of the rectification be served on 
the Controller in the prescribed  manner who shall upon the receipt of such notice rectify the register  
accordingly.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to empower the  Controller to make any such order 
cancelling the registration of a  design as is provided for in section 19.  
CHAPTER VII  
POWER S AND DUTIES OF  CONTROLLER  
32. Powers of Controller in proceedings under Act .—Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the 
Controller in any  proceedings before him under this Act shall have the powers of a  civil court for the 
purpose of receiving evidence, administering  oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the  
discovery and production of documents, issuing commissions  for the examining of witnesse s and 
awarding costs and such award  shall be executable in any court having jurisdiction as if it were a  decree 
of that court.  
33. Exercise of discretionary power by Controller .—Where any discretionary power is by or under 
this Act given to  Controller, he shall not exercise that power adversely to the  applicant for registration of 
a design without (if so required within the  prescribed time by the applicant) giving the applicant an 
opportunity  of being heard.  
34. Power of Controller to take directions of the  Central Government. —The Controller may, in 
any case of doubt or difficulty arising  in the administration of any of the provisions of this Act, apply to 
the Central Government for directions in the matter.  11 
 35. Refusal to register a design in certain cases .—(1) The Controller may refuse to register a design 
of which  the use would, in his opinion, be contrary to public order or morality.  
(2) An appeal shall lie to the High Court from an order of the  Controller under this section.  
36. Appeals to the High Court .—(1) Where an appeal is declared by this Act to lie from the  
Controller to the High Court, the appeal shall be made within  three months of the date of the order passed 
by the Controller.  
 (2) In calculating the said period of three months, the time (if an y) occupied in granting a copy of the 
order appealed against shall be  excluded.  
(3) The High Court may, if it thinks fit, obtain the assistance of an  expert in deciding such appeals, 
and the decision of the High Court  shall be final.  
(4) The High Court my make rules consistent with this Act as to  the conduct and procedure of all 
proceedings under this Act before it.  
CHAPTER VIII  
EVIDENCE, ETC . 
37. Evidence before the Controller. —Subject to any rules made under section 44, in any proceeding 
under this  Act before the Controller, the evidence shall be given by affidavit in the absence of  directions  
by the Controller to  the contrary; but in any case in which  the Controller thinks it right so to do he may 
take evidence viva voce  in lieu of or  in addition to evidence by affidavit or may allow any party to be 
cross -examined on  the contents of his affidavit.  
38. Certificate of Controller to be evidence. —A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the 
Controller as to any entry,  matter or thin g which he is authoriz ed by this Act, or any rules made 
thereunder to  make or do, shall be prima  facie  evidence of the entry having been made, and of the  
contents thereof, and of the matter or thing having been done or left undone.  
39. Evidence of document s in patent office. —Printed or written copies or extracts, purporting to be 
certified by  Controller and sealed wit h the seal of the patent office, of documents in the patent office,  
and of or from registers and other  books kept there, shall be admitted in  evidence in a ll courts in  India, 
and in all proceedings, without further proof or production of the originals:  
Provided that a court may, if it has reason to doubt the accuracy or authenticity of  the copies tendered 
in evidence, require the production of the originals or such  further proof as it considers necessary.  
40. Applications and notices by post .—Any application, notice or other document authorized or 
required to  be left, made or given at the patent o ffice or to the  Controller, or to any other perso n under this 
Act, may be sent by  post.  
41. Declaration by infant, lunatic, etc .—(1) If any person , is by reason of infancy , lunacy or other  
disability, incapable of making any statement or doing anything  required or permitted by or under this 
Act, the lawful guardian,  committee or manager (if any) of the person subject to the disability,  or , if there 
be none, any person appointed by any court possessing  jurisdic tion in respect of his property , may make 
such statement or a  statement as nearly correspond ing thereto as circumstances permit,  and do such thing 
in the name and on behalf of the person subject to  the disability.  
 (2) An appointment may be made by the court for the purposes of this  section upon the petition of 
any person acting on behalf of the person  subject to the disability or of any  other  person interested in the 
making of  the statement or the doing of the thing.  
42. Avoidance of certain restrictive conditions .—(1) It shall not be lawful to insert — 
(i) in any contract for or in relation to the sale or lease of an  article in respect of which a design is 
registered; or  
(ii) in a licence to manufacture or use an article in respect of which a  design is registered; or  
(iii) in a licence to package the article i n respect of which a design is  registered,  
  12 
 condition the effect of which may be — 
(a) to require the purchaser, lessee, or licensee to acquire from the  vendor, less or, or licensor or 
his nominees , or to prohibit him from  acquiring or to restrict in any ma nner or to any extent his right 
to acquire from any person or to prohibit him from acquiring except  from the vendor, lessor, or 
licensor or his nominees any article other  than the article in respect of which a design is registered; or  
(b) to prohibit the p urchaser, lessee or licensee from using or to  restrict in any manner or to any 
extent the right of the purchaser,  lessee or licensee, to use an article other than the article in respect of  
which a design is registered which is not supplied by the vendor,  lessor or licensor or his nominee,  
and any such condition shall be void.  
 (2) A condition of the nature referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) shall not cease 
to be a condition fal ling within that  sub-section merely by reason of the fact that the agreement  containing 
it has been entered into separately, whether before or after  the contract relating to the sale, lease or licence 
of the article in  respect of which a design is registered.  
(3) In proceeding against any person for any act in contravention of  section 22, it shall be a defence to 
prove that at the time of such  contravention there was in force a contract relating to the registered  design 
and containing a condition declared unlawful by this section:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply if the plaintiff is not a  party to the contract and proves to 
the satisfaction of the court that the  restrictive condition was inserted in the contract without his  
knowledge and consent, express or implied.  
(4) Nothing in this section sh all— 
(a) affect a condition in a contract by which a person is prohibited  from selling goods other than 
those of particular person;  
(b) validate a contract which, but for this section, would be invalid;  
(c) affect a condition in a contract for the lease of , or licence to use,  an article in respect of which 
a design is registered, by which the  lessor or licensor reserves to himself or his nominee the right to  
supply such new parts of the article, in respect of which a design is  registered, as may be required  or 
to put or keep it in repair.  
(5) The provision of this section shall also apply to contracts made  before the commencement of this 
Act if, and in so far as, any  restrictive conditions declared unlawful by this section continue in  force after 
the expirat ion of one year from such commencement . 
CHAPTER IX  
AGENCY  
43. Agency.—(1) All applications and communications to the Controller under  this Act may be 
signed by, and all attendances upon the Controller  may be made by or through a legal practitioner or by or  
through an  agent whose name and address ha d been entered in the register of  patent agents maintained 
under section 125 of the Patents Act,  1970  (39 of 1970 ). 
(2) The Controller may, if he sees fit, require — 
(a) any such agent to be resident in India;  
(b) any person not residing in India to employ an agent  residing in India;  
(c) the personal signature or presence of any applicant or other  person.  
CHAPTER X  
POWERS , ETC. , OF CENTRAL  GOVERNMENT  
44. Reciprocal arrangement with the United Kingdom and other convention countries or group 
of countries of inter -governmental organisations .—(1) Any person who has applied for protection for 
any design in the United  Kingdom or any of other convention countries or group of countries or countries  
which are members of inter-governmental organisations, or his legal representative  or assignee shall, 
either alone or jointly with any other person, be entitled to claim  that the registration of the said design 
under this Act shall be in priority to other  applicants and shall have the same date as the date of the 13 
 application in the United  Kingdom or any of such other convention countries or group of countries or  
countries which are members of inter -governmental organisations, as the  case may be:  
Provided that — 
(a) the application is made within six months from the application for  protection in the United 
Kingdom or any such other convention  countries or group of countries or countries which are 
members of  inter-governmental organisations, as the case may be; and  
(b) not hing in this section shall entitle the proprietor of the design to  recover damages for piracy 
of design happening prior to the  actual date on which the design is registered in India.  
 (2) The registration of a design shall not be invalidated by reason  only of the exhibition or use of or 
the publication of a description or  representation of the design in India during the period specified in  this 
section as that within whic h the application may be made.  
(3) The application for registration of a design under t his section has been  made in the same manner 
as an ordinary application  under this Act.  
(4) Where it is made to appear to the Central Government that the  legislature of the United Kingdom 
or any such other convention  country or a country which is member of  any group of countries or  inter-
governmental organisation as may be notified by the Central  Government in this behalf has made 
satisfactory provision for the  protection of designs registered in India, the Central Government  may, by 
notification in the Off icial Gazette, direct that the provisions  of this section, with such variations or 
additions, if any, as may be  set out in such notification, shall apply for the protection of designs  registered 
in the United Kingdom or that other convention country or  such country which is member of any group of 
countries or inter -governmental  organisation, as the case may be.  
Explanation  1.—For the purposes of this section, the expression  “convention countries”, “group of 
countries” or “inter -governmental  organisation” means, respectively, such countries, group of countries  or 
inter-governmental organisation to which the Paris Convention for  Protection of Industrial Property, 1883 
as revised at Stockholm in  1967 and as amended in 1979 or the Final Act, embodying the  results of the 
Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations,  provided for the establishment of World Trade 
Organisation applies.  
Explanation  2.—Where more than one application for protection  referred to in sub -section ( 1) has 
been made for similar protecti ons in the United Kingdom or one or more convention countries, group  of 
countries or countries which are members of inter -governmental  organisations, the period of six months 
referred to in clause ( a) of that sub -section  shall be reckoned from the date of which the earlier  or the 
earliest application, as the case may be, of such applications  has been made.  
45. Report of the Controller to be placed before Parliament. —The Central Government shall 
cause to be placed before both  House s of Parliament once a year a report respecting the execution of  this 
Act by or under the Controller.  
46. Protection of security of India. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Controller  
shall— 
(a) not disclose any information relating to the registration of a  design or any application relating 
to the registration of a design  under this Act, which he considers prejudicial to the interest of the  
security of India; and  
(b) take any action regarding the ca ncellation of registration of  such designs registered under this 
Act which the Central  Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in  the interest 
of the security of India.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression  “security of India” means any action 
necessary for the security of  India which relates to the application of any design registered under  this Act 
to any article used for war or applied directly or indirectly  for the purposes of military establishment or 
for the purposes of war  or other emergency in international relations.  
47. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official  Gazette, make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
  14 
 (2) In part icular, and without prejudice to the generally of the  forgoing power, such rules may provide 
for all or any of the  following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form of application  for registration of design , the manner of filing it at the patent office 
and the fee which shall accompany  it, under sub -section ( 2) of section 5;  
(b) the time within which the registration is to be effected under sub -section  (5) of section 5;  
(c) the classification of articles for registration under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(d) the p articulars of design to be published and the manner of  their publication under section 7;  
(e) the manner of making claim under sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(f) the manner of making application s to the Controller under sub -section  (5) of section 8;  
(g) the additional matters required to be entered in the register of  design s and the safeguard s to be 
made in maintaining such register in  computer floppies or diskettes under sub -section ( 1) of      
section  10; 
 (h) the manner of making application and fee to b e paid for  extension of the period of copy right 
under and the fee payable thereto, sub -section ( 2) of section 11;  
(i) the manner of making application for restoration of design and the  fee to be paid with it under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 12;  
(j) the  manner of verification of statement contained in an  application under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 12;  
(k) the additional fee to be paid for restoration of the registration of  design under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 13;  
(l) the provisions subject to which t he right of the registered  proprietor shall be under              
sub-section ( 1) of section 14;  
(m) the number of exact representation or specimen of the design to  be furnished to the Controller 
under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(n) the m ark, words or figures with which the article is to be marked  denoting that the design is 
registered under clause ( b) of sub -section  (1) of section 15;  
(o) the rules to dispense with or modify as regards any class or  description of articles any of the 
requi rements of section 15 as to  marking under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(p) the fee to be paid for and the manner of inspection under sub -section  (1) of section 17;  
(q) the fee to be paid to obtain a certified copy of any design under  sub-section ( 2) of section 17;  
(r) the fee on payment of which the Controller shall inform under  section 18;  
(s) the form for giving notice to the controller under clause ( a) of the  proviso to section 21;  
(t) the fee to be paid in respect of the registration of designs and  application therefor, and in 
respect of other matters relating to  designs under sub -section ( 1) of section 24;  
(u) the fee to be paid for giving certified copy of any entry in the  register under section 26;  
(v) the fee to be accompanied with the request in  writing for correcting  any clerical error under 
section 29;  
(w) the form in which an application for registration as proprietor  shall be made and the manner 
in which the Controller shall cause an  entry to be made in the register of the assignment, transmi ssion 
or other instruments effecting the title under sub -section ( 1) of section  30; 
(x) the form in which an application for title shall be made and the  manner in which the 
Controller shall cause notice of the interest to  be entered in the register of desi gns with particulars of 
the instrument, if any, creating such interest under sub -section ( 2) of section 30;  
(y) the manner of filing an application for registration and for  making application for extension of 
time as referred to in sub -section  (3) of section 30;  15 
 (z) the manner of making application to the Controller for  rectification of register under           
sub-section ( 1) of section 31;  
(za) the manner in which the notice of rectification shall be served  on the Controller under      
sub-section ( 4) of section 31;  
(zb) the rules regulating the proceedings before the Controller under  section 32;  
(zc) the time which shall be granted to the applicants for being heard  by the Controller under 
section 33;  
(zd) the fee to be accompanied with an appeal unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 36;  
(ze) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) The power to make rules under this section shall be subject to the  conditions of the rules being 
made after previous publication.  
(4) Every rule made  under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in  one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the  expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive session s aforesaid, both House s agree in making any  modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not  be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such  modified  form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any  such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the  validity of anything previously done under that Act.  
CHAPTER XI  
REPEAL AND SAVING  
48. Repeal and saving s.—(1) The Designs Act, 1911  (2 of 1911)  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the General Clauses Act, 1897  (10 of 1897)  with  
respect to repeals, any notification, rule,  order, requirement, registration, certificate, notice, decis ion, 
determination, direction, approval, authorisation, consent,  application, request or thing made, issued, 
given or done under the  Designs Act, 1911  (2 of 1911) , shall, in force at the commencement of this Act, 
continue to be in f orce and have effect as if made , issued , given or  done under the corresponding 
provisions of this Act.  
 (3) The provisions of this Act shall apply to a ll application s for registration of design s pending at the 
commencement of this Act and  to any proceedings consequent thereon and  to any registration granted  in 
pursuance thereof.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, any proceeding  pending in any court at the 
commencement of this Act may be  continued in that court as if this Act has not been passed.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the date of  expiration of the copyright in 
the design registered before the  commencement of this Act shall, subject to the provisions of this Act,  be 
the date immediately after the period of five years  for which it was  registered or the date immediately 
after the period of five years for  which the extension of the period of copyright for a second period  from 
the expiration of the original period has been made.  
 
_____________  
--------------------------The Direct-Tax Laws (Miscellaneous) Repeal Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE DIRECT -TAX LAWS (MISCELLANEOUS) REPEAL ACT, 2000  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Repeal of certain enactments . 
3. Savings . 
THE SCHEDULE .  2 
 THE DIRECT -TAX LAWS (MISCELLANEOUS) REPEAL ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 20 OF 2000 
[9th June , 2000 .] 
An Act to repeal certain enactments relating to direct taxes.  
BE it enacted by parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: – 
1. Short title .–This Act may be called the Direct -tax Laws (Miscellaneous) Repeal Act, 2000.  
2. Repeal of certain enactments .–The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby repealed.  
3. Savings .–(1) The repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not – 
(a) affect  any other enactment in which the repealed enactment has been applied, incorporated or 
referred to;  
(b) affect the validity, invalidity , effect or consequences of anything already done or s uffered, or 
any right, title, immunity, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy 
or proceeding in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, 
liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing ; 
(c) affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction, form or course of pleading, 
practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, restriction, exemption, office or appointment, 
notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in  any manner affirmed or recognised or 
derived by, in or from any enactment hereby repealed;  
(d) revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability, right, title, restriction, exemption, 
usage, practice, procedure or other matter or thing not now  existing or in force.  
(2) The mention of particular matters in sub -section ( 1) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the 
general application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), with regard to the effect of 
repeals.  
  3 
  
   
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
REPEALS  
Year  Number                       Short title  
1926  3 The Government Trading Taxation Act, 1926.  
1940  XV The Excess Profits Tax Act, 1940.  
1947  XXI The Business Profits Tax Act, 1947.  
1947  XXX  The Taxation on Income (Investigation Commission) Act, 1947.  
1949  22 The Payment of Taxes ( Transfer of Property) Act, 1949.  
1949  67 The Taxation Laws (Extension to Merged States and Amendment) 
Act, 1949.  
1953  34 The Estate Duty Act, 1953.  
1954  38 The Madhya Bharat Taxes on Income (Validation) Act, 1954.  
1962  9 The Estate Duty (Distribution) Act, 1962.  
1965  1 The Income -tax (Amendment) Act, 1965.  
1971  37 The Central Board of Direct Taxes (Validation of Proceedings) 
Act, 1971.  
1971  62 The Companies (Surcharge on Income -tax) Act, 1971.  
1976  8 The Voluntary Disclosure of Income and Wealth Act, 1976.  
1981  7 The Special Bearer Bonds (Immunities and Exemptions) Act, 
1981.  
1991  47 The Voluntary Deposits (Immunities and Exemptions) Act, 1991.  
1942  LX The Income -tax and Excess Profits Tax (Emergency) Ordinance, 
1942.  
1943  IV The Income -tax Proceedings Validity Ordinance, 1943.  
1943  XVI The Excess Profits Tax Ordinance, 1943.  
  
--------------------------The Immigration (Carriers Liability) Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE IMMIGRATION (CARRIERS ’ LIABILITY) ACT, 2000  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and extent . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Liability of carriers for passengers brought into India . 
 3A. Power to exempt.  
4. Appeals.  
5. Recovery of penalty due to Government . 
6. Bar of legal proceedings . 
7. Application of Acts 16 of 1939, 34 of 1920 and 31 of 1946 not barred . 
8. Power to make rules.  
9. Rules to be laid before Parliament . 
10. Power to remove difficulties . 
  2 
 THE IMMIGRATION (CARRIERS' LIABILITY) ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 52 OF 2000  
[11th December , 2000.]  
An Act to make the carriers liable in respect of passengers brought by them into India in 
contravention of the provisions of the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 and the rules 
made thereunder and matters connected therewith .  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and extent .—(1) This Act may be called the Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act, 
2000. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “carrier” means a person who is engaged in the business of transporting passengers by water 
or air and includes any association of persons, whether incorporated or not, by whom the a ircraft or 
the ship is owned or chartered;  
(b) “Competent Authority ” means the civil authority appointed under sub -paragraph ( 2) of 
paragraph 2 of the Foreigners Order, 1948 made under the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 1946) or any 
other officer notified by  the Central Government in this behalf;  
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act.  
(2) Words and expressions not defined in this Act but defined in the Foreigners Act, 1946 (31 of 
1946) or the Passport (Entry into India) Act, 1920 (34 of 1920) shall have the meanings respectively 
assigned to them in those Acts.  
3. Liability of carriers for  passengers brought into India. —Where the competent authority is of 
the opinion that any carrier has brought a person in contravention of the provisions of the Passport (Entry 
into India) Act, 1920 (34 of 1920) and rules made thereunder into India, he may by order impose a 
penalty of r upees one lakh on such carrier:  
Provided that no order shall be passed without giving the carrier an opportunity  of being heard in the 
matter.  
1[3A. Power to exempt .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of the Passport (Entry into India) 
Act, 1920 (34 of 1920) and the rules made thereunder, if the Central Government is of opinion that it is 
necessary or expedient  in the interest of  the general public or to fulfi l the international obligation, it may, 
by order notified in the Official Gaz ette and subject to such conditions a s may be specified in the order, 
exempt any carrier or class of carrier from the operations of all or any of the provisions of this A ct and 
may, as often as may be necessary, revoke or modify such order.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.]  
4. Appeals .—(1) An  appeal shall lie against the order made under section 3 of this Act to the Joint 
Secretary to the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs authorised in this  behalf by that 
Government . 
(2) Every such appeal shall be preferred within thirty days  from the date of the order appealed 
against:  
Provided that the appellate authority may, if it is satisfied that the appella nt was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within the said period of thirty days, permit the appellant to 
prefe r the appeal within a further period of thirty days.  
(3) On receipt of any such appeal, the appellate authority shall, after giving the parties a reasonable 
oppo rtunity of being heard and after making such inquiry as it deems proper, make such order, as it  may 
think fit, confirming, modifying or reversing the order appealed against.  
(4) Every appeal shall be preferred on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2005, s. 2  (w.e.f. 15 -11-2005).  3 
 5. Recovery of penalty due to Government .—Where  any penalty imposed under this Act is not 
paid, the competent authority may recover the penalty so payable by seizing, detaining or selling — 
(a) the aircraft or the ship; or  
(b) any goods on the ship or aircraft, belonging to the carrier.  
6. Bar of legal proceedings .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the 
Central Government or the competent authority or any officer of the Central Government or any other 
person exercising any p owers or discharging any functio ns or performing an y duty under this Act for 
anything in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or any rule made thereunder.  
7. Application of Acts 16 of 1939, 34 of 1920 and 31 of 1946 not barred .—The provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder shall  be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Registration of 
Foreigners Act, 1939, the Passport (Entry into Indi a) Act, 1920 and the Foreigners Act, 1946 or the rules 
or orders made thereunder.  
8. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, b y notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing po wer, such rules may 
provide for — 
(a) the fees which shall be paid for appeals under s ub-section ( 4) of section 4; 
(b) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
9. Rule s to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or i n two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Hou ses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should no t be ma de, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annu lment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule.  
10. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, do anything n ot inconsistent with such provisions for the 
purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of two years fro m the commencement of 
this Act. 
(2) Every order under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament.  
--------------------------The Information Technology Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000  
––––––––– 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
––––––– –– 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application.  
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
DIGITAL SIGNATURE  AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE  
3. Authentication of electronic records.  
3A. Electronic signature.  
CHAPTER  III 
ELECTRONIC  GOVERNANCE  
4. Legal recognition of electronic records.  
5. Legal recognition of electronic signatures.  
6. Use of electronic records and electronic signatures in Government and its agencies.  
6A. Delivery of services by service provider.  
7. Retention of electronic records.  
7A. Audit of documents , etc., maintained in electronic form.  
8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette.  
9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document  should be accepted in electronic form.  
10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of electronic signature.  
10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means.  
CHAPTER  IV 
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGEMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS  
11. Attribution of electronic records.  
12. Acknowledg ment of receipt.  
13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record.  
CHAPTER  V 
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND SECURE ELECTRONIC  SIGNATURE  
14. Secure electronic record.  
15. Secure electronic signature.  
16. Security procedure s and p ractices.  
CHAPTER VI  
REGULATION OF  CERTIFYING  AUTHORITIES  
17. Appointment of Controller and other officers.  
18. Functions of Controller.  
19. Recognition of foreign Certifying Authorities.  
20. [Omitted .] 
21. Licence to issue electronic  signature Certificates.  
22. Application for licence.  
23. Renewal of licence.  
24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence.  
25. Suspension of licence.  
26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence.  2 
 SECTIONS  
27. Power to delegate.  
28. Power to investigate contraventions.  
29. Access to computers and data.  
30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures.  
31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, etc.  
32. Display of licence.  
33. Surrender of licence.  
34. Disclosure.  
CHAPTER VII  
ELECTRONIC  SIGNATURE CERTIFICATES  
35. Certifying authority to issue electronic signature Certificate.  
36. Representations upon issuance of Digital signature Certificate.  
37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate.  
38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate.  
39. Notice of suspension or revocation.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS  
40. Generatin g key pair.  
40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate.  
41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate.  
42. Control of private key.  
CHAPTER IX  
PENALTIES , COMPENSATION  AND ADJUDICATION  
43. Penalty and compensation for damage to computer, computer system, etc.  
43A. Compensation for failure to protect data.  
44. Penalty for failure to furnish information, return, etc.  
45. Residuary penalty.  
46. Power to adjudicate.  
47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer.  
CHAPTER X  
THE APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
48. Appellate Tribunal.  
49. [Omitted .] 
50. [Omitted .] 
51. [Omitted .] 
52. [Omitted .] 
52A. [Omitted .] 
52B. [Omitted .] 
52C. [Omitted .] 
52D. Decision by majority.  
53.  [Omitted .] 
54. [Omitted .] 
55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings.  
56. [Omitted .] 
57. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.  
58. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal.  
59. Right to legal representation.  
60. Limitation.  
61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.  
62. Appeal to High Court.  
63. Compounding of contraventions.  3 
 SECTIONS  
64. Recovery of penalty  or compensation . 
CHAPTER XI  
OFFENCES  
65. Tampering with computer source documents.  
66. Computer related offences.  
66A. Punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, etc.  
66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication device.  
66C. Punishment for identity theft.  
66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource.  
66E. Punishment for violation of privacy.  
66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism.  
67.   Punishment for publishing or transmitting obs cene material in electronic form.  
67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material containing sexually explicit act, etc., in 
electronic form.  
67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually explicit act,  
etc., in electronic form.  
67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries.  
68. Power of Controller to give directions.  
69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information through 
any computer resource.  
69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any 
computer resource.  
69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or information through any computer 
resource for cyber security.  
70. Protected system.  
70A. National nodal agency.  
70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national agency for incident response.  
71. Penalty for misrepresentation.  
72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy.  
72A. Punishment for disclosure of information in brea ch of lawful contract.  
73. Penalty for publishing electronic signature Certificate false in certain particulars.  
74. Publication for fraudulent purpose.  
75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India.  
76. Confiscation.  
77. Compensation, penalties or con fiscation not to interfere with other punishment.  
77A. Compounding of offences.  
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable.  
78. Power to investigate offences.  
CHAPTER XII  
INTERMEDIARIES NOT  TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES  
79. Exemption from liability  of intermediary in certain cases.  
CHAPTER XIIA  
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE  
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence.  
CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc.  
81. Act to have over riding effect.  
81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque.  
82. Controller, Deputy Controller and Assistant Controller to be public servants . 
83. Power to give directions.  4 
 SECTIONS  
84. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
84A. Modes or methods for encryption.  
84B. Punishment for abetment of offences.  
84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences.  
85. Offences by companies.  
86. Removal of difficulties.  
87. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
88. Constitution of Advisory Committee.  
89. Power of Contro ller to make regulations.  
90. Power of State Government to make rules.  
91. [Omitted ]. 
92. [Omitted ]. 
93. [Omitted ]. 
94. [Omitted ]. 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  [Omitted. ] 
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  [Omitted. ] 
  5 
 THE INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 21 OF 2000  
[9th June , 2000 .] 
An Act to provide legal recognition for transactions carried out by means of electronic data 
interchange and other means of electronic communication, commonly referred to as 
“electronic commerce ”, which involve the use of alternatives to paper -based methods of 
communication and storage of information, to facilitate electronic filing of documents with 
the Government agencies and further to amend the Indian Penal Code, the Indian Evidence 
Act, 1872, the Banker ’s Books Evid ence Act, 1891 and the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 
and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto . 
WHEREAS  the General Assembly of the United Nations by resolution A/RES/51/162, dated  the 30th 
January, 1997 has adopted the Model Law on Elect ronic Commerce adopted by the United Nations 
Commission on International Trade Law;  
AND WHEREAS  the said resolution recommends inter alia , that all States give favourable 
consideration to the said Model Law when they enact or revise their laws, in view of the need for 
uniformity of the law applicable to alternatives to paper -based methods of communication and storage of 
information;  
AND WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to give effect to the said resolution and to promote efficient 
delivery of Government services by means  of reliable electronic records.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER 1  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, commencement and application. —(1) This Act may be called the 
Information Technology Act, 2000.  
(2) It shall extend to the whole of India and, save as otherwise provided in this Act, it applies also to 
any offence  or contravention thereunder committed outside India by any person.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notificati on, appoint and 
different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any referen ce in any such 
provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to the commencement of that 
provision.  
2[(4) Nothing in this Act shall apply to documents or transactions specified in the First Schedule : 
Provided that the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First 
Schedule by way of addition  or deletion of entries thereto.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “access ” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means gaining entry into, 
instructing or communicating with the logical, arithmetical , or memory function resources of a 
computer, compu ter system or computer network;  
(b) “addressee ” means a person who is intended by the originator to receive the electronic record 
but does not include any intermediary;  
(c) “adjudicating officer ” means an adjudicating officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 46;  
  
                                                           
1. 17 th October, 2000, vide notification No. G.S.R. 788 (E), dated 17 th October, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,      
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 3, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  6 
 (d) “affixing 1[electronic signature] ” with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions 
means adoption of any methodology or procedure by a person for the purpose of authenticating an 
electronic record by means of digital signature;  
2[(da) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribun al referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 
48;] 
(e) “appropriate Government ” means as respects any matter, – 
(i) enumerated in List II of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution;  
(ii) relating to any State law enacted under List III of the Sevent h Schedule to the 
Constitution,  
the State Government and in any other case, the Central Government;  
(f) “asymmetric crypto system ” means a system of a secure key p air consisting of a private key 
for creating a digital signature and a public key to verify the  digital signature;  
(g) “Certifying Authority ” means a person who has be en granted a licence to issue a 1[electronic 
signature] Certificate under section 24;  
(h) “certification practice statement ” means a statement issued by a Certifying Authority to 
specify the practices that the Certifyi ng Authority employs in issuing 1[electronic signature] 
Certificates;  
3[(ha) “communication device ” means cell phones, personal digital assistance or combination of 
both or any other device used to communicate, send or transmit any text, video, audio or image;]  
(i) “computer ” means any electronic, magnetic, optical or other high -speed data processing device 
or system which performs logical, arithmetic , and memory f unctions by manipulations of electronic, 
magnetic or optical impulses, and includes all input, output, processing, storage, computer software or 
communication facilities which are connected or related to the computer in a computer system or 
computer networ k; 
4[(j) “computer network ” means the inter -connection of one or more compute rs or computer 
systems  or communication device  through – 
(i) the use of satellite, microwave, terrestrial line, wire, wireless or other communication 
media; and  
(ii) terminals  or a complex consisting of two or more interconnected computers or 
communic ation  device  whether or not the inter -connecti on is continuously maintained;]  
(k) “computer resource ” means computer, computer system, computer network, data, computer 
data base or  software;  
(l) “computer system ” means a device or collection of devices, including input and output support 
devices and excluding calculators which are not programmable and capable of being used in 
conjunction with external files , which contain computer p rogrammes, electronic instructions, input 
data and output data , that performs logic, arithmetic, data storage and retrieval, communication 
control and other functions;  
(m) “Controller ” means the Controller of Certifying Authorities appointed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 17;  
5*   *   *  *   * 
  
2[(na) “cyber cafe ” means any facility from where access to the internet is offered by any person 
in the ordinary course of busine ss to the members of the public ; 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
3. Ins. by  Act 10 of 2009, s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Clause ( n) omitted by  Act 7 of 2017, s.169 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 7 
 (nb) “cyber security ” means protecting information, equipment , devices, computer, computer 
resource, communication device and information stored therein from unauthorised access, use, 
disclosure, disruption, modification  or destruction; ] 
(o) “data” means a representation of in formation, knowledge, facts, concepts or instructions 
which are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised manner, and is intended to be 
processed, is being processed or has been processed in a computer system or computer network, and 
may be in a ny form (including computer printouts magnetic or optical storage media, punched cards, 
punched tapes) or stored internally in the memory of the computer;  
(p) “digital signature ” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by means of 
an electronic method or procedure in accordance with the provisions of section 3;  
(q) “Digital Signature Certificate ” means a Digital Signature Certificate issued under sub -section 
(4) of section 35;  
(r) “electronic form ” with reference to information, means any information generated, sent, 
received or stored in media, magnetic, optical, computer memory, micro film, comp uter generated 
micro fiche or similar device;  
(s) “Electronic Gazette ” means the Official Gazette published in the electronic form;  
(t) “electronic record ” means data, record or data generated, image or sound stored, received or 
sent in an electronic form or micro film or computer generated micro fiche;  
1[(ta) “electronic signature ” means authentication of any electronic record by a subscriber by 
means of the electronic technique specified in the Second Schedule and includes digital signature;  
(tb) “Electro nic Signature Certificate ” means an Electronic Signature Certificate issued under 
section 35 and includes Digital Signature Certificate; ] 
(u) “function ”, in relation to a computer, includes logic, control, arithmetical process, deletion, 
storage and retrieval and communication or telecommunication from or within a computer;  
1[(ua) Indian Computer Emergency Response Team ” means an agency established under sub -
section ( 1) of Section 7 0B;] 
(v) “information ” includes 2[data, message, text,] images, sound,  voice, codes, computer 
programmes, software and data bases or micro film or computer generated micro fiche;  
3[(w) “intermediary ”, with respect to any particular electronic records, means any person who on 
behalf of another person receives, stores or transmits that record or provides any service with respect 
to that record and includes telecom service providers, network service providers, internet service 
providers, web -hosting service providers, search engines, online payment sites, online -auction sit es, 
onlin e-market places and cyber cafes; ] 
(x) “key pair ”, in an asymmetric crypto system, means a private key and its mathematically 
related public key, which are so related that the public key can verify a digital signature created by the 
private key;  
(y) “law” includes any Act of Parliament or of a State Legislature, Ordinances promulgated by the 
President or a Governor, as the case may be, Regulations made by the President under article 240, 
Bills enacted as President's Act under sub -clause ( a) of claus e (1) of article 357 of the Constitution 
and includes rules, regulations, bye -laws and orders issued or made thereunder;  
(z) “licence ” means a licence granted to a Certifying Authority under section 24;  
(za) “originator ” means a person who sends, generates , stores or t ransmits any electronic message  
or causes any electronic message to be sent, generated, stored or transmitted to any other person but 
does not include an intermediary;  
(zb) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(zc) “private key ” means the key of a key pair used to create a digital signature;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 4 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for “data, text” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( w) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  8 
 (zd) “public key ” means the key of a key pair used to verify a digital signature and listed in the 
Digital Signature Certificate;  
(ze) “secure system ” means computer hardware , software, and procedure that – 
(a) are reasonably secure from unauthorised access and misuse;  
(b) provide a reasonable level of reliability and correct operation;  
(c) are reasonably suited to performing the intended functions; and  
(d) adhere to generally accep ted security procedures;  
(zf) “security procedure ” means the security procedure prescribed under section 16 by the Central 
Government;  
(zg) “subscriber ” means a person in whose name the 1[electronic signature] Certificate is issued;  
(zh) “verify ”, in relation to a digital signature, electronic record or public key, with its 
grammatical variations and cognate expressio ns, means to determine whether – 
(a) the initial electronic record was affixed with the digital signature by the use of private key 
corres ponding to the public key of the subscriber;  
(b) the initial electronic record is retained intact or has been altered since such electronic 
record was so affixed with the digital signature.  
(2) Any reference in this Act to any enactment or any provision th ereof shall, in relation to an area in 
which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference to the corresponding 
law or the relevant provision of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area . 
CHAPTER II  
2[DIGITAL SIGN ATURE  AND ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE ] 
3. Authentication of electronic records. –(1) Subject to the provisions of this section any subscriber 
may authenticate an electronic record by affixing his digital signature.  
(2) The authentication of the electronic record shall be effected by the use of asymmetric crypto 
system and hash function which envelop and transform the initial electronic record into another electronic 
record.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this sub -section, “hash function ” means an algorithm mappi ng or 
translation of one sequence of bits into another, generally smaller, set known as “hash result ” such that an 
electronic record yields the same hash result every time the algorithm is executed with the same electronic 
record as its input making  it com putationally infeasible – 
(a) to derive or reconstruct the original electronic record from the hash result produced by the 
algorithm;  
(b) that two electronic records can produce the same hash result using the algorithm.  
(3) Any person by the use of a public  key of the subscriber can verify the electronic record.  
(4) The private key and the public key are unique to the subscriber and constitute a functioning key 
pair. 
3[3A. Electronic signature. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 3, but subject  to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), a subscriber may authenticate any electronic record by such electronic 
signature or electronic  authentication technique which — 
(a) is considered reliable; and  
(b) may be specified in the Second Schedule.  
(2) For the p urposes of this section any electronic signature or electronic authentication technique 
shall be considered reliable if — 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for the heading “D IGITAL  SIGNATURE ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009). 
3. Ins. by s. 6, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  9 
 (a) the signature creation data or the authentication data are, within the context in which they are 
used, lin ked to the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and to no other person;  
(b) the signature creation data or the authentication data were, at the time of signing, under the 
control of the signatory or, as the case may be, the authenticator and of no other person;  
(c) any alteration to the electronic signature made after affixing such signature is detectable;  
(d) any alteration to the information made after its authentication by electronic signature is 
detectable; and  
(e) it fulfils such other conditions which may be pr escribed.  
(3) The Central Government may prescribe the procedure for the purpose of ascertaining whether 
electronic signature is that of the person by whom it is purported to have been affixed or authenticated.  
(4) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, add to or omit any 
electronic signature or electronic authentication technique and the procedure for affixing such signature 
from the Second Schedule:  
Provided that no electronic signature or authentication technique s hall be specified in the Second 
Schedule unless such signature or technique is reliable.  
(5) Every notification issued under sub -section ( 4) shall be laid before each House of Parliament.]  
CHAPTER III  
ELECTRONIC GOVERNANCE  
4. Legal recognition of electroni c records .—Where any law provides that information or any other 
matter shall be in writing or in the typewritten or printed form, then, notwithstanding anything contained 
in such law, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if  such information or matter is – 
(a) rendered or made available in an electronic form; and  
(b) accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent reference.  
5. Legal recognition of 1[electronic signatures ].—Where any law provides that information or any 
other matter shall be authenticated by affixing the signature or any document shall be signed or bear the 
signature of any person, then, notwithstanding anything contained in such law, such requirement shall b e 
deemed to have been satisfied, if such information or matter is authenticated by means of 1[electronic  
signature ] affixed in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, “signed ”, with its grammatical variations and cognate 
expressions, shall, with reference to a person, mean affixing of his hand written signature or any mark on 
any document and the expression “signature ” shall be construed accordingly.  
6. Use of electronic record s and 1[electronic signatures ] in Government and its agencies .–(1) 
Where any law provides for — 
(a) the filing of any form, application or any other document with any office, authority, body or 
agency owned or controlled by the appropriate Government in a particular manner;  
(b) the issue or grant of any licence, permit, sanction or approval by whatever name called in a 
particular manner;  
(c) the receipt or payment of money in a particular manner,  
then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for  the time being in force, such requirement 
shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment, as the case may be, 
is effected by means of such electronic form as may be prescribed by the appropriate Government.  
(2) The  appropriate Government may, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), by rules, prescribe — 
(a) the manner and format in which such electronic records shall be filed, created or issued;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “digital signatures”  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  10 
 (b) the  manner or method of payment of any fee or charges for filing, creation or issue any 
electronic record under clause ( a). 
1[6A. Delivery of services by service provider .—(1) The appropriate Government may, for the 
purposes of this Chapter and for efficient delivery of services to the public through electronic means 
authorise, by order, any service provider to set up, maintain and upgrade the computerised facilities and 
perform such other services as it may specify, by notification in the Official Gazette.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, service provider so authorised includes any 
individual, private agency, private company, partnership firm, sole proprietor firm or any such other body 
or agency which has been granted permission by the appropria te Government to offer services through 
electronic means in accordance with the policy governing such service sector.  
(2) The appropriate Government may also authorise any service provider authorised under             
sub-section ( 1) to collect, retain and  appropriate such service charges, as may be prescribed by the 
appropriate Government for the purpose of providing such services, from the person availing such 
service.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the appropriate Government may author ise the service 
providers to collect, retain and appropriate service charges under this section notwithstanding the fact that 
there is no express provision under the Act, rule, regulation or notification under which the service is 
provided to collect, reta in and appropriate e -service charges by the service providers.  
(4) The appropriate Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the scale of 
service charges which may be charged and collected by the service providers under this sectio n: 
Provided that the appropriate Government may specify different scale of service charges for different 
types of services.]  
7. Retention of electronic records .—(1) Where any law provides that documents, records or 
information shall be retained for any specific period, then, that requirement shall be deemed to have been 
satisfied if such documents, records or information are retai ned in the electronic form, if — 
(a) the information contained therein remains accessible so as to be usable for a subsequent 
reference;  
(b) the electronic record is retained in the format in which it was originally generated, sent or 
received or in a format which can be demonstrated to represent accurately the information originally 
generated, sent or received;  
(c) the  details which will facilitate the identification of the origin, destination, date and time of 
despatch or receipt of such electronic record are available in the electronic record:  
Provided  that this clause does not apply to any information which is automa tically generated 
solely for the purpose of enabling an electronic record to be despatched or received.  
(2) Nothing in this section shall apply to any law that expressly provides for the retention of 
documents, records or information in the form of electro nic records.  
2[7A. Audit of documents , etc., maintained in electronic form .—Where in any law for the time 
being in force, there is a provision for audit of documents, records or information, that provision shall also 
be applicable for audit of documents, records or information processed and main tained in the electronic 
form.]  
8. Publication of rule, regulation, etc., in Electronic Gazette .—Where any law provides that any 
rule, regulation, order, bye -law, notification or any other matter shall be published in the Official Gazette, 
then, such requirement shall be deemed to have been satisfied if such rule, regulation, order, bye -law, 
notification or any other matter is published in the Official Gazette or Electronic Gazette:  
Provided that where any rule, regu lation, order, by -law, notification or any other matter is published 
in the Official Gaze tte or Electronic Gazette, the date of publication shall be deemed to be the date of the 
Gazette which was first published in any form.  
9. Sections 6, 7 and 8 not to confer right to insist document should be accepted in electronic 
form .—Nothing contained in sections 6, 7 and 8 shall confer a right upon any person to insist that any 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 7 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  11 
 Ministry or Department of the Central Government or the State Government or any authorit y or body 
established by or under any law or controlled or funded by the Central or State Government should 
accept, issue, create, retain and preserve any document in the form of electronic records or effect any 
monetary transaction in the electronic form.  
10. Power to make rules by Central Government in respect of 1[electronic signature ].—The 
Central Government may, for the purposes of  this Act, by rules, prescribe — 
(a) the type of 1[electronic signature];  
(b) the manner and format in which the 1[electronic  signature] shall be affixed;  
(c) the manner or procedure which facilitates identification of the person affixing the 1[electronic 
signature];  
(d) control  processes and procedures to ensure adequate integrity, security and confidentiality of 
electronic records or payments; and  
(e) any other matter which is ne cessary to give legal effect to 1[electronic  signatures].  
2[10A. Validity of contracts formed through electronic means .—Where in a contract formation, 
the communication of proposals, the acceptance of proposals, the revocation of proposals and 
acceptances , as the case may be, are expressed in electronic form or by means of an electronic records, 
such contract shall not be deemed to be unenforceable solely on the ground that such electronic form or 
means was used for that purpose.]  
CHAPTER IV  
ATTRIBUTION, ACKNOWLEDGMENT AND DESPATCH OF ELECTRONIC RECORDS  
11. Attribution of electronic records .—An elec tronic record shall be  attributed to the originator — 
(a) if it was sent by the originator himself;  
(b) by a person who had the authority to act on behalf of the originator in respect of that 
electronic record; or  
(c) by  an information system programmed by or on behalf of the originator to operate 
automatically.  
12. Acknowledg ment of receipt .—(1) Where the originator has not 3[stipulated ] that the 
acknowledg ment of receipt of electronic record be given in a particular form or by a p articular method, an 
acknowledg ment may be given by — 
(a) any communication by the addressee, automated or otherwise; or  
(b) any conduct of the addressee, sufficient to indicate to the originator that the electronic record 
has been received.  
(2) Where the originator has stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on receipt of an 
acknowledgment of such electronic record  by him, then unless acknowledg ment has been so received, the 
electronic record shall he deemed to have been ne ver sent by the originator.  
(3) Where the originator has not stipulated that the electronic record shall be binding only on re ceipt 
of such acknowledgment, and the acknowledg ment has not been received by the originator within the 
time specified or agreed o r, if no time has been specified or agreed to within a reasonable time, then the 
originator may give notice to the addressee  stating that no acknowledg ment has been received by him and 
specifying a reasonab le time by which the acknowledg ment must be recei ved by him and if no 
acknowledg ment is received within the aforesaid time limit he may after giving notice to the addressee, 
treat the electronic record as though it has never been sent.  
13. Time and place of despatch and receipt of electronic record .—(1) Save as otherwise agreed to 
between the originator and the addressee, the despatch of an electronic record occurs when it enters a 
computer resource outside the control of the originator.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s.  2, for “ digital  signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 10, ibid., for  “agreed with the addressee ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  12 
 (2) Save  as  otherwise   agreed   between the originator and   the  addressee, the   time  of  receipt of an  
electronic record shall be determined as follows, namely: — 
(a) if the addressee has designated a computer resource for the purpose of  receiving electronic 
records, — 
(i) receipt  occurs at the time when the electronic record enters the designated computer 
resource; or  
(ii) if the electronic record is sent to a computer resource of the addressee that is not the 
designated computer resource, receipt occurs at the time when the elect ronic record is retrieved 
by the addressee;  
(b) if the addressee has not designated a computer resource along with specified timings, if any, 
receipt occurs when the electronic record enters the computer resource of the addressee.  
(3) Save as otherwise agr eed to between the originator and the addressee, an electronic record is 
deemed to be despatched at the place where the originator has his place of business, and is deemed to be 
received at the place where the addressee has his place of business.  
(4) The p rovisions of sub -section ( 2) shall apply notwithstanding that the place where the computer 
resource is located may be different from the place where the electronic record is deemed to have been 
received under sub -section ( 3). 
(5) For  the purposes of this s ection, – 
(a) if the originator or the addressee has more than one place of business, the principal place of 
business, shall be the place of business;  
(b) if the originator or the addressee does not have a place of business, his usual place of 
residence sha ll be deemed to be the place of business;  
(c) “usual place of residence ”, in relation to a body corporate, means the place where it is 
registered.  
CHAPTER V  
SECURE ELECTRONIC RECORDS AND  SECURE 1[ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE ] 
14. Secure electronic record .—Where any security procedure has been applied to an electronic 
record at a specific point of time, then such record shall he deemed to be a secure electronic record from 
such point of time to the time of verification.  
2[15. Secure electronic signature .—An electronic signature shall be deemed to be a secure electronic 
signature if — 
(i) the signature creation data, at the time of affixing signature, was under the exclusive control of 
signatory and no other person; and  
(ii) the signature creation data was sto red and affixed in such exclusive manner as may be 
prescribed.  
Explanation. –In case of digital signature, the “signature creation data ” means the  private key of the 
subscriber.  
16. Security procedure s and p ractices .—The Central Government may, for the purposes of sections 
14 and 15, prescribe the security procedures and practices:  
Provided that in prescribing such security procedures and practices, the Central Government shall 
have regard to the commercial circumstances, nature of transactions and such other related factors as it 
may consider appropriate.]  
CHAPTER VI  
REGULATION OF CERTIFYING AUTHORITIES  
17. Appointment of Controller and other officers .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a Controller of Certifying Authorities for the purposes of this  
Act and may also by the same or subsequent notification appoint suc h number of Deputy Controllers  
3[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees]   as it deems fit.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ digital  signature s” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s 11 , ibid.,  for sections 15 and 16 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for “and Assistant Controllers ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  13 
 (2) The Controller shall discharge his functions under this Act subject to the general control and 
directions of the Central Government.  
(3) The Deputy Controllers and Assistant Controllers shall perform the functions assigned to them by 
the Controller under the general superintendence and control of the Controller.  
(4) The qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Controller, Deputy 
Controllers 1[,Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] shall be such as may be prescribed by 
the Central Government.  
(5) The Head Office and Branch Office of the office of the Controller shall be at such places as the 
Central Government may specify, and these may be established at such places as the Central Government 
may think fit.  
(6) There shall be a seal of the Office of t he Controller.  
18. Functions of Controller .—The Controller may perform all or any of th e following functions, 
namely: – 
(a) exercising supervision over the activities of the Certifying Authorities;  
(b) certifying public keys of the Certifying Authorities;  
(c) laying down the standards to be maintained by the Certifying Authorities;  
(d) specifying the qualifications and experience which employees of the Certifying Authority 
should possess;  
(e) specifying the conditions subject to which the Certifying Authorit ies shall conduct their 
business;  
(f) specifying the contents of written, printed or visual materials and advertisements that may be 
distributed or used in respect of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the public key;  
(g) speci fying  the form and content of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate and the key;  
(h) specifying the form and manner in which accounts shall be maintained by the Certifying 
Authorities;  
(i) specifying the terms and conditions subject to which auditors may be app ointed and the 
remuneration to be paid to them;  
(j) facilitating the establishment of any electronic system by a Certifying Authority either solely 
or jointly with other Certifying Authorities and regulation of such systems;  
(k) specifying the manner in wh ich the Certifying Authorities shall conduct their dealings with the 
subscribers;  
(l) resolving any conflict of interests between the Certifying Authorities and the subscribers;  
(m) laying down the duties of the Certifying Authorities;  
(n) maintaining a da ta base containing the disclosure record of every Certifying Authority 
containing such particulars as may be specified by regulations, which shall be accessible to public.  
19. Recognition of foreign Certifying Authorities .—(1) Subject to such conditions and restrictions 
as may be specified by regulations, the Controller may with the previous approval of the Central 
Government, and by notification in the Official Gazette, recognise any foreign Certifying Authority as a 
Certifying Authority for the purposes  of this Act.  
(2) Where any Certifying Authority is recognised under sub -section ( 1), the 2[electronic signature] 
Certificate issued by such Certifying Authority shall be valid for the purposes of this Act.  
(3) The Controller may, if he is satisfied that a ny Certifying Authority has contravened any of the 
conditions and restrictions subject to which it was granted recognition under sub -section ( 1) he may, for 
reasons to be recorded in writing, by notification in the Official Gazette, revoke such recognition .  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 12, for “ Assistant Controllers ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “Digital Signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  14 
 20. [Controller to act as repository .] Omitted by the Information Technology  (Amendment ) Act, 
2008 (10 of 2009), s. 13 ( w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
21. Licence to issue 1[electronic  signature ] Certificates .—(1) Subject to the provisions of              
sub-section ( 2), any person may make an application , to the Controller , for a licence to issue 1[electronic  
signature ] Certificates.  
(2) No licence shall be issued under sub -section ( 1), unless the applicant fulfil s such requirements 
with respect to qualification, expertise, manpower, financial resources and other infrastructure facilities, 
which ar e necessary to issue 1[electronic signature]  Certificates as may be presc ribed by the Central 
Government.  
(3) A licence gr anted under this section shall — 
(a) be valid for such period as may be prescribed by the Central Government;  
(b) not be transferable or heritable;  
(c) be subject to such terms and conditions as may be specified by the regulations.  
22. Application for licence .—(1) Every application for iss ue of a licence shall be in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every application for issue of a licence shall be accompanied by — 
(a) a ce rtification practice statement;  
(b) a statement including the procedures with respect to i dentification of the applicant;  
(c) payment of such fees, not exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees as may be prescr ibed by the 
Central Government;  
(d) such other documents, as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
23. Renewal of licence .—An application for renewal of a licence shall be — 
(a) in such form;  
(b) accompanied by such fees, not exceeding five thousand rupees, as may be prescribed by the 
Central Government and shall be made not less than forty -five days before the date of expiry of the 
period of validity of the licence.  
24. Procedure for grant or rejection of licence .—The Controller may, on receipt of an application 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 21, after considering the documents accompanying the application and 
such other factor s, as he deems fit, grant the licence or reject the application:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected under this section unless the applicant has been given a 
reasonable opportunity of presenting his case.  
25. Suspension of licence .—(1) The Contr oller may, if he is satisfied after making such inquiry, as 
he may think fit, t hat a Certifying Authority has — 
(a) made  a statement in, or in relation to, the application for the issue or renewal of the licence, 
which is incorrect or false in material particulars;  
(b) failed to comply with the terms and conditions subject to which the licence was granted;  
2[(c) failed to maintain the procedures and standards specified in section 30;]  
 (d) contravened any provisions of this Act, rule, regu lation or order made thereunder,  
revoke the licence:  
Provided that no licence shall be revoked unless the Certifying Authority has been g iven a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the proposed revocation.  
(2) The Controller may, if he has reasonable cause to believe that there is any ground for revoking a 
licence under sub -section ( 1), by order suspend such licence pending the c ompletion of any enquiry 
ordered by him:  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “Digital Signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E)  (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002 ). 15 
 Provided that no licence shall be suspended for a period exceeding ten days unless the Certifying 
Authority has been given a reasonable opportunity of showing cause against the proposed suspension.  
(3) No Certifying  Authority whose licence has been suspended shall issue any 1[electronic signature] 
Certificate during such suspension.  
26. Notice of suspension or revocation of licence .—(1) Where the licence  of the Certifying 
Authority is suspended or revoked, the Controller shall publish notice of such suspension or revocation, 
as the case may be, in t he data base maintained by him.  
(2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Controller shall publi sh notices of such 
suspension or revocation, as the case ma y be, in all such repositories:  
Provided that the data base containing the notice of such suspension or revocation, as the case may 
be, shall be made available through a web site which shall be acc essible round the clock:  
Provided further that the Controller may, if he considers necessary, publicise the contents of data base 
in such electronic or other media, as he may consider appropriate.  
27. Power to delegate .—The Controller may, in writing, auth orise the Deputy Controller, Assistant 
Controller or any officer to exercise any of the powers of the Controller under this Chapter.  
28. Power to investigate contraventions .—(1) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in 
this behalf shall take up for investigation any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or 
regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The Controller or any officer authorised by him in this behalf shall  exercise the like powers which 
are conferred on Income -tax authorities under Chapter XIII of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), and 
shall exercise such powers, subject to such limita tions laid down under that Act.  
29. Access to computers and data .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 69, the Controller or any person authorised by him shall, if he has reasonable cause to suspect that 
2[any contravention of the provisions of this Chapter] has been committed, have access to any computer 
system, any apparatus, data or any other material connected with such system, for the purpose of 
searching or causing a search to be made for obtaining any information or data contained in or available 
to such computer system.  
(2) For the p urposes of sub -section ( 1), the Controller or any person authorised by him may, by order, 
direct any person in charge of, or otherwise concerned with the operation of, the computer system, data 
apparatus or material, to provide him with such reasonable tec hnical and other assistance as he may 
consider necessary.  
30. Certifying Authority to follow certain procedures .—Every Certifying Authority shall, — 
(a) make use of hardware, software and procedures that are secure from intrusion and misuse;  
(b) provide  a reasonable level of reliability in its services which are reasonably suited to the 
performance of intended functions;  
(c) adhere to security procedures to ensure that the secrecy and privacy of the 1[electronic 
signatures] are assured; 3*** 
4[(ca) be the repository of all electronic signature Certificates issued under this Act;  
(cb) publish information regarding its practices, electronic signature Certificates and current 
status of such certificates; and  ] 
(d) observe such other standards as may b e specified by regulations.  
31. Certifying Authority to ensure compliance of the Act, etc .—Every Certifying Authority shall 
ensure that every person employed or otherwise engaged by it complies, in the course of his employment 
or engagement, with the provisions of this Act, rules, regulations and orders made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “Digital Signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “any contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules and regulations  made  thereunder”                
(w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. The word “and” omitted by s. 15 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Ins. by s. 15, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  16 
 32. Display of licence .—Every Certifying Authority shall display its licence at a conspicuous place 
of the premises in which it carries on its business.  
33. Surrender of licence .—(1) Every Certifying Authority whose licence is suspended or revoked 
shall immediately after such susp ension or revocation, surrender  the licence to the Controller.  
(2) Where any Certifying Authority fails to surrender a licence under sub -section ( 1), the person in 
whose favour a licence is issued, shall be guilty of an offence and shall be punished with imprisonment 
which may extend up to six months or a fine which may extend up to ten thousand  rupees or with both.  
34. Disclosure .–(1) Every Certifying Authority shall disclose in the m anner specified by 
regulations — 
(a) its 1[electronic signature] Certificate 2***; 
(b) any certification practice statement relevant thereto;  
(c) notice of the revocation or suspension of its Certifying Authority certificate, if any; and  
(d) any other fact that materially and adversely affects either the relia bility of a 1[electronic signature] 
Certificate, which that Authority has issued, or the Authority's ability to perform its services.  
(2) Where in the opinion of the Certifying Authority any event has occurred or any situation has 
arisen which may materially and adversely affect the integrity of its computer system or the conditions 
subject to which a 1[electronic signature] Certificate was granted, then, the Certifying Authority shall – 
(a) use reasonable efforts to notify any person  who is likely to be affected by that occurrence; or  
(b) act in accordance with the procedure specified in its certification practice statement to deal 
with such event or situation.  
CHAPTERVII  
1[ELECTRONIC  SIGNATURE ] CERTIFICATE S 
35. Certifying authority to issue 1[electronic signature ] Certificate .—(1) Any person may make an 
application to the Certifying Authority for the issue of a 1[electronic signature] Certificate in such form as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government.  
(2) Every such application shall be accompanied by such fee not exceeding twenty -five thousand 
rupees as may be prescribed by the Central Government, to be paid to the Certifying Authority:  
Provided that while prescribing fees under sub -section ( 2) different f ees may be prescribed for 
different classes of applicants.  
(3) Every such application shall be accompanied by a certification practice statement or where there is 
no such statement, a statement containing such particulars, as may be specified by regulation s. 
(4) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Certifying Authority may, after 
consideration of the certification practice statement or the other statement under sub -section ( 3) and after 
making such enquiries as it may deem fit, grant the 1[electronic signature] Certificate or for reasons to be 
recorded in writing, reject the application:  
3*   *   *   *   * 
4[Provided] that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against  the proposed rejection.  
36. Representations upon issuance of Digital Signature Certificate .—A Certifying Authority 
while issuing a Digital Signature Certificate shall cert ify that — 
(a) it has complied with the provisions of this Act and the rules and regu lations made thereunder;  
(b) it has published the Digital Signature Certificate or otherwise made it available to such person 
relying on it and the subscriber has ac cepted it;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2, for “ Digital Signature ”  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Certain words omitted by s. 16, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. The first proviso omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 17, ibid., for “Provided further” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  17 
 (c) the  subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key, listed in the Digital 
Signature Certificate;  
1[(ca) the subscriber holds a private key which is capable of creating a digital signature;  
(cb) the public key to be listed in the certificate can be used to verify a digital signature affixed by 
the private key held by the subscriber;]  
(d) the subscriber's public key and private key constitute a functioning key pair;  
(e) the information contained in the Digital Signature Certificate is accurate;  and 
(f) it has no knowledge of any material fact, which if it had been included in the Digital Signature 
Certificate would adversely affect the reliability of the representations in clauses ( a) to ( d). 
37. Suspension of Digital Signature Certificate .–(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
Certifying Authority which has issued a Digital Signature Certificate may suspend such Digital Signature 
Certificate, – 
(a) on receipt of a request to that effect from – 
(i) the subscriber listed in the Di gital Signature Certificate; or  
(ii) any person duly authorised to ac t on behalf of that subscriber;  
(b) if it is of opinion that the Digital Signature Certificate should be suspended in public interest.  
(2) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be sus pended for a period exceeding fifteen days unless 
the subscriber has been given an opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
(3) On suspension of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall 
communicate the same to the  subscriber.  
38. Revocation of Digital Signature Certificate .–(1) A Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital 
Signature Certificate issued by it – 
(a) where the subscriber or any other person authorised by him mak es a request to that effect; or  
(b) upon the death of the subscriber; or  
(c) upon the dissolution of the firm or winding up of the company where the subscriber is a firm 
or a company.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3) and without prejudice to the provisions of                  
sub-section ( 1), a Certifying Authority may revoke a Digital Signature Certificate which has been issued 
by it at any time, if it is of opini on that – 
(a) a material fact represented in the Digital Signature Certificate is false or has been concealed ; 
(b) a requirement for issuance of the Digital Signature  Certificate was not satisfied;  
(c) the Certifying Authority's private key or security system was compromised in a manner 
materially affecting the Digital Signa ture Certificate's reliability;  
(d) the subscr iber has been declared insolvent or dead or where a subscriber is a firm or a 
company, which has been dissolved, wound -up or otherwise ce ased to exist.  
(3) A Digital Signature Certificate shall not be revoked unless the subscriber has been given an 
opportu nity of being heard in the matter.  
(4) On revocation of a Digital Signature Certificate under this section, the Certifying Authority shall 
communicate the same to the subscriber.  
39. Notice of suspension or revocation .–(1) Where a Digital Signature Certifi cate is suspended or 
revoked under section 37 or section 38, the Certifying Authority shall publish a notice of such suspension 
or revocation, as the case may be, in the repository specified in the Digital Signature Certificate for 
publication of such noti ce. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 18  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  18 
 (2) Where one or more repositories are specified, the Certifying Authority shall publish notices of 
such suspension or revocation, as the case may be, in all such repositories.  
CHAPTER VIII  
DUTIES OF SUBSCRIBERS  
40. Generating key pair .–Where any Digital Signature Certificate the public key of which 
corresponds to the private key of that subscriber which is to be listed in the Digital Signature Certificate 
has been accepted by a subscriber,  1*** the subscriber shall generate  2[that key] pair by app lying the 
security procedure.  
3[40A. Duties of subscriber of Electronic Signature Certificate .–In respect of Electronic Signature 
Certificate the subscriber shall perform such duties as may be prescribed.]  
41. Acceptance of Digital Signature Certificate .–(1) A subscriber shall be deemed to have accepted 
a Digital Signature Certificate if he publishes or authorises the publication of a  Digital Signature 
Certificate – 
(a) to one or more persons;  
(b) in a repository; or  
otherwise  demonstrates his approval of the Digital Signa ture Certificate in any manner.  
(2) By accepting a Digital Signature Certificate the subscriber certifies to all who reasonably rely on 
the information contained in the Digi tal Signature Certificate that – 
(a) the subscriber holds the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital 
Signature Certificate and is entitled to hold the same;  
(b) all representations made by the subscriber to the Certifying Authority and all material relevant 
to the i nformation contained in the Digital Signature Certificate are true;  
(c) all information in the Digital Signature Certificate that is within the knowl edge of the 
subscriber is true.  
42. Control of private key .–(1) Every subscriber shall exercise reasonable care to retain control of 
the private key corresponding to the public key listed in his Digital Signature Certificate and take all steps 
to prevent its disclosure  4***. 
(2) If the private key corresponding to the public key listed in the Digital Signature Certificate has 
been compromised, then, the subscriber shall communicate the same without any delay to the Certifying 
Authority in such manner as may be specified by the regulations.  
Explanation .–For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the su bscriber shall be liable till he 
has informed the Certifying Authority that the private key has been compromised.  
CHAPTER IX  
5[PENALTIES,  COMPENSATION AND ADJUDICATION ] 
43. 6[Penalty and compensation ] for damage to computer, computer system, etc .–If any person 
without permission of the owner or any ot her person who is in charge  of a computer, compu ter system or  
computer network, – 
(a)  accesses   or  secures   access  to  such  computer,   compu ter system    or computer   network  
7[or computer resource] ; 
                                                           
1. The word “then” omitted by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
2. Subs.  ibid.,  for “the key” (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
3. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 19  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. The words “to a person not authori sed to affix the digital signature of the subscriber” omitted by notification No. S.O.1015(E) 
(w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
5. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 20,  for “P ENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
6. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “Penalty”  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
7. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  19 
 (b) downloads, copies or extracts any data, computer data base or information from such 
computer, computer system or computer network including information or data held or stored in any 
removable storage medium;  
(c) introduces or causes to be introduced any co mputer contaminant or computer virus into any 
computer, computer system or computer network;  
(d) damages or causes to be damaged any computer, computer system or computer network, data, 
computer data base or any other programmes residing in such computer, computer system or 
computer network;  
(e) disrupts or causes disruption of any computer, computer system or computer network;  
(f) denies or causes the denial of access to any person authorised to access any computer, 
computer system or computer network by a ny means;  
(g) provides any assistance to any person to facilitate access to a computer, computer system or 
computer network in contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules or regulations made 
thereunder;  
(h) charges  the services availed of by a person to the account of another person by tampering with 
or manipulating any computer, compu ter system, or computer network;  
1[(i) destroys, deletes or alters any information residing in a computer resource or diminishes its 
value or utility or affects it injuriously by any means;  
(j) steal, conceal, destroys or alters or causes any person to steal, conceal, destroy or alter any 
computer source code used for a computer resource with an intention to cause damage ;] 
2[he shall be  liable to pay damages by way of compens ation to the person so affected .] 
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(i) “computer contaminant ” means any set of computer  instructions that are designed – 
(a) to modify, destroy, record, transmit data or programme residing within a computer, 
computer system or computer network; or  
(b) by any means to usurp the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or 
computer network;  
(ii) “computer data -base” means a  representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts or 
instructions in text, image, audio, video that are being prepared or have been prepared in a formalised 
manner or have been produced by a computer, computer system or computer network and are 
intended for use in a computer, computer system or computer network;  
(iii) “computer virus ” means any computer instruction, information, data or programme that 
destroys, damages, degrades or adversely affects the performance of a computer resource or attaches 
itself to another computer resource and operates when a programme, data or instruction is executed or 
some other event takes place in that computer resource;  
(iv) “damage ” means to destroy, alter, delete, add, modify or rearrange any computer resource by 
any means.  
1[(v) “computer source code ” means the listing of programme, co mputer command s, design and 
layout and programme analysis of c omputer resource in any form.]  
3[43A. Compensation for failure to protect data .–Where a body corporate, possessing, dealing or 
handling any sensitive personal data or information in a computer resource which it owns, controls or 
operates, is negligent in implementing and maintaining reasonable security practices and procedures and 
thereby causes wrongful loss or wrongful gain to any person, such body corporate shall be liable to pay 
damages by way of compensat ion to the person so affected.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 21 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for certain words (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Ins. by s. 22, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  20 
 Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(i) “body corporate ” means any company and includes a firm, sole proprietorship or other 
association of individuals engaged in commercial or professional activities;  
(ii) “reasonable security practices and procedures ” means security practices and procedures 
designed to protect such information from unauthorised access, damage, use, modification, disclosure 
or impairment, as may be specified in an agreement between the partie s or as may be specified in any 
law for the time being in force and in the absence of such agreement or any law, such reasonable 
security practices and procedures, as may be prescribed by the Central Government in consultation 
with such professional bodies  or associations as it may deem fit;  
(iii) “sensitive personal data or information ” means such personal information as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government in consultation with such professional bodies or associations as 
it may deem fit.]  
44. Penalt y for failure to furnish information, return, etc .–If any person who is required under this 
Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder to – 
(a) furnish any document, return or report to the Controller or the Certifying Authority fails to 
furnish the sa me, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding one lakh and fifty thousan d rupees for 
each such failure;  
(b) file any return or furnish any information, books or other documents within the time specified 
therefor in the regulations fails to file return or furnish the same within the time specified therefor in 
the regulations, he shall be liable to a penalty not exceeding five thousand rupees for every day during 
which suc h failure continues;  
(c) maintain books of account or records , fails to maintain the  same, he shall be liable to a penalty 
not exceeding ten thousand rupees for every day duri ng which the failure continues.  
45. Residuary penalty .–Whoever contravenes any rules or regulations made under this Act, for the 
contravention of which no penalty has been separately provided, shall be liable to pay a compensation not 
exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees to the person affected by such contravention or a penalty not 
exceeding twenty -five thousand rupees.  
46. Power to adjudicate .–(1) For the purpose of adjudging under this Chapter whether any person 
has committed a contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation, 1[direction or 
order made thereunder which renders him liable to pay penalty or compensation ,] the Central Gov ernment 
shall, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), appoint any officer not below the rank of a Director to 
the Government of India or  an equivalent officer of a Stat e Government to be an adjudicating officer for 
holding an inquiry in the manner prescribed by the Central Government.  
2[(1A) The adjudicating officer appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall exercise jurisdiction to 
adjudicate matters in which the claim for injury or damage do es not exceed rupees five crore:  
Provided that the jurisdictio n in respect of the claim for injury or damage exceeding rupees five 
crores shall vest with the competent court .] 
(2) The adjudicating officer shall, after giving the person referred to in sub -section ( 1) a reasonable 
opportunity for making representation in the matter and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person 
has committed the contravention, he may impose such penalty or award such compensation as he thinks 
fit in accordance with the provisions of that section.  
(3) No person shall be appoint ed as an adjudicating officer unless he possesses such experience in the 
field of Information Technology and legal or judicial experience as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government.  
(4) Where more than one adjudicating officers are appointed, the Centr al Government shall specify by 
order the matters and places with respect to which such officers shall exercise their jurisdiction.  
(5) Every adjudicating officer shall have the powers of a civil court which are conferred on the 
“Appellate Tribunal ” under s ub-section ( 2) of section 58, and – 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23, for “direction or order made thereunder” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  21 
 (a) all proceedings before it shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within the meaning of 
sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860);  
(b) shall  be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of 
Crimi nal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
1[(c) shall be deemed to be a civil court for purposes of Order XXI of the Civil Procedure Code , 
1908  (5 of 1908) .] 
47. Factors to be taken into account by the adjudicating officer .–While adjudging the quantum of 
compensation under this Chapter, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the  following factors,  
namely: – 
(a) the amount of gain of unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, m ade as a result of the default;  
(b) the amount of loss caused to any per son as a result of the default;  
(c) the re petitive nature of the default.  
CHAPTER  X 
THE 2[APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL ] 
48. 3[Appellate Tribunal ].–4[(1) The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal 
established under section 14 of the Telecom Regulatory Authority of India Act, 1997  (24 of 1997) , shall, 
on and from the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance  Act, 2017  (7 of 2017),  be the 
Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and the said Appellate Tribunal shall exercise the 
jurisdiction, powers and authority confer red on it by or under this Act. ] 
(2) The Central Government 5[shall specify, by notif ication ] the matters and places in relation to 
which the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] may exercise jurisdiction.  
6[49. [Composition of Cyber Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by the Finance  Act, 2017 (7 of 2017),           
s.  169 ( w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
50. [Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson and Members of Cyber Appellate 
Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
51. [Term of office, conditions of service, etc., of Chairperson and Members .] Omitted by  s. 169,  
ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52. [Salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and 
Members .] Omitted by  s. 169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52A. [Powers of superintendence, direction, etc .] Omitted by  s. 169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52B. [Distribution of business among Benches. ] Omitted by  s. 169,  ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52C. [Power of Chairperson to transfer cases .] Omitted by  s. 169, ibid. (w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
52D. Decision by majority .–If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in opinion 
on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
Chairperson of the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] who shall hear the point or points himself and such point or 
points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it.]  
53. [Filling up of vacancies .] Omitted by the Financ e Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 169                       
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
54. [Resignation and removal .] Omitted by s . 169 , ibid. (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
55. Orders constituting Appellate Tribunal to be final and not to invalidate its proceedings .–No 
order of the Central Government appointing any person as the 7[Chairperson or the Member] of a 
2[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be called in question in any manner and no act or proceeding before a 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 23 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by  Act  7 of 2017, s. 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
3. Subs. by s. 169, ibid.,  for “ Establishment of Appellate Tribunal” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
4. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
5. Subs. by s.  169, ibid., for “shall also specify, in the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
6. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2 6, for sections 49 to 52 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
7. Subs. by s. 29, ibid.,  for “Presiding Officer” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  22 
 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be called in question in any man ner on the ground merely of any defect in the 
constitution of a  1[Appellate Tribunal ]. 
56. [Staff of the Cyber Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by the Finance  Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 169 
(w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  
57. Appeal to 1[Appellate Tribunal ].–(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), any person aggrieved 
by an order made by controller or an adjudicating officer under this Act may prefer an appeal to a 
1[Appellate Tribunal ] having jurisdict ion in the matter.  
(2) No appeal shall lie to the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] from an order made by an adjudicating officer 
with the consent of the parties.  
(3) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the date 
on which a copy of the order made by the Controller or the adjud icating officer is received by the person 
aggrieved and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by  such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
forty -five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] may, after giving the 
parties to the appeal, an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting as ide the order appealed against.  
(5) The 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal 
and to the concerned Cont roller or adjudicating officer.  
(6) The appeal filed before the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within six 
months from the  date of receipt of the appeal.  
58. Procedure and powers of the Appellate Tribunal ].–(1) The 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall not be 
bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided 
by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act and of any rules, the 
1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall have  powers to regulate its own procedure including the place at which it sh all 
have its sittings.  
(2) The 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, 
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while 
trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documen ts or oth er electronic records;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses or documents;  
(e) reviewing its decisions;  
(f) dismissing an application for d efault or deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) any other matter which m ay be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceeding before the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) and the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 
195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
59. Right to legal representation .–The appellant may either appear in person or authorise one or 
more legal practitioners or any of its officers to present his or its case before the 1[Appellate Tribunal ]. 
60. Limitation .–The provisions of the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963), shall, as far as may be, 
apply to an appeal made to the 1[Appellate Tribunal ]. 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s, 169 , for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal”  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  23 
 61. Civil court not to have jurisdiction .–No court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or 
proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed under this Act or the 
1[Appellate Tribunal ] constituted under this Act is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in 
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act.  
62. Appeal to High Court .–Any person aggrieved by a ny decision or order of the 1[Appellate 
Tribunal ] may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the 
decision or order of the 1[Appellate Tribunal ] to him on any question of fact or law arising out of such 
order:  
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause 
from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty days.  
63. Compounding of contravention s.–(1) Any contravention under this  2[Act] may, either before or 
after the institution of adjudication proceedings, be compounded by the Controller or such other officer as 
may be specially authorised by him in this behalf or by the adjudicating officer, a s the case may be, 
subject to such conditions as the Controller or such other officer or the adjudicating officer may specify:  
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the penalty which may 
be imposed under this Act for t he contravention so compounded.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall apply to a person who commits the same or similar contravention 
within a period of three years from the date on which the first contravention, committed by him, was 
compounded.  
Explanatio n.–For the purposes of this sub -section, any second or subsequent contravention 
committed after the expiry of a period of three years from the date on which the contravention was 
previously compounded shall be deemed to be a first contravention.  
(3) Where any contravention has been compounded under sub -section ( 1), no proceeding or further 
proceeding, as the case may be, shall be taken against the person guilty of such contravention in respect of 
the contravention so compounded.  
64. Recovery of 3[penalty  or compensation ].–A 4[penalty imposed or compensation awarded] under 
this Act, if it is not paid, shall he recovered as an arrear of land  revenue and the licence or the 5[electronic 
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be suspended till the p enalty is paid.  
CHAPTER XI  
OFFENCES  
65. Tampering with computer source documents .–Whoever knowingly or intentionally conceals, 
destroys or alters or intentionally or knowingly causes another to conceal, destroy, or alter any computer 
source code used for a  computer, computer programme, computer system or computer network, when the 
computer source code is required to be kept or maintained by law for the time being in force, shall be 
punishable with imprisonment up to three years, or with fine which may exten d up to two lakh rupees, or 
with both.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, “computer source code ” means the listing of 
programmes, computer commands, design and layout and programme analysis of computer resource in 
any form.  
6[66. Computer related offences .–If any person, dishonestly or fraudulently, does any act referred to 
in section 43, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years or 
with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees or with both.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal”  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
2. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E) (w.e.f. 19 -9-2002).  
3. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 3 1, for “penalty” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 31, ibid., for “penalty  imposed ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “ Digital Signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
6. Subs. by s. 32, ibid.,  for sections 66 and 67  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  24 
 Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) the word “dishonestly ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 24 of the Indian Penal 
Code  (45 of 1860);  
(b) the word “fraudulently ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 25 of the  Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
66A. Punishment for sending offensive messages through communication service, etc. –Any 
person who sends, by means of a computer reso urce or a communication device, – 
(a) any  information that is grossly offensive or has menacing character; or  
(b) any information which he knows to be false, but for the purpose of causing annoyance, 
inconvenience, danger, obstruction, insult, injury, criminal intimidation, enmity, hatred or ill will, 
persistently by making use of such computer resource or a communication device ; 
(c) any electronic mail or electronic mail message for the purpose of causing annoyance or 
inconvenience or to deceive or to mislead the addressee or recipient about the origin of such 
messages,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and with fine.  
Explanation .–For the purpose s of this section, terms “electronic mail ” and “electronic mail message ” 
means a message or information created or transmitted or received on a computer, computer system, 
computer resource or communication device including attachments in text, image, audio, video and any 
other electronic record, which may be transmitted with t he message.  
66B. Punishment for dishonestly receiving stolen computer resource or communication  
device .–Whoever dishonestly receive  or retains any stolen computer resource or communication device 
knowing or having reason to believe the same to be stolen c omputer resource or communication device, 
shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years or 
with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh or with both.  
66C. Punishment for identity theft .–Whoever, fraud ulently or dishonestly make use of the 
electronic signature, password or any other unique identification feature of any other person, shall be 
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall 
also be l iable to fine which may ex tend to rupees one lakh.  
66D. Punishment for cheating by personation by using computer resource .–Whoever, by means of 
any communication device or compute r resource cheats by personation , shall be punished with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to 
fine whic h may extend to one lakh rupee s. 
66E. Punishment for violation of privacy .–Whoever, intentionally or knowingly captures, publishes 
or transmits the image of a private area of any person without his or her consent, under circumstances 
violating the privacy of that person, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years 
or with fine not exceeding two lakh rupees, or with both.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section – 
(a) “transmit ” means to electronically send a visual image with the intent that it be viewed by a 
person or persons;  
(b) “capture ”, with respect to an image, means to videotape, photograph, film or record by any 
means;  
(c) “private area ” means the naked or undergarment clad genitals, public area, buttocks or female 
breast:  
(d) “publishes ” means reproduction in the printed or electronic form and making it available for 
public;  
(e) “under circumstances violating privacy ” means circumstances in which a person can hav e a 
reasonable expectation that – 
(i) he or she could disrobe in privacy, without being concerned that an image of his private 
area was being captured; or  25 
 (ii) any  part of his or her private area would not be visible to the public, regardless of whether 
that person is in a public or private place.  
66F. Punishment for cyber terrorism .–(1) Whoever, – 
(A) with intent to threaten the unity, integrity, security or soverei gnty of India or to strike terror in 
the people or any section of the people by – 
(i) denying or cause the denial of access to any person authoris ed to access computer 
resource; or  
(ii) attempting to penetrate or access a computer resource without authorisa tion or exceeding 
authorised access; or  
(iii) introducing or causing to introduce any computer contaminan t, 
and by means of such conduct causes or is likely to cause death or injuries to persons or damage to or 
destruction of property or disrupts or knowing that it is likely to cause damage or disruption of supplies or 
services essential to the life of the community or adversely affect the critical information infrastructure 
specified under section 70 ; or 
(B) knowingly or intentionally penetrates or a ccesses a computer resource without authorisation or 
exceeding authorised access, and by means of such conduct obtains access to information, data or 
computer data  base that is restricted for reasons of the security of the State or foreign relations ; or an y 
restricted information, data or computer data  base, with reasons to believe that such information, data 
or computer data  base so obtained may be used to cause or likely to cause injury to the interests of the 
sovereignty and integrity of India, the secur ity of the State, friendly relations with foreign States, 
public order, decency or morality, or in relation to contempt of court, defamation or incitement to an 
offence, or to the advantage of any foreign nation, gro up of individuals or otherwise,  
commits the offence of cyber terrorism.  
(2) Whoever commits or conspires to commit cyber terrorism shall be punishable with imprisonment 
which may e xtend to imprisonment for life.  
67. Punishment for publishing or transmitting obscene material in electronic form .–Whoever 
publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the electronic form, any material which 
is lascivious or appeals to the prurient interest or if its effect is such as to tend to deprave and corrupt 
persons who are likely, having r egard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter 
contained or embodied in it, shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonment of either description 
for a term which may extend to three years and with fine which may extend to fiv e lakh rupees and in the 
event of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may 
extend to five years and also with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
67A. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of ma terial containing sexually explicit act, etc., 
in electronic form .–Whoever publishes or transmits or causes to be published or transmitted in the 
electronic form any material which contains sexually explicit act or conduct shall be punished on first 
convic tion with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to five years and with 
fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent conviction with 
imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend  to seven years and also with fine which 
may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
67B. Punishment for publishing or transmitting of material depicting children in sexually 
explicit act, etc., in electronic form .–Whoever, – 
(a) publishes or transmits or causes to be p ublished or transmitted material in any electronic form 
which depicts children engaged in sexually explicit act or conduct; or  
(b) creates text or digital images, collects, seeks, browses, downloads, advertises, promotes, 
exchanges or distributes material in any electronic form depicting children in obscene or indecent or 
sexually explicit manner; or  
(c) cultivates, entices or induces children to online relationship with one or more children for and 
on sexually explicit act or in a manner that may offend a reasonable adult on the computer resource; or  
(d) facilitates abusing children online, or  26 
 (e) records in any electronic form own abuse or that of others pertaining to sexua lly explicit act 
with children,  
shall be punished on first conviction with imprisonm ent of either description for a term which may extend 
to five years and with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees and in the event of second or subsequent 
conviction with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years and  also 
with fine which may extend to ten lakh rupees:  
Provided that provisions of section 67, section 67A and this section does not extend to any book, 
pamphlet, paper, writing, drawing, painting representati on or figure in electronic form – 
(i) the publication of which is proved to be justified as being for the public good on the ground 
that such book, pamphlet, paper, writing , drawing, painting representation or figure is the interest 
of science, literature, art or learning or other objects of gener al concern; or  
(ii) which is kept or used for bona  fide heritage or religious purposes.  
Explanation –For the purposes of this section , “children ” means a person who has not  completed the 
age of 18 years.  
67C. Preservation and retention of information by intermediaries .–(1) Intermediary shall preserve 
and retain such information as may be specified for such duration and in such manner and format as the 
Central Government may prescribe.  
(2) any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) 
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and also be liable to 
fine.]  
68. Power of Controller to give directions .–(1) The Controller may, by order, direct a Certifying 
Authority or any employee of such Authority to take such measures or cease carrying on such activities as 
specified in the order if those are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this Act, rules or 
any regulations made thereunder.  
1[(2) Any person who inte ntionally or knowingly fails to comply with any order under sub -section ( 1) 
shall be guilty of an offence and shall be liable on conviction to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 
two years or a fine not exceeding one lakh rupees or with both.]  
2[69. Power to issue directions for interception or monitoring or decryption of any information 
through any computer resource .–(1) Where the Central Government or a State Government or any of 
its officer s specially authorised by the Central Government or the Sta te Government, as the case may be, 
in this behalf may, if satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do , in the interest of the sovereignty 
or integrity of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or pub lic 
order or for preventing incitement to the commission of any cognizable offence relating to above or for 
investigation of any offence, it may subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, by order, direct any agenc y of the appropriate Government to intercept, monitor or decrypt or 
cause to be intercepted or monitored or decrypted any information generated, transmitted, received or 
stored in any computer resource.  
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which suc h interception or monitoring or decryption may 
be carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The subscriber or intermediary or any person in -charge of the computer resource shall, when called 
upon by any agency referred to in sub -section ( 1), extend all facilit ies and technical assistance to – 
(a) provide access to or secure access to the computer resource generating , transmitting, receiving 
or storing such information; or  
(b) intercept, monitor, or decrypt the information, as the case may be; o r 
(c) provide information stored in computer resource.  
(4) The subscriber or intermediary or any person who fails to assist the agency referred to in           
sub-section ( 3) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years a nd shall 
also be liable to fine.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 33, for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 34, ibid., for section 69  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  27 
 69A. Power to issue directions for blocking for public access of any information through any 
computer resource .–(1) Where the Central Government or any of its officers specially authorised by it in 
this behalf is satisfied that it is necessary or expedient so to do , in the interest of sovereignty and integrity 
of India, defence of India, security of the State, friendly relations with foreign States or public order or for 
preventing incitement to the commission of any cogniza ble offence relating to above, it may subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), for reasons to be recorded in writing, by order, direct any agency of the 
Government or intermediary to block for access by the public or cause to be blocked for access by the 
public any information generated, transmitted, received, stored or hosted in any computer resource.  
(2) The procedure and safeguards subject to which such blocking for access by the public may be 
carried out, shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The  intermediary who fails to comply with the direction issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be 
punished with an imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years and also be liable to fine.  
69B. Power to authorise to monitor and collect traffic data or i nformation through any 
computer resource for cyber security .–(1) The Central Government may, to enhance cyber security and 
for identification, analysis and prevention of intrusion or spread of computer contaminant in the country, 
by notification in the Off icial Gazette, authorise any agency of the Government to monitor and collect 
traffic data or information generated, transmitted, received or stored in any computer resource.  
(2) The intermediary or any person in -charge or the computer resource shall, when called upon by the 
agency which has been authorised under sub -section ( 1), provide technical assistance and extend all 
facilities to such agency to enable online access or to secure and provide online access to the computer 
resource generating, transmittin g, receiving or storing such traffic data or information.  
(3) The procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information, shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(4) Any intermediary who intentionally or knowingly contravenes the pr ovisions of sub -section ( 2) 
shall be punished with an imprisonment for a term which any extend to three years and shall also be liable 
to fine.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(i) “computer contaminant ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 43;  
(ii) “traffic data ” means any data identifying or purporting to identify any person, computer 
system or computer network or location to or from which the communication is or may be 
transmitted and inclu des communications origin, destination, route, time, data, size, duration or 
type of underlying service and any other information.]  
70. Protected system .–1[(1) The appropriate Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
declare any computer re source which directly or indirectly affects the facility of Critical Information 
Infrastructure, to be a protected system.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, “Critical Information Infrastructure ” means the 
computer resource, the incapacitation or destruction of which, shall have debilitating impact on national 
security, economy, public health or safety.]  
(2) The appropriate Government may, by order in writing, authorise the persons who are authori sed to 
access protected systems notified under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Any person who secures access or attempts to secure access to a protected system in contravention 
of the provisions of this section shall be punished with imprisonment of either descriptio n for a term 
which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine.  
2[(4) The Central Government shall prescribe the information security practices and procedures for 
such protected system.]  
3[70A. National nodal agency .–(1) The Central Government  may, by notification published in the 
Official Gazette, designate any organisation of the Government as the national nodal agency in respect of 
Critical Information Infrastructure Protection.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 35, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f. 27-10-2009).  
3. Ins. by  s. 36, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  28 
 (2) The national nodal agency designated under sub -section ( 1) shall be responsible for all measures 
including Research and Development relating to protection of Critical Information Infrastructure.  
(3) The manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
such as may be p rescribed.  
70B. Indian Computer Emergency Response Team to serve as national agency for incident 
response .–(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint an agency of 
the Governmen t to be called the Indian Compu ter Emergency Response Team.  
(2) The Central Government shall provide the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) with a Director 
General and such other officers and employees as may be prescribed.  
(3) The salary and allowances and terms and conditions of the Di recto r-General and other officers and 
employees shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Indian Computer Emergency Response Team shall serve as the national agency for 
performing the following functions  in the area of cyber security, – 
(a) collection, an alysis and dissemination of information on cyber incidents;  
(b) forecast and alerts of cyber security incidents;  
(c) emergency measures for handling cyber security incidents;  
(d) coordination of cyber incidents response activities;  
(e) issue  guidelines, advisories, vulnerability notes and white papers relating to information 
security practices, procedures, preventation, response and reporting of cyber incidents;  
(f) such other functions relating to cyber security as may be prescribed.  
(5) The  manner of performing functions and duties of the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(6) For carrying out the provisions of sub -section ( 4), the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1) may 
call for information and give direction to the service providers, intermediaries, data centres, body 
corporate and any other person.  
(7) Any service provider, intermediaries, data centres, body corporate or person who fails to provide 
the information called for or comply with the direc tion under sub -section ( 6), shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees 
or with both.  
(8) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under this section, except on a compl aint made by an 
officer authorised in this behalf by the agency referred to in sub -section ( 1).] 
71. Penalty for misrepresentation .–Whoever makes any misrepresentation to, or suppresses any 
material fact from the Controller or the Certifying Authority for obtaining any licence or 1[electronic 
signature] Certificate, as the case may be, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to  one lakh rupees, or with both.  
72. Penalty for Breach of confidentiality and privacy .–Save as otherwise provided in this Act or 
any other law for the time being in force, if any person who, in pursuance of any of the powers conferred 
under this Act, rules or regulations made thereunder, has secured access to any  electronic record, book, 
register, correspondence, information, document or other material without the consent of the person 
concerned discloses such electronic record, book, register, correspondence, information, document or 
other material to any other p erson shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh rupees, or with both.  
2[72A. Punishment for disclosure of information in breach of lawful contract .–Save as otherwise 
provided in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, any person including an intermediary 
who, while providing services under the terms of lawful contract, has secured access to any material 
containing personal information about another person, with the intent to cause or knowing that he is likely 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 2 , for “ Digital Signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 37, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  29 
 to cause wrongful loss or wrongful gain discloses, without the consent of the person concerned, or in 
breach of a lawful contract, such material to any other person, shall be punished with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to five lakh rupees, or with both. ] 
73. Penalty for publishing 1[electronic signature ] Certificate false in certain particulars .–(1) No 
person shall publish a  1[electronic signature] Certificate or otherwise make it available to any other  person 
with the knowledge that – 
(a) the Certifying Authority listed in the certificate has not issued it; or  
(b) the subscriber listed in the certificate has not accepted it; or  
(c) the certificate has been revoked or suspended,   
unless such publication is for the purpose of verifying a 1[electronic signature] created prior to such 
suspension or revocation.  
(2) Any person who contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall be punishe d with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.  
74. Publication for fraudulent purpose .–Whoever knowingly creates, publishes or otherwise makes 
available a 1[electronic signature ] Certificate for any fraudulent or unlawful purpose shall be punished 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to one lakh 
rupees, or with both.  
75. Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India .–(1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2), the provisions of this Act shall apply also to any offence or contravention 
committed outside India by any person i rrespective of his nationality.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), thi s Act shall apply to an offence or contravention committed 
outside India by any person if the act or conduct constituting the offence or contravention involves a 
computer, computer system or com puter network located in India.  
76. Confiscation .–Any computer , computer system, floppies, compact disks, tape drives or any other 
accessories related thereto, in respect of which any provision of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made 
thereunder has been or is being contravened, shall be liable to confiscation:  
Provided that where it is established to the satisfaction of the court adjudicating the confiscation that 
the person in whose possession, power or control of any such computer, computer system, floppies, 
compact disks, tape drives or any other accessories  relating thereto is found is not responsible for the 
contravention of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder, the court may, 
instead of making an order for confiscation of such computer, computer system, floppies, compact  disks, 
tape drives or any other accessories related thereto, make such other order authorised by this Act against 
the person contravening of the provisions of this Act, rules, orders or regulations made thereunder as it 
may think fit.  
1[77. Compensation, penalties or confiscation not to interfere with other punishment .–No 
compensation awarded, penalty imposed or confiscation made under this Act shall prevent the award of 
compensation or imposition of any other penalty or punishment under any other law for the time being in 
force.  
77A. Compounding of offences .–A court of competent jurisdiction may compound offences, other 
than offences for which the punishment for life or imprisonment for a term exceeding three years has  
been provided, under this Act:  
Provid ed that the court shall not compound such offence where the accused is, by reason of his 
previous conviction, liable to either enhanced punishment or to a punishment of a different kind:  
Provided further that the court shall not compound any offence where such offence affects the socio 
economic conditions of the country or has been committed against a child below the age of 18 years or a 
woman.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 38 , for section 77  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  30 
 (2) The person accused of an offence under this Act may file an application for compounding in the 
court in which offence is pending f or trial and the provisions of  sections 265B and 265C of the Code of 
Crimin al Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974)  shall apply.  
77B. Offences with three years imprisonment to be bailable .–Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Code of Crimina l Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), the offence punishable with imprisonment of three 
years and above shall be cognizable and the offence punishable with imprisonment of three years shall be 
bailable.]  
78. Power to investigate offences .–Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), a police officer not below the rank of 1[Inspector] shall investigate any 
offence under this Act.  
2[CHAPTER XII  
INTERMEDIARIES NOT TO BE LIABLE IN CERTAIN CASES  
79. Exemption from liability of intermediary in certain cases .–(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time being in force but subject to the provisions of sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3), 
an intermediary shall not be liable for any third party information, data, or communication link made 
available or hosted by him.  
(2) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall apply if – 
(a) the function of the intermediary is limited to providing access to a communication system over 
which information made availa ble by third parties is transmitted or temporarily stored or hosted; or  
(b) the intermediary does not – 
(i) initiate the transmission,  
(ii) select the receiver of the transmission, and  
(iii) select or modify the information contained in the transmission;  
(c) the intermediary observes due diligence while discharging his duties under this Act and also 
observes such other guidelines as the Central Government may prescribe in this behalf.  
(3) The provisions of sub -section ( 1) shall not apply if – 
(a) the intermed iary has conspired or abetted or aided or induced, whether by threats or promise or 
otherwise in the commission of the unlawful act;  
(b) upon receiving actual knowledge, or on being notified by the appropriate Government or its 
agency that any information,  data or communication link residing in or connected to a computer 
resource controlled by the intermediary is being used to commit the unlawful act, the intermediary 
fails to expeditiously remove or disable access to that material on that resource without vitiating the 
evidence in any manner.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, the expression “third party information ” means any 
information dealt with by an intermediary in his capacity as an intermediary.  
CHAPTER XIIA  
EXAMINER OF ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE  
79A. Central Government to notify Examiner of Electronic Evidence .–The Central Government 
may, for the purposes of providing expert opinion on electronic form evidence before any court or other 
authority specify, by notification in the Official Ga zette, any Department, body or agency of the Central 
Government or a State Government as an Examiner of Electronic Evidence.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, “electronic form evidence ” means any information of 
probative value that is either s tored or transmitted in electronic form and includes computer evidence, 
digital audio, digital video, cel l phones, digital fax machines. ] 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 39, for “Deputy Superintendent of Police ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by, s. 40 , ibid., for Chapter XII  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  31 
 CHAPTER XIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
80. Power of police officer and other officers to enter, search, etc .–(1) Notwithstanding  anything 
contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), any police o fficer, not below the rank of a 
1[Inspector], or any other officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorised by the 
Central Government in this behalf may enter any public place and search and arrest without warrant any 
person found therein who is reasonably suspected of having committed or of committing or of being 
about to commit any offence under this Act.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this sub -section , the expression “public place ” includes any public 
conveyance, any hotel, any shop or any other place intended for use by, or accessible to the public.  
(2) Where any person is arrested under sub -section ( 1) by an officer other than a police officer, such 
officer shall, without unnecessary delay, take or send the person arrested before a magistrate having 
jurisdiction in the case or before the officer -in-charge of a police station.  
(3) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall , subject to the provisions 
of this section, apply, so far as may be, in relation to any entry, search or arrest, made under this section.  
81. Act to have overriding effect .–The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent  therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
2[Provided that nothing contained in this Act shall restrict any person from exercising any right 
conferred under the Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of  1957) or the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970) .] 
3[81A. Application of the Act to electronic cheque and truncated cheque .–(1) The provisions of 
this Act, for the time being in force, shall apply to, or in relation to, electronic cheques and the truncated 
cheques  subject to such modifications and amendments as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes 
of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 of 1881) by the Central Government, in consultation with the 
Reserve Bank of India, by notification in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every notification made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one  session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the notification or both Houses agree that the notification should not 
be made, the notification shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the 
case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the 
validity of anything pr eviously done under that notification.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this Act, the expressions “electronic cheque ” and “truncated cheque ” 
shall have the same meaning as assigned to them in section 6 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881 (26 
of 1881).]  
4[82. Controller, Deputy Controller and Assistant Controller to be public servants .–The 
Controller, the Deputy Controller and the Assistant Controllers shall be deemed to be public servants 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .] 
83. Power to give directions .–The Central Government may give directions to any State Government 
as to the carrying into execution in the State of any of the provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation 
or order made thereunder.  
84. Protection of action taken in good faith .–No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
against the Central Government, the State Government, the Controller or any pers on acting on behalf of 
him, 5[and adjudicating officers ] for anything which i s in good faith done or intended to b e done in 
pursuance of this Act or any rule, regulation or order made thereunder.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 41, for “Deputy Superintendent of Police ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Ins.  by s. 42 , ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
3. Ins. by Act 55 of 2002, s. 13 ( w.e.f. 26 -2-2003 ). 
4. Subs. by 7 of 2017, s. 169 , for section 82 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
5. Subs. by s. 169, ibid., for “ the Chairperson Members, adjudicating officers and the staff of the  Cyber Appellate Tribunal”  
(w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  32 
 1[84A. Modes or methods for encryption .–The Central Government may, for secure use of the 
electronic medium and for promotion of e-governance and e -commerce, prescribe the modes or methods 
for encryption.  
84B. Punishment for abetment of offences .–Whoever abets any offence shall, if the act abetted is 
committed in consequence of the abetment, and no express provision is made by this Act for the 
punishment of such abetment, be punished with the punishment provided for the offence under this Act.  
Explanation. –An act or offence is said to be committed in consequence of abetment, when it is 
committed in consequence of the instigation, or in pursuance of the conspiracy, or with the aid which 
constitutes the abetment.  
84C. Punishment for attempt to commit offences .–Whoever attempts to commit an offence 
punishable by this Act or causes such an offence to be committed, and in such an attempt does any act 
towards the commission of the offence, shall, where no express provision is made for the punishment of 
such attempt, be punished with imprisonment of any description provided for the offence, for a term 
which may extend to one -half of the long est term of imprisonment provided for that offence, or with such 
fine as is provided for the offence, or with both.]  
85. Offences by companies .–(1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the provisions 
of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, at the time 
the contravention was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the company for the conduct 
of business of the company as well as the company, shall be guilty of the contravention  and shall be liable 
to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to punishment if 
he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exe rcised all due diligence to 
prevent such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company  and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other offic er shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, – 
(i) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(ii) “director ”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
86. Removal of difficulties .–(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two ye ars from 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
87. Power of Central Government to make rules .–(1) The Central Government may, by notificatio n 
in the Official Gazette and in the Electronic Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: – 
2[(a) the conditions for considering reliability of electronic signature or electronic authentication 
technique under sub -section ( 2) of section 3A;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by 10 of 2009, s. 45 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  33 
 (aa) the procedure for ascertaining electronic signature or authentication under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 3A;  
(ab) the manner in which any information or matter may be authenticated by means of electronic 
signature under section 5;]  
(b) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant or payment shall be effected under sub -section 
(1) of section 6;  
(c) the manner and format in which electronic records shall be filed, or issued and the method of 
payment under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
1[(ca) the manner in which the authorised service provider may collect, retain and appropriate 
service charges un der sub -section ( 2) of section 6A;]  
(d) the matters relating to the type of 2[electronic signature], manner and format in which it may be 
affixed under section 10;  
3[(e) the manner of storing and affixing electronic signature creation data under section 15 ; 
(ea) the security procedures and practices under section 16;]  
(f) the qualifications, experience and terms and conditions of service of Con troller, Deputy 
Controllers 4[, Assistant Controllers, other officers and employees] under section 17;  
5*  *   *   *   * 
(h) the requirements  which an applicant must fulfil under sub -section ( 2) of section 21;  
(i) the period of validity of licence granted under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) of section 21;  
(j) the form in which an application for licence may be made und er sub -section ( 1) of section 22;  
(k) the amount of fees payable under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 2) of section 22;  
(l) such other documents which shall accompany an application for licence under clause ( d) of sub -
section ( 2) of section 22;  
(m) the form and the fee for renewal of a licence and the fee payable thereof under section 23;  
6[(ma) the form of application and fee for issue of Electronic Signature Certificate under  
section 35 ;] 
(n) the form in which application for is sue of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate may be made 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(o) the fee to be paid to the Cert ifying Authority for issue of a 2[electronic signature] Certificate 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 35;  
1[(oa) the duties of subscribers under sectio n 40A;  
(ob) the reasonable security practices and procedures and sensitive personal data or information 
under section 43A;]  
(p) the manner in which the adjudicating officer shall hold inquiry under sub -section ( 1) of section 
46; 
(q) the qualification and experience which the adjudicating officer shall possess under sub -section 
(3) of section 46;  
7*   *     *   * 
 (u) the form in which appeal may be filed and the fee thereof under sub -section ( 3) of section 57;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 10 of 2009 , s. 46 (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
2. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for “digital signature” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 46, ibid., for clause ( e) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 46 , ibid., for “and Assistant Controllers ” (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
5. Clause ( g) omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
6. Ins. by s. 4 6, ibid.  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009 ). 
7. Clauses ( r), (s) and ( t) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  34 
 (v) any  other power of a civil court required to be prescribed under clause ( g) of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 58; and  
1[(w) the powers and func tions of the Chairperson of the 2[Appellate Tribunal ] under  
section 52A;  
(x) the  information, duration, manner and form of such information to be retained and preserved 
under section 67C;  
(y) the procedures and safeguards for interception, monitoring or decryption under sub -section ( 2) 
of section 69 ; 
(z) the procedures and safeguards for blocking for access by the public under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 69 A; 
(za) the procedure and safeguards for monitoring and collecting traffic data or information under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 69B;  
(zb) the information security practices and procedures for protected system under section 70;  
(zc) manner of performing functions and duties of the agency under sub -section ( 3) of  
 section 70 A; 
(zd) the officers and employees under sub -section ( 2) of section 70B;  
(ze) salaries and allowances and te rms and condit ions of service of the Director  General and other 
officers and employees under sub -section ( 3) of section 70B ; 
(zf) the manner in which the functions and duties of agency shall be performed under                    
sub-section ( 5) of section 70B;  
(zg) the guidelines to be observed by the intermediaries under sub -section (2) of section 79;  
(zh) the modes or methods for encryption under section 84 A.] 
(3) 3[Every notification made by the Central Government under sub -section  (1)  of section 70 A and 
every rule made by it] shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, 
while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or 
more successive sessions, and if, be fore the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agre e in making any modification in 4*** the  rule or both 
Houses agree that 4*** the rule should not be made, 4*** the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification or 
rule. 
88. Constitution of Advisory Committee .–(1) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be 
after the commencement of this Act, constitute a Committee called the Cyber Regulations Advisory 
Committee.  
(2) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such number of 
other official and non -official members representing the interests principally affected or having special 
knowledge of the subject -matter as the C entral Government may deem fit.  
(3) The Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee shall advise – 
(a) the Central Government either generally as regards any rules or for any other purpose 
connected with this Act;  
(b) the Controller in framing the regulations under this Act.  
(4) There shall be paid to the non -official members of such Committee such trav elling and other 
allowances as the Central Government may fix.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 46,  for clause ( w) (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 169, for “Cyber Appellate Tribunal”(w.e.f. 26-5-2017).  
3. Subs. by  Act 10 of 2009,  s. 46,  for certain words, brackets, letter and figures (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
4. The words “the notification or” omitted by s. 46, ibid. (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  35 
 89. Power of Controller to make regulations .–(1) The Controller may, after consultation with the 
Cyber Regulations Advisory Committee and with the previous approval of the Central Government, b y 
notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations consistent with this Act and the rules made 
thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: – 
(a) the particulars relating to maintenance of data base containing the disclosure record of every 
Certifying Authority under clause  1[(n)] of section 18;  
(b) the  conditions and restrictions subject to which the Controller may recognise any foreign 
Certifying Authority under sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(c) the terms and conditions subject to which a licence may be granted under clause ( c) of             
sub-section (3) of section 21;  
(d) other standards to be observed by a Certifying Authority under clause ( d) of section 30;  
(e) the manner in which the Certifying Authority shall disclose the matters specified in                
sub-section ( 1) of section 34;  
(f) the particulars of statement which shall accompany an application under sub -section ( 3) of 
section 35.  
(g) the manner by which the subscriber shall communicate the compromise of private key to the 
Certifying Authority under sub -section ( 2) of section 42.  
(3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation or both Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation sh all 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that regulation.  
90. Power of St ate Government to make rules .–(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provi de for all or any of  the following ma tters, namely: – 
(a) the electronic form in which filing, issue, grant, receipt or payment shall be effected under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 6;  
(b) for matters specified in sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
2*  *   *   *   * 
(3) Every rule made by the State Government under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the Sta te Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such 
Legislature consists of one House, before that Hou se. 
91. [Amendment of Act  45 of 1860 .] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment ) Act, 2008 
(10 of 2009) , s. 48 (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
92. [Amendment of Act 1 of 1872 .] Omitted by s.  48, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
93. [Amendment of Act  18 of 1891 .] Omitted by s.  48, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
94. [Amendment of Act  2 of 1934 .] Omitted by s.  48, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. S.O. 1015(E), for “( m)” (w.e.f.  19-9-2002 ). 
2. Clause ( c) omitted by Act 10 of 2009, s. 47  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  36 
 1[THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See sub-section ( 4) of section 1]  
DOCUMENTS OR TRANSACTIONS TO WHICH THE ACT SHALL NOT APPLY  
Sl. No . Description of documents or transactions  
1. A negotiable instrument (other than a cheque) as defined in section 13 of the  Negotiable 
Instrument s Act, 1881 (26 of 1881).  
2. A power -of-attorney as defined in section 1A of the Powers -of-Attorney Act,  1882 (7 of 1882).  
3. A trust as defined in section 3 of the Indian Trust Act, 1882 (2 of 1882).  
4. A will as defined in clause ( h) of section 2 of the Indian Succession Act, 1925  (39 of 1925), 
including any other testamentary disposition by whatever name  called.  
5. Any contract for the sale or conveyance of immovable property or any interest  in such 
property.  
 
______________  
 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See sub-section ( 1) of section 3A]  
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURE OR ELECTRONIC AUTHENTICATION TECHNIQUE AND PROCEDURE  
Sl. No.  Description  Procedure  
(1) (2) (3) 
   
.] 
________________  
 
[THE THIRD  SCHEDULE. ] Omitted by the Information Technology (Amendment ) Act, 2008                   
(10 of 2009) , s. 50 (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
[THE FOURTH  SCHEDULE .] Omitted by s.  50, ibid. (w.e.f.  27-10-2009).  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 10 of 2009, s. 49, for the First Schedule and the Second Schedule  (w.e.f. 27 -10-2009).  
--------------------------The Leaders And Chief Whips of Recognised Parties And Groups in Parliament (Facilities) Amendment Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE LEAD ERS AND CHIEF WHIPS OF RECOGNI SED PARTIES  AND GROUPS IN 
PARLIAMENT (FACILITIES) AMENDMENT ACT, 2000  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Amendment of section 1 . 
3. Substitution of new section for section 2.  
4. Substitution of new section for section 3 . 
5. Amendment of section 3 of Act 10 of 1959.  
6. Validation of rules and certain actions . 
 
  2 
 THE LEAD ERS AND CHIEF WHIPS OF RECOGNI SED PARTIES  AND GROUPS IN 
PARLIAMENT (FACILITIES ) AME NDMENT ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 18 OF 2000  
 [7th June , 2000.]  
An Act to amend the Leaders and Chief Whips of Re cognised Parties and Groups in Parliament 
(Facilities) Act, 1998.  
BE it enacted by Parliament  in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencem ent.—(1) This Act may be called the Leaders and Chief Whips of 
Recognised Parties and Groups in Parliament (Fac ilities) Amendment Act, 2000.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it  shall come into force at once.  
2. Amendment of section 1 .—In the Leaders and Chief Whips of Recognised Parties and Groups in 
Parliament (Facilities) Act, 1998  (5 of 1999) (hereinafter referred to as the principal Act), in section 1, for 
sub-section ( 2), the following sub -section shall be substituted and shall be deemed to have been 
substituted on and from the 5th day of February, 1999, namely: — 
“(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 5th day of February, 1999. ”. 
3. Substitution  of new section for section 2. —For section 2 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be substi tuted, namely: — 
“2.Definitions .—In this Act, unless th e context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “recognised group” means, — 
(i) in relation to the Council of States, every party whic h has a strength of not less tha n 
fifteen members  and not more than twenty -four members in the Council;  
(ii) in relation to the House of the P eople, every party which has a strength of not less 
than thirty members and not more than f ifty-four members in the House;  
(b) “recognised party ” means, — 
(i) in relation to the Council of States, every party which has a strength of not less than 
twen ty-five members in the Council;  
(ii) in relation to the House of the People, every party which has a strength of not less 
than fifty-five members in the House.”.  
4. Substitution of new section for section 3 .—For section 3 of the principal Act, the following 
section shall be substituted, namely :— 
“3.Facilities to the Lea ders and Chief Whips of recognis ed groups and parties .—Subject  to any 
rules made in this behalf by the Central Government, each leader, deputy leader and each Chief Whip 
of a recognised group and a recognised party shall be entitled to telephone and secretarial facilities:  
  3 
 Provided that such facilities shall not be  provided to such leader, deputy le ader or Chief  Whip, as 
the case may be, who — 
(i) holds an office of Minister as defined in section 2 of the Salaries and All owances of 
Ministers Act, 1952  (58 of 1952) ; 
(ii) holds an office of the Leader of the Opposition  as defined  in section 2 of the Salary and 
Allowances of Leaders of Op position in Parliament Act, 1977  (33 of 1977); or 
(iii) is entitled to similar telephone and secretarial facilities by vi rtue of holding any office of, 
or representation in, a Parliament ary Committee or other Committee, Council, Board, 
Commission or other bo dy set up by the Government; or  
(iv) is entitled to similar telephone and secretarial facilities provided to him in any other 
capacity by the Government or a local authority or Corporation owned or controlled by the 
Government or any local authority. ”. 
5. Amendment of section 3 of Act 10 of 1959 .—In the Parliament (Prevention of Disqualificati on) 
Act, 1959, in section 3, in clause ( ac), for the words “each leader ”, the words “each leader and each 
deputy leader ” shall be substituted.  
6. Validation of rules and certain actions. — The Leaders and Chief Whips of Recognised Parties 
and Groups in Parliament (Telephone and Secretarial Facilities) Rules, 1999 published in the Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, dated the 5th February , 1999 with the notification of the Government of India in the 
Ministry of Parliamentary Affairs No. G.S.R. 66(E), dated the 4th February, 1999 (hereinafter referred to 
as the said Rules) shall be deemed to have and to have always had effect on and from the 5th day of 
February, 1999 as if th e amendments made by section 2 had been in force at all material times and 
accordingly any action taken or anything done or purported to have been taken or done under the said 
Rules during the period commencing on and from the 5th day of February, 1999 and  ending with the day 
on which the Leaders and Chief Whips of Recognised Parties and Groups in Parliament (Facilities) 
Amendment Act, 2000 receives the assent of the President shall be deemed to be, and to always have 
been , for all purposes, as validl y and effectively taken or done as if the said Rules had been in force at all 
material times.  
 
--------------------------The Madhya Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE MADHYA PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2000  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
PART II  
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH  
3. Formation of Chhattisgarh State.  
4. State of Madhya Pradesh and territorial divisions thereof.  
5. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution.  
6. Saving powers of the State Government.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
7. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution.  
8. Allocation of sitting members.  
The House of the People  
9. Representation in the House of the People.  
10. Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies.  
11. Provision as to sitting mem bers. 
The Legislative Assembly  
12. Provisions as to Legislative Assemblies.  
13. Allocation of sitting members.  
14. Duration of Legislative Assemblies.  
15. Speakers and Deputy Speakers.  
16. Rules of procedure.  
Delimitation of constituencies  
17. Delimitation of constituencies.  
18. Power of the Election Commission to maintain Delimitation Orders up -to-date. 
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled  Tribes  
19. Amendment of the Scheduled Castes Order.  
20. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
21. High Court of Chhattisgarh.  
22. Judges of Chhattisgarh High Court.  
23. Jurisdiction of Chhattisgarh High Court.  
24. Special provision relating to Bar Council and advocates.  
25. Practice and procedure in Chhattisgarh High Court.  
26. Custody of seal of Chhattisgarh High Court.  
27. Form of writs and other processes.  
28. Powers of Judges.  2 
 SECTIONS  
29. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court.  
30. Transfer of proceedings from Madhya Pradesh High Court to Chhattisgarh High Court.  
31. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to Chhattisgarh High Court.  
32. Interpretation.  
33. Saving.  
 
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
34. Authorisation of expenditure of Chhattisgarh State.  
35. Reports relating to accounts of Madhya Pradesh State.  
36. Distribution of revenue.  
 
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS ANS LIABILITIES  
37. Application  of Part.  
38. Land and goods.  
39. Treasury and bank balances.  
40. Arrears of taxes.  
41. Right to recover loans and advances.  
42. Investments and credits in certain funds.  
43. Assets and liabilities of State undertaking.  
44. Public Debt.  
45. Floating loans.  
46. Refund of taxes collected in ex cess.  
47. Deposits, etc.  
48. Provident fund.  
49. Pensions.  
50. Contracts.  
51. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.  
52. Liability as guarantor.  
53. Items in suspense.  
54. Residuary provision.  
55. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.  
56. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
57. Certain expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund.  
 
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
58. Provisions as to Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board, State R oad Transport Corporation and 
State Warehousi ng Corporation, etc.  
59. Provisions as to Madhya Pradesh State Financial Corporation.  
60. Provisions as to certain companies.  
61. Functioning of organisation, registered society or trust incorporated on behest of State 
Government.  
62. General provisions as to statutory corporations.  
63. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits.  
64. Special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases.  
65. Special provisions as to income -tax. 
66. Continuance of facilities in certain State inst itutions.  
  3 
 PART VIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
SECTIONS  
67. Provisions relating to All -India Services.  
68. Provisions relating to services in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.  
69. Provisions relating to other services.  
70. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post.  
71. Advisory Committee s. 
72. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
73. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission.  
74. Jurisdiction of the Commission s, authorities and tribunals . 
 
PART IX  
MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF POWER AND WATER RESOURCES  
75. Management of power and water supply in certain cases.  
76. Inter -State River Water Board.  
 
PART X  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
77. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956.  
78. Territorial extent of laws.  
79. Power to adapt laws.  
80. Power to construe laws.  
81. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions.  
82. Legal proceedings.  
83. Transfer of pending proceedings.  
84. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases.  
85. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws.  
86. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE FIRST  SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SCHEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.  
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE.  
 
 
  4 
 THE MADHYA PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 28 OF 2000  
[25th August, 2000. ] 
An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Madhya  Pradesh and for matters 
connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the Republic of India  as follows: — 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Madhya Pradesh  Reorganisation Act, 2000.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means the day1 which the Central  Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,  appoint;  
(b) “article ” means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meanings as in  the Representation of the People Act, 1950 (43 of 1950);  
(d) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission  appointed by the President under 
article 324;  
(e) “existing State of Madhya Pradesh ” means the State of  Madhya Pradesh as existing 
immediately before the  appointed day;  
(f) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation,  order,  bye-law, rule, scheme, notification 
or other instrument  having, immediately before the appointed day, the force of  law in the whole or in 
any part of the existing State of  Madhya Pradesh;  
(g) “notified order ” means an order published in the Official  Gazette ; 
(h) “population ratio ” in relation to the States of Madhya  Pradesh and Chhattisgarh means the 
ratio of 485.7 : 176.2;  
(i) “sitting member ”, in relation to either House of Parliament or  of the Legislature o f the existing 
State of Madhya Pradesh  means a person who immediately before the appointed day,  is a member of 
that House;  
 (j) “successor State ”, in relation to the existing State of Madhya Pradesh , means the State of 
Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh;  
(k) “transferred territory ” means the territory which on the appointed  day is transferred from the 
existing State of Madhya Pradesh to the  State of Chhattisgarh;  
(l) “treasury ” includes a sub -treasury; and  
(m) any reference to a district, tehsil or other territ orial division of the  existing State of Madhya 
Pradesh shall be construed as a reference  to the area comprised within that territorial division on the 
appointed  day. 
PART II  
REORGANISATION OF THE  STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH  
3. Formation of Chhattisgarh State .—On and from the appointed day,  there shall be formed a new 
State to be known as the State of Chhattisgarh  comprising the following territories of the existing State of 
Madhya Pradesh,  namely :— 
Bastar, laspur, Dantewada, Dhamtari, Durg, Janjgir -Champa, Jash pur, Kanker,                    
Kawardha,  Korba,   Koria,   Mahasamund,    Raigarh,   Raipur,    Rajnandgaon    and   Surguja    districts,  
                                                           
1. 1st November, 2000, vide notification No. S.O. 827(E), dated 14th September, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 5 
 and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part of the existing State of  Madhya Pradesh.  
4. State of Madhya Pradesh and territorial divisions thereof .—On and  from the appointed day, 
the State of Madhya Pradesh shall comprise the territories  of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh other 
than those specified in section 3.  
5. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution .—On and from  the appointed day, in the 
First Schedule to the Constitution, under the heading  “I. THE STATES ”,— 
(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Madhya  Pradesh, after the words, 
brackets and figures, “the Rajasth an and  Madhya Pradesh (Transfer of Territories) Act, 1959              
(47 of 1959) ”, the following shall be added, namel y:— 
“but excluding the territories specified in section 3 of the Madhya  Pradesh Reorganisation 
Act, 2000 .”; 
(b) after entry 25, the following entry shall be inserted, namely: — 
“26. Chhattisgarh : The territories specified in section 3 of the  Madhya Pradesh 
Reorganisation Act, 2000. ”. 
6. Saving powers of the State Government .—Nothing in the foregoing  provisions of this Part shall 
be deemed to affect the power of the Government of  Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh to alter, after the 
appointed day, the name, area or  boundaries of any district or other territorial division in the State.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
7. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution .—On and from  the appointed day, in 
the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution, in the Table, — 
(a) entries 9 to 27 shall be renumbered as entries 10 to 28 respectively;  
(b) in entry 8, for the figures “16”, the figures “11 “ shall be substituted;  
(c) after entry 8, the following en try shall be inserted, namely :— 
“9. Chhattisgarh ……………………5. ”. 
8. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the  sixteen sitting members 
of the Council of States representing the existing State of  Madhya Pradesh , shall be deemed to have been 
elected to fill the seats allotted to  the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, as specified in the First 
Schedule  to this Act.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  
The House of the People  
9. Representation in the House of the People .—On and from the appointed  day, there shall be 
allocated 29 seats to the successor State of Madhya Pradesh , and 11 to the successor State of 
Chhattisgarh, in the House of the People , and the First  Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 
1950 (43 of 1950) shall be  deemed to be amended accordingly.  
10. Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly constituencies .—On and from the appointed day, 
the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly  Constituencies Order, 1976, shall stand amended as 
directed in the Second  Schedule to this Act.  
11. Provision as to sitting members .—(1) Every sitting member of the  House of the People 
representing a constituency which, on the appointed day by  virtue of the provisions of section 10, stands 
allotted, with or without alteration of  boundaries, to the successor States of Madhya Pradesh or 
Chhattisgarh, shall be  deemed to have been ele cted to the House of the People by that constituency as so  
allotted. 
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  
  6 
 The Legislative Assembly  
12. Provisions as to Legislative Assemblies .—(1) The number of seats as  on the appointed day in 
the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Madhya Pradesh  and Chhattisgarh shall be two hundred and 
thirty and ninety respectively.  
(2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1 950), under heading 
“I. States ”,— 
(a) entries 5 to 25 shall be renumbered as entries 6 to 26 respectively;  
(b) after entry 4, the following en try shall be inserted, namely : — 
 
“1 5 
5. Chhattisgarh ………………………………………………… ……. ………..90. ”; 
(c) in entry 13, as so renumbered, for the figures “320”, the figures  “230” shall be substituted.  
13. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) Every sitting member of the  Legislative Assembly of the 
existing State of Madhya Pradesh elected to fill a seat  in that Assembly from a constituency which on the 
appointed day b y virtue of the  provisions of s ection 10 stands allotted, with or without alteration of 
boundaries,  to the State of Chhattisgarh shall, on and from that day, cease to be a member of the  
Legislative Assembly of Madhya Pradesh and shall be deemed to have bee n elected  to fill a seat in the 
Legislative Assembly of Chhattisgarh from that constituency so  allotted.  
(2) All other sitting members of the Legislative Assembly of the existing  State of Madhya Pradesh 
shall continue to be members of the Legislative Assem bly of that State and any such sitting member 
representing a constituency the extent, or  the name and extent of which are altered by virtue of the 
provisions of s ection 9  shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Madhya  
Pradesh by  that constituency as so altered.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being  in force, the Legislative 
Assemblies of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh shall be  deemed to be duly constituted on the appointed 
day. 
(4) The sittin g member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of  Madhya Pradesh 
nominated to that Assembly under Article 333 to represent the  Anglo -Indian community shall be deemed 
to have been nominated to represent the  said community in the Legislative Asse mbly of Madhya Pradesh 
under that Article.  
14. Duration of Legislative Assemblies .—The period of five years referred to in c lause ( 1) of    
article 172, shall, in the case of Legislative Assembly  of the State of Madhya Pradesh and the State of 
Chhattisgarh  be deemed to have  commenced on the date on which it actually commenced in the case of 
Legislative  Assembly of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh.  
15. Speakers and Deputy Speakers .—(1) The persons who immediately  before the appointed day 
are the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legislative  Assembly of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh 
shall continue to be the Speaker  and Deputy Speaker respectively of that Assembly on and from that day.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Legislative As sembly of  the successor State of 
Chhattisgarh shall choose two members of that Assembly to  be respectively Speaker and Deputy Speaker  
thereof and until they are so chosen,  the duties of the office of the Speaker shall be performed by such 
member of the  Assembly as the Governor may appoint for the purpose.  
16. Rules of procedure .—The rules of procedure and conduct of business  of the Legislative 
Assembly of Madhya Pradesh as in force immedi ately before the  appointed day sha ll, until rules are made 
under c lause ( 1) of a rticle 208, be the  rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
Assembly of the State  of Chhattisgarh, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made  
therein by the Speaker thereof.  
  7 
 Delimitation of constituencies  
17. Delimitation of constituencies .—(1) For the purpose of giving effect to  the provisions of section 
12, the Election Commission shall determine in the  manner hereinafter provided — 
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Ca stes and the  Scheduled Tribes in the 
Legislative Assemblies of the States of  Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, respectively having regard 
to the  relevant provisions of the Constitution;  
(b) the assembly constituencies into which each State referred to in  clause ( a) shall be divided, 
the extent of each of such constituencies  and in which of them seats shall be reserved for the 
Scheduled  Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes; and  
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of  the parliam entary 
constituencies in each State referred to in clause  (a) that may be necessary or expedient.  
(2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section  (1), the Election  
Commission shall have regard to the  following provisions, n amely: — 
(a) all the constituencies shall be single -member constituencies ; 
(b) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically  compact  areas , and in 
delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features,  existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communication and  conveniences to the public; and  
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the  Scheduled Tribes 
shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the  proportion of  their population to the total 
population is the largest.  
(3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the  performance of its functions 
under sub -section ( 1), associate with itself as associate  members, five persons as the Central Government 
may, by order specify, being  persons who are members of the Legislative A ssembly of the  State or of the 
House  of the People representing the State : 
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to  sign any decision of  the 
Election Commission.  
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls  vacant, it shall be filled 
as far as practicable, in accordance with the provisions of  sub-section ( 3). 
(5) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies together  with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate member who  desires publication thereof in the Official Gazette and 
in such other  manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice  inviting objections 
and suggestions in relation to the proposals and  specifying a date on or after which the proposals will 
be further  considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received  by it before the date  so 
specified; and  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been  recei ved by it before the 
date so spec ified, determine by one or more  orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
order or  orders to be published in the Official Gazette; and upon such  publication, the order or orders 
shall have the full force of law and  shall no t be called in question in any c ourt. 
(6) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to  assembly constituencies 
shall  be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the  concerned State.  
(7) The delimitation of constituencies in the States of Madhya Pradesh and  Chhattisgarh shall be 
determined on the basis of the published figures of the census  taken in the year 1971.  
18. Power of the Election Commission to maintain Delimitation Orders  up-to-date.—(1) The 
Election Commission may, from time to time, by notification  in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 17 or  any error arising therein 
from inadvertent slip or omission; and  8 
 (b) where the boundaries or name of any territorial division mentioned  in any such order or orders 
is or are altered, make such amendments  as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such  
order  up-to-date.  
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency  shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is issued, before the concerned Legislative  Assembly.  
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes  
19. Amendment of the Scheduled Castes Order .—On and from the  appointed day,  the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand  amended as directed in the Third Schedule.  
20. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order .—On and from the  appointed day, the C onstitution 
(Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, shall stand  amended as directed in the Fourth Schedule.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
21. High Court of Chhattisgarh .—(1) As from the appointed day, there  shall be a separate High 
Court for the State of Chhattisgarh (hereinafter referred to  as “the High Court of Chhattisgarh ”) and the 
High Court of Madhya Pradesh shall  become the High Court for the State of Madhya Pradesh (hereinafter 
referred to as  the High Court of Madhya Pradesh).  
(2) The principal seat of High Court of Chhatti sgarh shall be at such place  as the President may, by 
notified order, appoint.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Judges and  Division Courts of the 
High Court of Chhattisgarh may sit at such other place or  places in the State of  Chhattisgarh other than its 
principal seat as the Chief Justice  may, with the approval of the Governor of Chhattisgarh, appoint.  
22. Judges of Chhattisgarh High Court .—(1) Such of the Judges of the  High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh holding office immediately before the appointed  day as may be determined by the President shall 
on that day cease to be Judges of  the High Court of Madhya Pradesh and become Judges of the High 
Court of  Chhattisgarh.  
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) become Judges of t he High  Court of Chhattisgarh 
shall, except in the case where any such person is appointed  to be the Chief Justice of that High Court, 
rank in that Court according to the  priority of their respective appointments as Judges of the High Court 
of Madhya  Prade sh. 
23. Jurisdiction of Chhattisgarh High Court .—The High Court of  Chhattisgarh shall have, in 
respect of any part of the territories included in the State  of Chhattisgarh, all such jurisdiction, powers and 
authority as, under the law in  force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect to 
that part  of the said territories by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh.  
24. Special p rovision relating to Bar Council and advocates .—On and  from the appointed day, in 
the Advoc ates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961) in s ection 3, in  sub-section ( 1), in clause ( a), for the words “and 
Madhya Pradesh ”, the words  “Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh ” shall be substituted.  
(2) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an Advocate  on the roll of the Bar 
Counc il of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh may give his  option in writing, within one year from the 
appointed day to the Bar Council of  such existing State, to transfer his name on the roll of the Bar Council 
of Chhattisgarh and notwithstanding anything co ntained in the Advocates Act, 1961  (25 of 1961) and the 
rules made thereunder, on such option so given his name shall  be deemed to have been transferred on the 
roll of the Bar Council of Chhattisgarh  with effect from the date of the option so given for the  purposes of 
the said Act and  the rules made thereunder.  
(3) The persons other than the Advocates who are entitled immediately  before the appointed day, to 
practise in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh or any  subordinate c ourt thereof shall, on and after th e 
appointed day , be recognised as such  persons entitled also to practise in the High Court of Chhattisgarh or 
any subordinate c ourt thereof, as the case may be.  
(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Chhattisgarh shall be  regulated in accordance wi th the 
like principles as immediately before the  appointed day are in force with respect to the right of audience 
in the High Court of  Madhya Pradesh.  9 
 25. Practice and procedure in Chhattisgarh High Court .—Subject to the  provisions of this Part, 
the law in  force immediately before the appointed day with  respect to practice and procedure in the High 
Court of Madhya Pradesh shall, with  the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of 
Chhattisgarh , and accordingly, the High Court of Chhattis garh shall have all such powers to make  rules 
and orders with respect to practice and procedure as are immediately before  the appointed day exercisable 
by the High Court of Madhya Pradesh : 
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately be fore the  appointed day with 
respect to practice and procedure in the High Court of Madhya  Pradesh shall, until varied or revoked by 
rules or orders made by the High Court of  Chhattisgarh, apply with the necessary modifications in 
relation to practice and  procedure in the High Court of Chhattisgarh as if made by that Court.  
26. Custody of seal of Chhattisgarh High Court .—The law in force  immediately before the 
appointed day with respect to the custody of the seal of the  High Court of Madhya Pradesh shall, wi th the 
necessary modifications, apply with  respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Chhattisgarh.  
27. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately  before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used,  issued or awarded by the High Court of 
Madhya Pradesh shall, with the necessary  modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other 
processes used,  issued or awarded by the High Court of Chhattisgarh.  
28. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately before the appointed  day relating to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, Single Judge and Division Courts of  the High Court of Madhya Pradesh and 
with respect to all matters ancillary to the  exercise of those powers shall, with the ne cessary 
modifications, apply in relation  to the High Court of Chhattisgarh.  
29. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force  immediately before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court  from the High Court of Ma dhya Pradesh a nd the 
Judges and division c ourts thereof  shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High 
Court of  Chhattisgarh.  
30. Transfer of proceedings from Madhya Pradesh High Court to  Chhattisgarh High Court .—
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, the High Court of  Madhya Pradesh shall, as from the appointed day, 
have no jurisdiction in respect of  the transferred territory.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court of Madhya Pradesh  immediately before the 
appointed day as are certified, whether before or after that  day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court, 
having regard to the place of accrual  of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings 
which ought to be  heard and decided by the High Court of Chhattisg arh shall, as soon as may be after  
such certification, be transferred to the High Court of Chhattisgarh.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this  section or in s ection 23, but 
save as hereinafter provided, the High Court of Madhya Pradesh shall have , and the High Court of 
Chhattisgarh shall not have,  jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to 
the Supreme Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such  proceedings se ek any 
relief in respect of any order passed by the High Court of  Madhya Pradesh before the appointed day:  
Provided that i f after any such proceedings have been entertained by the  High Court of Madhya 
Pradesh, it appears to the Chief Justice of that High C ourt that they ought to be transferred to the High 
Court of Chhattisgarh, he shall order  that they shall be so transferred , and such proceedings shall 
thereupon be transferred  accordingly.  
(4) Any order made by t he High Court of Madhya Pradesh — 
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceedings transferred to the High  Court of Chhattisgarh by 
virtue of sub -section ( 2); or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court of Madhya  Pradesh retains 
jurisdiction by virtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall for all purposes have effect, not only as an order of the High Court of  Madhya Pradesh, but also as 
an order made by the High Court of  Chhattisgarh.  
31. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to Chhattisgarh  High Court .—Any 
person, who, immediate ly before the appointed day, is an  Advocate entitled to practise or any other 
persons entitled to practise in the High  Court of Madhya Pradesh and was authorised to appear in any 10 
 proceedings  transferred from that High Court to the Hi gh Court of Chhattisgar h under s ection  30, shall 
have the right to appear in the High Court of Chhattisgarh in relation to  those proceedings.  
32. Interpretation .—For the purposes of s ection 30 — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a Court until that  Court has disposed of all 
issues between the parties, including any  issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the 
proceedings  and shall include appeals, applications for leave to the Supreme  Court, applications for 
review, petitions for revision and petiti ons for writs; and  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including  references to a Judge or division  
court thereof, and references to an  order made by a Court or a Judge shall be construed as including  
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that  Court or Judge.  
33. Saving .—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High  Court of Chhattisgarh of any 
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have  effect subject to any provision that may be made 
on or after the appointed day with  respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other authority having 
power to  make such provision.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF  REVENUES  
34. Authorisation of expenditure of Chhattisgarh State .—The Governor  of Madhya Pradesh may, 
at any time before the appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the  Consolidated Fund of the State 
of Chhattisgarh as he deems necessary for any  period not more than six months beginning with the 
appointed day pen ding the  sanction of such expenditure by the Legislative Assembly of the State of  
Chhattisgarh : 
Provided that the Governor of Chhattisgarh may, after the appointed day,  authorise such further 
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated  Fund of the State of Chhattisgarh for any 
period not extending beyond the said  period of six months.  
35. Reports relating to accounts of Madhya Pradesh State .—(1) The  reports of the Comptroller 
and Auditor -General of India referred to in c lause ( 2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the State of 
Madhya Pradesh in respect of  any period prior to the appointed day shall be submitted to the Governor of 
each of  the successor States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh who shall cause them to  be laid before 
the Leg islature of that State.  
(2) The President may by order — 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of  Madhya Pradesh on any 
service in respect of any period prior to the  appointed day during the financial year or in respect of 
any earlier  financial year in excess of the amount granted for that service and  for that year as 
disclosed in the reports referred to in sub -section ( 1) to have been duly authorised; and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the  said reports.  
36. Distribution of revenue .—The President shall, by order, determine the  share of the States of 
Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in the total amount payable  to the existing State of Madhya Pradesh on 
the recommendation of the Finance  Commissio n constituted under a rticle 280 of the Constitution, in such 
manner as  he thinks fit.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
37. Application of Part .—(1) The provisions of this Part shall apply in  relation to the apportionment 
of the assets and liabilities of the State of Madhya  Pradesh immediately before the appointed day.  
(2) The successor State shall be entitled to receive benefits arising out of the  decisions taken by the 
predecessor State and the successor States shall be liable to  bear the financial liabilities arising out of the 
decision taken by the existing State of  Madhya Pradesh.  
(3) The apportionment of assets and liabilities would be subject to such  financial adjustment as may 
be necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable  apportionment of the assets and liabilities amongst 
the successor States.  11 
 (4) Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall  be settled through mutual 
agreement, failing which by order by the Central  Government on the advice of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
38. Land and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all  land and all stores, articles 
and other goods belonging to the existing State of  Madhya Pradesh shall, — 
(a) if within the transferred te rritory, pass to the State of Chhattisgarh;  or 
(b) in any other case, remain the property of the State of Madhya  Pradesh : 
Provided that any land, stores, articles or other goods may be distributed  otherwise than in accordance 
with the situation of such lan d, stores, articles or  goods by mutual agreement between the successor 
States, failing which the Central  Government may, on the request of any of the Governments of the 
successor States  and after consulting both the Governments of the successor States, iss ue directions  for 
the just and equitable distribution of such land, stores, articles or goods between  the successor States and 
the land, articles or goods shall accordingly pass to the  successor States : 
Provided further that in case of the distribution, of  any land, stores, articles  and goods or class of 
goods under this sub -section located outside the existing State  of Madhya Pradesh, such distribution shall 
be made through mutual agreement  arrived at between the Government s of the successor States for tha t 
purpose, failing  which the Central Government may, on request by any of the Governments of the  
successor States, after consulting both the Governments of the successor States,  issue such direction as it 
may deem fit for the distribution of such land, sto res, articles and goods or class of goods, as the case may 
be, under this sub -section.  
(2) Stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in  particular institutions, workshops or 
undertakings or on particular works under  construction, shall pass to the successor States in whose 
territories such institutions,  workshops, undertakings or works are located.  
(3) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads of  Departments having jurisdiction over the 
whole of the existing State of Madhya  Pradesh shall be divided between the successor States in 
accordance with the  mutual agreement arrived at between the Government of the successor States for  that 
purpose, failing which the Central Government may, on request by any of the  Government s of the  
successor States, after consulting both the Government s of the  successor S tates, issue such direction as i t 
may deem fit for the d istribution of such  stores or any part of such stores, as the case may be.  
(4) Any other unissued stores of any class in the existing State of  Madhya Pradesh shall be divided 
between the successor States in proportion to the  total stores of that class purchased in the period of three 
years prior to the appointed  day, for the territories of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh in cluded  
respectively in each of the successor States:  
Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in respect of any  class of stores or where 
the value of any class of such stores does not exceed rupees  ten thousand,  that class of stores shall  be 
divided between the successor States  according to the population ratio.  
(5) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property of  every kind and any rights in 
or over such property, and the expression “goods ” does not include coins, ban k notes and currency notes.  
39. Treasury and bank balances .—The total of the cash  balances in all  treasuries of the State of 
Madhya Pradesh and the credit balances of the State with  Reserve Bank of India , the State Bank of India 
or any other bank immediately  before the appointed day shall be divided between the States of Madhya 
Pradesh  and Chhattisgarh according to the population ratio:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no tra nsfer of  cash balances from any 
treasury to any other treasury and the apportionments shall  be effected by adjusting the credit balances of 
the two States in the books of the  Reserve Bank of India on the appointed day:  
Provided further that if the State of  Chhattisgarh has no account on the  appointed day with the 
Reserve Bank of India, the adjustment shall be made in such  manner as the Central Government may, by 
order, direct.  
40. Arrears of taxes .—The right to recover arrears of any tax or duty on  property , including arrears 
of land revenue, shall belong to the successor State in  which the property is situated, and the right to 12 
 recover arrears of any other tax or  duty shall belong to the successor State in whose territories the place of 
assessment  of that t ax or duty is included on the appointed day.  
41. Right to recover loans and advances .—(1) The right of the existing  State of Madhya Pradesh to 
recover any loans or advances made before the  appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist or 
other person in an area  within that State shall belong to the successor State in which that area is included  
on that day.  
(2) The right of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh to recover any loans  or advances made before 
the appointed day to any person or instit ution outside that  State shall belong to the State of Madhya 
Pradesh:  
Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan or advance  shall be divided between the 
States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh according  to the population ratio.  
42. Inves tments and credits in certain funds .—(1) The securities held in  respect of the investments 
made from Cash Balances Investment Account or from  any Fund in the Public Account of the existing 
State of Madhya Pradesh as  specified in the Fifth Schedule to this Act shall be apportioned in the ratio of  
population of the successor States:  
Provided that the securities held in investments made from the Calamity  Relief Fund of the existing 
State of Madhya Pradesh shall be divided in the ratio of  the area of the territ ories occupied by the 
successor States:  
Provided further that the balance in the Reserve Funds in the Public  Account of Madhya Pradesh 
created wholly out of appropriations from the  Consolidated Fund of the existing State of Madhya 
Pradesh, to the extent th e balances have not been invested outside Government account, shall not be 
carried  forward to similar Reserve Funds in the Public Account of, successor States:  
Provided also that the balances in any other Reserve Funds, excluding those  specified in                   
sub-section ( 2), shall be allocated between the States of Madhya  Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in the ratio of 
population of those States.  
(2) The investments of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh immediately  before the appointed day in 
any special fund the objects of which are confined to a  local area shall belong to the State in which that 
area is included on the appointed  day. 
(3) The investments of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh immediately  before the appointed day in 
any private, c ommercial or industrial undertaking, in so  far as such investments have not been made or 
are deemed not to have been made  from the cash balance investment account, shall pass to the State in 
which the  principal seat of business of the undertaking is locate d. 
(4) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act or  Provincial Act for the 
existing State of Madhya Pradesh or any part thereof has, by  virtue of the provisions of Part II of this Act, 
become an inter -State body corporate,  the inv estments in, or loans or advances to, any such body 
corporate by the existing  State of Madhya Pradesh made before the appointed day shall, save as otherwise  
expressly provided by or under this Act, be divided between the States of Madhya  Pradesh and 
Chhatt isgarh in the same proportion in which the assets of the body  corporate are divided under the 
provisions of this Part.  
43. Assets and liabilities of State undertaking .—(1) The assets and  liabilities relating to any 
undertaking of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh  whether directly owned or through a body corporate 
constituted or incorporated or  registered under any Central, State or Provincial Act, shall, — 
(a) if exclusively located in a successor State, pass to the successor  State, and where a 
deprec iation reserve i s maintained by the existing  State of Madhya Pradesh for such undertaking, the 
securities held in  respect of investment made from that fund shall also pass to such  successor State;  
(b) where any such undertaking or part thereof is located, in more than  one successor State, the 
assets, liabilities and securities shall be  divided in such manner as may be agreed upon between the  
successor States within a period of two years from the appointed day  or in failure of such agreement 
as the Central G overnment may by  order direct.  
(2) An agreement entered into between the successor States, or order made  by the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 1) may provide for the dissolution of  the undertaking or transfer or              13 
 re-employment of any employee of the undertaking to  or by the successor States, subject to the provisions 
of section 62.  
(3) An agreement entered into between the successor States, or order made  by the Central 
Government under sub -section ( 1) may also provide for the transfer  of the assets and liabilities which 
would otherwise have passed to a successor State  to any other undertaking of that successor State; and 
any employee of the  undertaking referred to in sub -section ( 1), who would otherwise have been  
transferred to or re -employed by a successor State, may be transferred to or be re -employed  by such 
undertaking instead of that successor State.  
44. Public Debt .—(1) All liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public  Account of the existing 
State of Madhya Pradesh outstanding immediately before  the appointed day shall be apportioned in the 
ratio of population of the successor  States unless a different mode of apportionment is provided under the 
provisions of  this Act.  
(2) The individual items of liabilities to be allocated to the successor  States and the amount of 
contribution required to be made by one successor State to  another shall be such as may be ordered by the 
Central Government in consultation  with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India:  
Provided that till such o rders are issued, the liabilities on account of Public  Debt and Public Account 
of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall continue to  be the liabilities of the successor State of 
Madhya Pradesh.  
(3) The liability on account of loans raised from any sour ce and re -lent by the existing State of 
Madhya Pradesh to such entities as may be specified by the  Central Government and whose area of 
operation is confined to either of the  successor States shall devolve on the respective States as specified in 
sub-section (4). 
(4) The Public Debt of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh attributable to  loan taken from any 
source for the express purpose of re -lending the same to a  specific institution and outstanding 
immediately before the appointed day shall — 
(a) if re -lent to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any  local area, be the debt of 
the State in which the local area is included  on the appointed day; or  
(b) if re -lent to  the Madhya Pradesh State Electricity Board, the Madhya  Pradesh State Road 
Transport Corporation, or the Madhya Pradesh  Housing Board or any other institution which becomes 
an inter-State  institution on the appointed day, be divided between the States of  Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh in the same proportion in which  the assets of  such body corporate or institution are 
divided under the  provisions of Part VII of this Act.  
(5) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained by the  existing State of Madhya 
Pradesh for repayment of any loan raised by it, the  securities held in respect of investments made from 
that fund shall be divided  between the successor States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in the same  
proportion in which the total public debt is divided between the two States under  this s ection.  
(6) In this section, the expression “Government security ” means a security,  created and issued by a 
State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan  and having any of the forms specified in, or 
prescribed under clause ( 2) of section  2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944 (18 of 1944).  
45. Floating loans .—All liabilities of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh  of any floating loan to 
provide short term finance to any local body, body corporate  or other institution shall be determined by 
mutual agreement between the successor  States, failing which the Central Government shall determine 
such liability between  the successor States in consultation with such States.  
46. Refund of taxes collected in excess .—The liability of the existing State  of Madhya Pradesh to 
refund any tax or duty on property, including land revenue,  collected in excess shall be the liability of the 
successor State in whose territories  the property is situated, and the liability of the existing State of 
Madhya Pradesh to  refund any other ta x or duty collected in excess shall be the liability of the  successor 
State in whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is  included.  
47. Deposits, etc .—(1) The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh  in respect of any civil 
deposit or local fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day,  be the liability of the State in whose area 
the deposit has been made.  14 
 (2) The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh in respect of any  charitable or other 
endowment shall, as from t he appointed day, be the liability of  the State in whose area the institution 
entitled to the benefit of the endowment is  located or of the State to which the objects of the endowment, 
under the terms  thereof, are confined.  
48. Provident fund .—The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh  in respect of the 
provident fund account of a Government servant in service on the  appointed day shall, as from that day, 
be the liability of the State to which that  Government servant is permanently allott ed. 
49. Pensions .—The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh in  respect of pensions shall pass 
to, or be apportioned between the successor States of  Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh in accordance 
with the provisions contained in  the Sixth Schedul e to this Act.  
50. Contracts .—(1) Where, before the appointed day, the existing State of  Madhya Pradesh has made 
any contract in the exercise of its executive power for  any purposes of the State, that contract shall be 
deemed to have been made in the  exerc ise of the  executive power — 
(a) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from the appointed day,  exclusive purposes of either 
of the successor States of Madhya  Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, then, of that State; or  
(b) in any other case, of the State of Madhya Pradesh,  
all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue under any such contract  shall, to the extent to 
which they would have been rights or liabilities of the  existing State of Madhya Pradesh, be rights or 
liabilities of the State of  Chhattisgarh or the State of Mad hya Pradesh, as the case may be : 
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( b), the initial  allocation of rights and 
liabilities made by this sub -section shall be subject to such  financial adjustment as may be agreed upon 
between the successor States of  Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh or in default of such agreement, as the 
Central  Government may, by order, direct.  
(2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in  the liabilities w hich have 
accured o r may accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy  an order or award made by any c ourt or other  tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in connection with  any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part  relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other  financial obligations; and bank 
balances and securities shall, notwi thstanding that  they partake of the nature of contractual rights, be dealt 
with under those  provisions.  
51. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before  the appointed day, the 
existing State of Madhya Pradesh is subject to any liability  in respect of any actionable wrong other than 
breach of contract, that liability  shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories which, as  from that day, are the 
territories of either of the successor States of  Madhya Prade sh or Chhattisgarh, be a liability of that 
successor  State; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Madhya  Pradesh, but subject to such 
financial adjustment as may be agreed  upon between the States of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattis garh 
or, in  default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by  order, direct.  
52. Liability as guarantor .—Where, immediately before the appointed day,  the existing State of 
Madhya Pradesh is liable as guarantor in respect of any  liability of a registered co -operative society or 
other person, that liability of the  existin g State of Madhya Pradesh shall — 
(a) if the area of operations of such society or persons is limited  to the territories which, as from 
that day, are the territories of  either of the States of Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh, be a  liability of 
that successor State; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of  Madhya Pradesh, subject to such 
financial adjustment as may  be agreed upon between the States of Madhya Pradesh and  Chhattisgarh 
or, in default of such agreements, as the Central  Government may, by order, direct.  15 
 53. Items in suspense .—If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect  an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the f oregoing provisions of  this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  
54. Residuary provision .—The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of  the existing State of 
Madhya Pradesh not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of  this Part shall pass to the State of Madhya 
Pradesh in the first instance, subject to  such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the 
States of Madhya  Pradesh and Chhattisgarh or, in default of such agreement, as the Central  Government 
may, by order , direct.  
55. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement .—Where the  successor States of Madhya 
Pradesh and Chhattisgarh agree that the asset, liability  or benefit or burden of any particul ar asset or 
liability should be  apportioned  between them in  a manner other than that provided for in the foregoing 
provisions  of this Part then, notwithstanding anything contained therein, the assets, liability or  benefit or 
burden of that asset or liability shall be apportioned in the manner agreed  upon.  
56. Powe r of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in  certain cases .—Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the  successor States of Madhya Pradesh and 
Chhattisgarh becomes entitled to any  property or obtains any benefits or b ecomes subject to any liability, 
and the Central  Government is of opinion, on a reference made within a period of three years from  the 
appointed day by either of the States, that it is just and equitable that property or  those benefits should be 
transferred to, or shared with, the other successor State, or  that a contribution towards that liability should 
be made by the other successor  State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner 
between the  two States, or the other State  shall make to the State subject to the liability such  contribution 
in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation  with the two State Governments, by 
order determine.  
57. Certain expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund .—All su ms payable either by the 
State of Madhya Pradesh or by the State of Chhattisgarh to  the other States or by the Central Government 
to either of those States, by virtue of  the provisions of this Act, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund 
of the State  by which such sums are payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of  India.  
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
58. Provisions as to Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board, State Road  Transport Corporation and 
State Warehousing Corporation, etc.—(1) The  following bodies corporate constituted for the existing 
State of Madhya Pradesh,  namely: — 
(a) the State Electricity Board constituted under the Electricity Supply  Act, 1948 (54 of 1948);  
(b) the State Road Transport Corporation established und er the Road  Transport Corporations Act, 
1950 (64 of 1950); and  
(c) the State Warehousing Corporation established under the  Warehousing Corporations Act, 
1962 (58 of 1962),  
shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect  of which they were 
functioning immediately before that day, subject to the  provisions of this section and arrangements for the 
functioning of such body  corporates as may be mutually agreed upon between the successor States failing  
which to such directions as may, from time to time, be issued by the Central  Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the Board or 
the Corporation shall include a direction that the Act  under which  the Board or the Corporation was 
constituted shall, in its application to  that Board or Corporation, have effect subject to such exceptions 
and modifications  as the Central Government thinks fit.  
(3) The Board or the Corporation referred to in sub -section  (1) shall cease to  function as from, and 
shall be deemed to be dissolved on such date as the Central  Government may, by order, appoint; and upon 
such dissolution, its assets, rights  and liabilities shall be apportioned between the successor States of 
Madh ya Pradesh  and Chhattisgarh  in such manner as may be agreed upon between them within one   year   16 
 of the dissolution of the Board or the Corporation, as the case may be, or if no  agreement is reached, in 
such manner as the Central Government may, by order,  determine:  
Provided that any liabilities of the said Board relating to the unpaid dues of  the coal supplied to the 
Board by any public sector coal company shall be  provisionally apportioned between the successor 
organisations constituted  respectively in the successor States of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh or  
after the date appointed for the dissolution of the Board under this sub -section in  such manner as may be 
agreed upon between the Governments of the successor  States within one month of such d issolution or i f 
no agreement is reached, in such  manner as the Central Government may, by order, determine subject to  
reconciliation and finalisation of the liabilities which shall be completed within  three months from the 
date of such dissolution by the mutual agreement between  the successor States or failing such agreement 
by the direction of the Central  Government : 
Provided further that an interest at the rate of two per cent . higher than the  Cash Credit interest shall 
be paid on outstanding unpaid dues  of the coal supplied  to the Board by the public sector coal company 
till the liquidation of such dues by  the concerned successor organisations constituted in the successor 
States on or after  the date appointed for the dissolution of the Board under this s ub-section.  
(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as  preventing the 
Government of the State of Madhya Pradesh or, as the case may be,  the Government of the State of 
Chhattisgarh from constituting, at any time on or  after the appointed day, a State Electricity Board or a 
State Road Transport  Corporation or a State Warehousing Corporation for the State under the provisions  
of the Act relating to such Board or Corporation; and if such a Board or  Corporation is so constitute d in 
either of the States before the dissolution of the  Board or the Corporation referred to in sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Government  enabling the new Board or the 
new Corporation to take over form the existing Board or Corporation all or any of its undertakings , 
assets, rights and liabilities in that State, and  
(b) upon the dissolution of existing Board or Corporation, — 
(i) any  assets,  rights and liabilities which would otherwise have passed to  that State by or 
under the provisions of sub -section ( 3) shall pass to  the new Board or the new Corporation 
instead of to that State;  
(ii) any employee who would otherwise have been transferred t o or re -employed  by that State 
under sub -section ( 3), read with clause ( i) of sub-section ( 5), shall be transferred to or                    
re-employed by the new  Board or the new Corporation instead of to or by that State.  
(5) An agreement entered into b etween the successor States unde r sub-section  (3) and an order made 
by the Central Government under that sub -section or  under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) may provide for 
the transfer or re -employment  of any employee of the Board or the Corporation referr ed to in sub -section 
(1),— 
(i) to or by the successor States, in the case of an agreement under sub -section  (4) or an order 
made under that sub -section;  
(ii) to or by the new Board or the new Corporation constituted, under  sub-section ( 4), in the case 
of an order made under clause  (a) of that  sub-section,  
and subject to the provisions of section 64, also for the  terms and conditions of service applicable to such 
employees after  such transfer or re -employment.  
59. Provisions as to Madhya Pradesh State Finan cial Corporation .—(1) The Madhya Pradesh 
State Financial Corporation established under the State  Financial Corporation Act, 1951 (63 of 1951) 
shall, on and from the appointed day,  continue to function in those areas in respect of which it was 
functioning  immediately before that day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such  directions as 
may from time to time, be issued by the Central Government after  consultation with the Governments of 
the successor States.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the 
Corporation may include a direction that the said Act, in its  application to the Corporation, shall have 
effect subject to such exceptions and  modifications as may be specified in the direction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section  (2), the Board of Directors 
of the Corporation may, with the previous approval of  the Central Government and shall, if so required by 17 
 the Central Government,  convene at any time after t he appointed day a meeting for the consideration of a  
scheme for the reconstitution or reorganisation or dissolution, as the case may be,  of the Corporation, 
including proposals regarding the formation of new  Corporations, and the transfer thereto of the a ssets, 
rights and liabilities of the  existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at the general meeting 
by a resolution passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the scheme  shall be submitted 
to the Central Government for its sanction.  
(4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either without  modifications or with 
modifications which ar e approved at a general meeting, the Central Government shall certify the scheme, 
and upon such certification, the  scheme shall, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any 
law for the  time being in force, be binding on the corporations affected by the scheme as well  as the 
shareholders and creditors thereof.  
(5) If the scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the Cent ral Government  may refer the scheme to 
such Judge of the High Court of Madhya Pradesh as may  be nominated in this behalf by the Chief Justice 
thereof, and the decision of the  Judge in regard to the scheme shall be final and shall be binding on the  
corporat ions affected by the scheme as well as the shareholders and creditors  thereof.  
(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as  preventing the 
Government of the State of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh from  constituting, at any  time on or after 
the appointed day, a State Financial  Corporation for that State under the State Financial Corporation Act, 
1951 (63 of  1951).  
60. Provisions as to certain companies .—(1) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the foregoing 
provisions of th is Part, each of the companies specified  in the Seventh Schedule to this Act shall, on and 
from the appointed day and until  otherwise provided for in any law, or in any agreement among the 
successor States,  or in any direction issued by the Central Governm ent, continue to function in the  areas 
in which it was functioning immediately before that day; and the Central  Government may, after 
consultation with the Governments of the successor States , from time to time issue such directions in 
relation to such fun ctioning as it may  deem fit, notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in the 
Companies Act,  1956 (1 of 1956) or in any other law.  
(2) Any directions issued under sub -section ( 1), in respect of a company  referred to in that sub -
section, may include directions — 
(a) regarding the division of the interests and shares of existing State of  Madhya Pradesh in the 
company among the successor States;  
(b) requiring the reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the  company so as to give adequate 
representation to both the successor  States.  
61. Functioning of organisation, registered society or trust incorporated  on behest of State 
Government .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the  foregoing provisions of this Part or any 
other law for the t ime being in force, any  organis ation,  registered society or trust, incorporated at the 
behest of the State  Government , shall, on and from the appointed day, and until otherwise provided for  in 
any law for the time being in force, or in any agreement between the successor  States, o r in any direction 
issued by the Central Government in consultation with  the successor States, continue to function in the 
areas in which it was functioning  immediately before that day , and the Central Government may , after 
consultin g the Government s of successor States, issue directions in relation to such functioning . 
(2) Any directions issued under sub -section ( 1) may include directions regarding the — 
(i) reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the organisation, society  or trust by whatever name 
it may be called; or  
(ii) appointment of the Chief Executive by whatever name it may be  called; or  
(iii) regulations or bye -laws, by whatever name they may be called; or  
(iv) assessment and apportionment of financial support, if any, provided  by the existing State of 
Madhya Pradesh for meeting fixed charges.  
62. General provisions as to statutory corporations .—(1) Save as  otherwise expressly provi ded by 
the foregoing provisions of this Part , where any  body corporate constituted un der a Central Act, State Act 
or Provincia1 Act for the  existing State of Madhya Pradesh or any part thereof has, by virtue of the  
provisions of Part II of this Act, become an inter -State body corporate, then, the  body corporate shall, on 
and from the appoi nted day, continue to function and  operate in those areas in respect of which it was 18 
 functioning and operating  immediately before that day, subject to such directions as may from time to 
time be  issued by the Central Government, after consultation with the  Government s of the  successor 
States, until other provision is made by law in respect of the said body  corporate.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any such 
body corporate shall include a direction that  any law by  which the said body corporate is governed shall, 
in its application to that body  corporate, have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may 
be specified in the direction.  
63. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain exi sting road  transport permits .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 88 of the  Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 19 88), a permit 
granted by the State Transport  Authority of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh or any Regional 
Transport  Authority in that State shall, if such permit was, immediately before the appointed  day, valid 
and effective in any area in the transferred territory, be deemed to  continue to be valid and effective in 
that area after that day subject to the provisions  of that Act a s for the time being in force in that area; and 
it shall not be necessary  for any such permit to be count ersigned by the State Transport Authority of  
Chhattisgarh or any Regional Transport Author ity there in for the purpose of  validating it for use in such 
area: 
Provided that the Central Government may, after  consultation with the successor State Government or 
Governments concerned add  to, amend or vary the condition s attached to the permit by the Authority by 
which  the permit was granted.  
(2) No tolls, entr ance fees or other charges of a like nature shall be levied  after the appointed day in 
respect any transport vehicle for its operations in any of  the successor States under a ny such permit, if 
such vehicle was, immediately  before that day, exempt from the payment of any such toll, entrance fees 
or other  charges for its operations in the transferred territory:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State  Government or 
Governments concerned, authorise the levy of any such toll,  entrance fees or other charges, as the case 
may be.  
64. Special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain  cases .—Where on 
account of the reorganisation of the existing State of Madhya  Pradesh under this Act, any body corporate 
constituted  under a Central Act, State  Act or Provincial Act, any co -operative society registered under any 
law relating to  co-operative societies or any commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is  
reconstituted or reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is  amalgamated with any  other body corporate, 
co-operative society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in  consequence of such reconstitution, 
reorganisation, amalgamation or dissolution,  any workman employed by such body corporate or in any 
such co -operativ e society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re -employed by any other body  corporate, or 
in any other co -operative society or undertaking, then notwithstanding  anything contained in section 25F, 
section 25FF  or section 25FFF of the  Industrial Disputes A ct, 1947 (14 of 1947) , such transfer or              
re-employment shall not  entitle him to any compensation under that section : 
Provided that — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after  such transfer or                  
re-employment are not less favourable to the  workman than those applicable to him immediately 
before the  transfer or re -employment;  
(b) the employer in relation to the body corporate, the co -operative  society or the undertaking 
where the workman is transfe rred or re -employed  is, by agreement or otherwise, legally liable to pay 
to the  workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation under  section 25F, section 25FF or 
section 25 FFF of the Industrial  Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) on the basis that his  service has  been 
continuous and has not been interrupted by the transfer or re -employment.  
65. Special provisions as to income -tax.—Where the assets, rights and liabilities of  any body 
corporate carrying on any business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies 
corporate which after the transfer carry on the same  business, the losses or profits or gains sustained by 
the body corporate first  mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried  
forward and set off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 
1961) , shall be  appo rtioned  amongst the transferee bodies corporat e in accordance with the  rules to be 
made by the Central Government in  this behalf and, upon su ch appo rtionment, the share of loss allotted to 
each transferee  body corporate shall be dealt with  in accordance with the provision s of Chapter VI of  the 19 
 said Act, as if the transferee body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a  business carried on by it in 
the years in which these losses were sustained.  
66. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions .—(1) The  Government of State of 
Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh, as the case may be, shall , in respect of the institutions specified in the 
Eighth Schedule to this Act, located in  that State, continue to provide facilities to the people of the other 
State which shall  not, in any respect, be less favourable to such people than what were being  provided to 
them before the appointed day, for such period and upon such terms  and conditions as may be agreed 
upon between the two State Governments within a  period of one year from the appointed day or if no 
agreement is reached within the  said period of one year, then, as may be fixed by order of the Cen tral 
Government.  
(2) The Central Government may, at any time within a period of one year  from the appointed day, by 
notification in the O fficial Gazette, specify in the Eighth Schedule any other institution existing on the 
appointed day in the States of  Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh and on the issue of such notification, the  
Schedule shall be deemed to be amended by the inclusion of the said institution  therein.  
PART VIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
67. Provisions relating to All India Services .—(1) In this section, the  expression “State cadre”,— 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned  to it in the Indian 
Administrat ive Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954 ; 
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the  Indian Police 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;  
(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to  it in the Indian Forest 
Service (Cadre) Rul es, 196 6. 
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service,  Indian  Police Service and Indian 
Forest Service for the existing State of Madhya Pradesh,  there shall , on and from the appointed day, be 
two separate cadres, one for the  State of Madhya Pradesh and the other for the S tate of Chhattisgarh in 
respect of  each of these services.  
(3) The initial strength and composition of the State cadres referred to in  sub-section ( 2) shall be such 
as the Central Government may, by order, determine  before the appointed day.  
(4) The members of each of the said service borne on  the Madhya Pradesh  cadre thereof immediately 
before the appointed day shall be allocated to the State  cadres of the same service constituted under       
sub-section ( 2) in such manner and  with effect from such date or dates as the Central Government may, 
by order,  specify.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on or  after the appointed day, of 
the All -India Service Act, 1951 (61 of 1951) or the rules  made thereunder.  
68. Provisions relating to services in Madhya Pradesh a nd C hhattisgarh .—(1) Every person who 
immediately before the appointed day is serving in  connection with the affairs of the existing State of 
Madhya Pradesh shall, on and  from that day provisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs 
of the  State  of Madhya Pradesh unless he is required, by general or special order of the  Central 
Government to serve provisionally in connection with the affairs of the  State of Chhattisgarh:  
Provided that no direction shall be issued under this section after the expiry  of a period of one year 
from the appointed day.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Central Government  shall, by general or special 
order, determine the successor State to which every  person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be fin ally 
allotted for service and the date  with effect from which such allotment sha ll take effect or be deemed to 
have taken  effect.  
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section  (2) to a successor State 
shall, if he is not alre ady serving therein be made available  for serving in the successor State from such 
date as may be agreed upon between  the Governments concerned or in default of such agreement, as may 
be determined  by the Central Government.  
69. Provisions relating to othe r services .—(1) Nothing in this section or  section 68 shall be deemed 
to affect on or after the appointed day the operation of  the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of the 20 
 Constitution in relation to  determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection with 
the affairs of the Union or any State : 
Provided that the conditions of service applicable immediately before the  appointed day in the case of 
any person deemed to have been allocated to the State  of Madhya Prade sh or to the State  of Chhattisgarh 
under section 68 shall not be  varied to his disadvantage except with the previous approval of the Central  
Government.  
(2) All services prior to the app ointed day rendered by a person — 
(a) if he is deemed to have bee n allocated to any State  under s ection 68, shall  be deemed to have 
been rendered in connection with the affairs of that  State;  
(b) if he is deemed to have been allocated to the Union in connection with the  administration of 
the Chhattisgarh shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of the Union,  
for the purposes of the rules regulating his conditions of service.  
(3) The provisions of section 68, shall not apply in relation to members of  any All -India Service.  
70. Provisions as to continuance of officers  in same post .—(1) Every  person who, immediately 
before the appointed day is holding or discharging duties  of any post or office in connection with the 
affairs of the existing State of Madhya  Pradesh in any area which on that day falls within any of the 
successor States shall  continue to hold the same post or office in that successor State, and shall be  
deemed, on and from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by  the Government of, or 
any other appropriate authority in, that succe ssor State : 
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a  competent authority, on and from 
the appointed day, from passing in relation to  such person any order affecting the continuance in such 
post or office.  
71. Advisory Committees .—The Central Government may, by order  establish one or more Advisory 
Committees for the purpose of assisting it in  regard to — 
(a) the discharge of any of its functions under this Part; and  
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected  by the provisions of this 
Part and the proper consideration of any  representations made by such persons.  
72. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central  Government may, give such 
directions to the State Government of Madhya Pradesh  and the  State Government of Chhattisgarh as may 
appear to it to be necessary for  the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the 
State  Governments shall comply with such directions.  
73. Provisions as to State Public Service Commissio n.—(1) The Public  Service Commission for 
the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall, on and from  the appointed day, be the Public Service 
Commission for the State of Madhya  Pradesh.  
(2) The persons holding office immediately before the appointed day as  Chairman or other member of 
the Public Service Commission for the existing State  of Madhya Pradesh shall, as from the appointed day, 
be the Chairman or, as the  case may be, the other member of the Public Service Commission for the State 
of Madhya Pradesh.  
(3) Every person who becomes Chairman or other member of the Public  Service Commission for the 
State of Madhya Pradesh on the appointed day under  sub-section ( 2), shall — 
(a) be entitled to receive from the Government of the State of Madhya  Pradesh conditio ns of 
service not less favourable than those to which he was  entitled under the provisions  applicable to him;  
(b) subject to the proviso to clause  (2) of article 316, hold office or continue to  hold office until 
the expiration of his term of office as dete rmined under the  provisions applicable to him immediately 
before the appointed day.  
(4) The report of the Madhya Pradesh Public Service Commission as to the  work done by the 
Commission in respect of any period prior to the appointed day  shall be presented under c lause ( 2) of 
article 323 to the Governors of the States  of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh, and the Governor of the 
State of Madhya  Pradesh shall, on receipt of such report, cause a copy thereof together with a  
memorandum explaining as far as possible, as respects the cases, if any, where the  advice of the 21 
 Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non -acceptance to  be laid before the Legislature of 
the State of Madhya Pradesh and it shall not be  necessary to cause such report or any suc h memorandum 
to be laid before the  Legislative Assembly of the State of Chhattisgarh.  
74. Jurisdiction of the Commissio ns, Authorities and Tribunals .—(1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in any law for the time being in  force, every Commission, Authority , Tribunal, University, 
Board or any other body  constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act and having 
jurisdiction  over the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall on and from the appointed day  continue to 
function in the successor State o f Madhya Pradesh and also exercise  jurisdiction as existed before the 
appointed day over the State of Chhattisgarh for a  maximum period of two years from the appointed day 
or till such period as is  decided by mutual agreeme nt between the successor States — 
(i) to continue such body as a joint body for the successor States; or  
(ii) to abolish it, on the expiry of that period, for either of the successor  States; or  
(iii) to constitute a separate Commission, Authority, Tribunal,  University, Board or any other 
body, as the case may be, for the  State of Chhattisgarh,  
whichever is earlier.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall be instituted, in case such body is  abolished under              
clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1), by any employee of such body  against the termination of his appointment or 
for the enforcement of any service  conditions or for securing absorption in alternative public employment 
against the  Central Government or any of the successor States.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any law  for the time being in  force or in any judgment, 
decree or order of any court or Tribunal  or contract  or agreement,  any Chairman or member of any body 
abolished under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1) shall not be entitled to any compensation for the unexpired 
period of his tenure.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section or any law  for the time being in force, the 
Central Government, shall, in accordance with any  mutual agreement between the successor States or if 
there is no such agreem ent, after consultation with the Governments of the successor States, issue 
directions for  the resolution of any matter relating to any body referred to in sub -section ( 1) and  falling 
within the jurisdiction of any of the successor States within any period  referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
PART IX  
MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF POWER AND WATER  RESOURCES  
75. Management of power and water supply in certain cases .—(1) Where  it appears to the Central 
Government that the arrangement in regard to the  generation or supply of electric power or the supply of 
water for any area or in  regard to the execution of any project for such generation or supply has been or is  
likely to be, modified to the disadvantage of that area by reason of the formation of  successor States, t he 
Central Government may, after consultation with the  successor States, give such directions to the State 
Government or other authority  responsible for the maintenance, so far as practicable, of such arrangement 
before  the appointed day.  
(2) The Central G overnment shall within a period of three months from the  appointed day, by order, 
also determine the share of the successor States in the  entitlement of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh 
to power produced by the  Central Government undertaking s having du e regard to the likely disadvantage  
which might have been occasioned to any successor State as a result of modified  arrangements for 
generation and supply of electric power.  
76. Inter -State River Water Board .—(1) The Central Government may, as  and when it considers 
necessary, constitute an inter-State River Water Board, after  consultation with the successor States, for 
the planning and development of inter-State rivers and river valleys.  
(2) The Inter -State River Board constituted under sub -section ( 1) may be entrusted with the following 
functions, na mely: — 
(a) to examine the requirement of funds for various projects according to  the programmes laid 
down for such projects and to advise regarding the  apportionment of the expenditure to the State 
participating  to implement such  programmes keeping in view the agreement on the sharing of costs;  22 
 (b) to decide the sharing and withdrawal of water from the reservoirs for  irrigation, power and 
other purposes with a view to securing better use of available  water;  
(c) to determine the programmes of re -settlement of displaced persons as a  result of the projects; 
and 
(d) to approve and supervise the planning, survey and investigation,  preparation of project reports 
and construction of joint inter-State Projects and their  subsequent operation and maintenance.  
PART X  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
77. Amendment of Act 37 of 1956 .—On and from the appointed day, in  section 15 of the States 
Reorganisation Act, 1956, in clause ( b), for the words  “Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh ”, the words 
“Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh  and Chhattisgarh ” shall be substituted.  
78. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of Part II of this Act shall  not be deemed to have 
effected any change in the territories to which any law in  force im mediately before the appointed day 
extends or applies, and territorial  references in any such law to the State of Madhya Pradesh shall, until 
otherwise  provided by a competent Legislature or other competent authority be constituted as  meaning the 
territori es within the existing State of Madhya Pradesh before the  appointed day.  
79. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application in  relation to the State of 
Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh of any law made before the  appointed day, the appro priate Government 
may, before the expiration of two years  from that day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications 
of the law,  whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and  thereupon 
every such law shall have effect s ubject to the adaptations and  modifications so made until altered, 
repealed or amended by a competent  legislature or other competent authority.  
Explanation .—In this Section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the  Central Government, and as respects any other law 
in its application to a State, the  State Government.  
80. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provision or  insuf ficient provi sion has been 
made under s ection 79 for the adaptation of a law  made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority, required or  empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application  
in relation to the State of Madhya Pradesh or Chhattisgarh, c onstrue the law in such  manner, without 
affecting the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to  the matter before the court, tribunal or 
authority.  
81. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions .—The Government of the 
State of Chhattisgarh, as respects the transferred territory  may, by notification in the Officia1 Gazette, 
specify the authority, officer or person  who, on or after the appointed day, shall be competent to exercise 
such functions  exercisable under any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that  notification and 
such law shall have effect accordingly.  
82. Legal proceedings .—Where immediately before the appointed day, the  existing State of Madhya 
Pradesh is a party to any legal proceedings with respe ct to any property, rights or liabilities subject to 
apportionment between the States of  Madhya Pradesh and Chhatti sgarh under this Act, the State  of 
Madhya Pradesh or  Chhatt isgarh which succeeds to, or acquires a share in, that property or those rights  or 
liabilities by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be substituted  for the existing State of 
Madhya Pradesh or added as a party to those proceedings,  and the proceedings may continue accordingly.  
83. Transfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceeding pending  immediately before the 
appointed day before a court (including High Court),  tribunal, authority or officer in any area which on 
that day falls within the State  of Madhya Pradesh shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the 
territory,  which as from that day are the territories of Chhattisgarh State, stand transferred to  the 
corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer of the State of  Chhattisgarh.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand  transferred under sub -section ( 1), 
it shall be referred to the High Court of Madhya  Pradesh and the decision of that High Court shall be 
final.  
 23 
 (3) In this Section — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ” in the  State of Ch hattisgarh means — 
(i) the court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before  whom, the proceeding would 
have laid if it had been  instituted after the appointed day; or  
(ii) in case of doubt, such court,  tribunal, authority or officer  in the State of Chhatti sgarh, as 
may be determined after the  appointed day by the Government of that State or the Central  
Government, as the case may be, or before the appointed day  by the Government of the existing 
State of Madhya Pradesh  to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or  officer.  
84. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases .—Any person who,  immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in  any subordinate courts in the existing State of 
Madhya Pradesh shall, for a period  of one year from that day, continue to be entitled to practise in those 
courts,  notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction  of those courts 
has bee n transferred to the State of Chhattisgarh.  
85. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws .—The provision of  this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything in consistent therewith contained in any other law.  
86. Power to remove diffi culties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect  to the provisions of 
this Act, the President may, by order, do anything not in  consistent with such provisions which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient  for the purpose of removing the difficul ty: 
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of  three years from the 
appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, before each House of  Parliament.  
  24 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section  8) 
(1) Of the five sitting members whose term of office will expire on the 9th day of  April, 2002, namely 
Shri 1[Lakkhiram] , Shri Surendra Kumar Singh, Shri  Sikandar Bakht, Shri 1[Suresh Pach auri] and                
Shri 1[Abdul Ga iyur Qureshi ]; Shri  1[Lakkhiram ] and Shri Surendra Kumar Singh shall be deemed to 
have been  elected to fill two of the seats allotted to the State of Chhattisgarh and other three  sitting 
members shall be deemed to have been elected to fill three of the seats  allotted to the State o f Madhya 
Pradesh.  
(2) Of the five sitting members whose term of office will expire on the 1[ the 29th day of  June, 200 0], 
namely Shri 1[O. Rajgopal ], Shri 1[Dilip Kumar ], Shri 1[Jhumuklal ], Shri 1[Balkavi]  and 1[Sushri Mo bal 
Ribelo]; Shri 1[Dilip Kumar]  and Shri 1[Jhumuklal ] both shall be deemed to have been elected to fill two 
of the seats allotted to the State of Chhattisgarh and other three sitting members shall  be deemed to have 
been elected to fill three of the seats allotted to the State of  Madhya Pradesh.  
(3) Of the six members whose term of office will expire on the 2nd day of April,  2006, namely,            
Shri Arjun Singh, Shri 1[Kailash Chandra] , Shri 1[Bhagatram ], Shri  Hansraj Bhardwaj, Shri P.K. 
Maheshwari and Shri 1[Vikram Singh] , Shri 1[Bhagatram ], shall be deemed to have been elected to fill the 
one of the seats allotted to  the State of Chhattisgarh and other five members shall be deemed to have been  
elected to fill the five seats allotted to the State of Madhya Pradesh.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  G.S.R. 673(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  25 
 THE SECOND SCH EDULE  
(See section 10) 
1. A MENDMENTS TO THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND  
ASSEMBLY  CONSTITUENCIES ORDER , 197 6 
In the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly  Constituencies Order,  1976, — 
1. in Schedule XI I,— 
(i) In PART  A—Parliamentary Constituencies — 
(a) serial numbers 12 to 22 (both inclusive) and entries relating  thereto shall be omitted;  
(b) in serial number 10, the following figures, words, brackets a nd letters shall be omitted, 
namely :— 
“87-Manendragarh (ST) ” and “88-Baikunthpur ”. 
(ii) In PART  B—Assembly Constituencies, serial numbers 87 to 176 (both  inclusive) and entries 
relating thereto shall be omitted.  
2. after Schedule XIl, the following Sche dule shall be inserted, namely: — 
“SCHEDULE XII A 
CHHATTISGARH  
PART A .—PARLIAMENTARY CONSTITUENCIES  
Serial No.  Name and extent of constituency  
(1) (2) 
1. Surguja (ST) —2. Baikunthpur, 3. Premnagar (ST), 4. Surajpur  (ST), 5. Pal  (ST), 6. Samri 
(ST), 7. Lundra (ST), 8. Pilkha ( ST) 9. Ambikapur (ST) and  10. Sitapur (ST).  
2. Raigarh (ST )—11. Bagicha (ST).12. Jashpur (ST), 13. Tapkar (ST), 14.  Pathalgaon (ST), 
15. Dharamjaigarh  (ST), 16. Lailung a (ST), 17. Raigarh and  18. Kharsia.  
3. Janjgir —21. Rampur (ST), 22 . Katghora, 23. Tanakhar (ST) , 1[32-Masturi  (SC) ],              
33. Sipat, 34. Akaltara, 36.  Champa and 37 . Sakti.   
4. Bilaspur  (SC) —1. Manendragarh (ST), 24. Marwahi (ST) , 25. Kota, 26.  Lormi,              
27. Mungeli (SC), 28. Jarhagaon (SC), 29 Takhatpur, 30. Bilaspur  and 31. Bilha.  
5. Sarangarh (SC) —19. Saria, 20. Sarangarh (SC), 35. Pamgarh , 38. Malkharoda (SC),           
39. Chandrapur, 48. Pallari (SC) , 49. Kasdol and 50.  Bhatgaon (SC).  
6. Raipur —40—Raipur Town, 41. Raipur Rural, 42. Abhanpur , 43. Mandirhasod,              
44. Arang (SC), 45. Dharsiwa, 46. Bhatapara  and 47. Baloda  Bazar.  
7. Mahasamund —53. Saraipali, 54. Basna, 55. Khallari , 56. Mahasamund, 51.  Rajim,            
52. Bindranawagarh (ST), 58. Kurud and 59. Dhamtari.  
8. Kanker (ST) —57. Sihawa (ST), 60. Bhanupratappur (ST),  61. Kanker (ST),  63. Keskala 
(ST), 62. Narayanpur (ST), 79.  Gunderdehi, 81. Balod and  82. Dondi Lohara (ST).  
9. Bastar (ST) —64. Kondagaon (ST), 65. Bhanpuri (ST), 66. Jagdalpur (ST),  67. Keslur 
(ST), 68. Chitrakote (ST), 69. Dantewara (ST), 70. Konta (ST)  and 71. Bijapur (ST).  
10. Durg —72. Maro (SC), 73. Bemetara, 74. Saja, 75. Dhamdha , 76. Durg, 77.  Bhilai,           
78. Patan and 80. Khertha.  
11. Rajnandgaon —83.Chowki (ST), 84. Khujji, 85. Dongargaon, 86.  Rajnandgaon,                  
87. Dongargarh (SC), 88. Khairagarh, 89. Birendranagar  and 90. Kawardha . 
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 673(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  26 
 Serial No.  Name and extent of constituency  
(1) (2) 
 PART B .—ASSEMBLY  CONSNTITUENCIES  
 KORIA DISTRICT  
1. Manendragarh (ST)—Bharatpur tahsil and Manendragarh tahsil (excluding  P.C. 15 in 
Khadgawan RIC) and the forest villages in the area.  
2. Baikunthpur —Baikunthpur tahsil and the forest villages in the area and  P.C. 15 in 
Khadgawan RIC in Manendragarh tahsil. 
 SURGUJA DISTRICT  
3. Premnagar (ST). —Premnagar RIC and Ramanujnagar RIC  (excluding P.Cs. 73 to 80) in 
Surajpur ta hsil and Udaipur RIC and P.Cs. 55, 57, 58 and 65 in Lakhanpur RIC in 
Ambikapur tehsil and the forest villages in the are a. 
4. Surajpur (ST)—Surajpur and Bhaiyathan RICs and P.Cs. 73 to 80 in  Ramanujnagar RIC 
and Chandramedha RIC (excluding  P.Cs. 17 to 26) in  Surajpur tahsil . 
5. Pal (ST) —Basantpur, Ramch andrapur and Chailgali RICs and Ramanujganj  Town and 
P.Cs. 32 to 34A and 34 B in Balrampur RIC in Pal tahsil.  
6. Samri (ST) —Samri tahsil and the forest villages in the area and Balrampur  RIC 
(excluding Ram anujganj Town and P.Cs. 32 to 34 A and 34B) in Pal  tahsil. 
7. Lundra (ST) —Lundra and Raipur  RICs in Arnbikapur tahsil and th e forest villages  in the 
area and P.Cs. 39 to 42 in Pratappur RIC in Surajpur tahsil.  
8. Pilkha (ST) —Pilkha RIC,  Pratappur (excluding P.Cs. 39 to 42), and P.Cs. 17 to 26 in 
Chandramed ha RIC in Surajpur tahsil and the forest  villages in the area.  
9. Ambikapur (ST) —Ambikapur -I and Ambikapur -Il RICs. and Lakhanpur  RIC (excluding 
P.Cs. 55, 57, 58 and 65) in Ambikapur tahsil and the forest  villages in the area.  
10. Sitapur (ST) —Sitapur and Batauli RICs in Ambikapur tahsil.  
 JASHPUR DISTRICT  
11. Bagicha (ST) —Bagicha and Sanna RICs in Jashpur tahsil and the forest  villages in the 
area.  
12. Jashpur ( ST)—Jashpur and Kastura RICs and P.Cs. 78 to 82 and 98 in  Kunkuri RIC in 
Jashpur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  
13. Tapkara (ST) —Tapkara RIC and Kunkuri RIC (excluding P.Cs. 78 to 82  and 98) in 
Jashpur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  
14. Pathalgaon (ST) —Pathalgaon RIC and Kapu RIC (excluding P.Cs. 1 to 6  and 36) in 
Udaipur (Dharamjaigarh) tahsil.  
 RAIGARH DISTRICT  
15. Dhramjaigarh (ST) —Dharamjaigarh RIC and P.Cs. 1 to 6 and 36 in Kapu  RIC in 
Udaipur ( Dharamjaigarh) tahsil and Gharghoda RIC in Gharghoda  tahsil and the forest  
villages in the area.  
16. Lailu nga (ST) —Lailunga and Tamnar RICs in Gharghoda tahsil and the  forest villages in 
the area.  
17. Raigarh - Raigarh —I and Raigarh - II RICs and P.Cs. 44 to 52 in pussour RIC  in Ra igarh 
tahsil.  
18. Kharsia —Kharsia and Bhupdeopur RICs in Raigarh tahsil.  
19. Saria —Pussour RIC (excluding P.Cs. 44 to 52) in Raigarh tahsil and Saria  and Baramkela 
RICs in Sarangarh tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  27 
 Serial No.  Name and extent  of constituency  
(1) (2) 
1[20. Sarangarh (SC) ]—Saranga rh and Hardi RICs in Sarangarh  tahsil and the  forest villages 
in the area.  
 KORBA DISTRICT  
21. Rampur (ST) —Korba RI C (excluding Korba Town and P .C. 21) Rampur  RIC  
(excluding P.Cs. 73 to 80) and P.Cs. 14, 20, 22 and 30 in Tanakhar RIC  in Katghora 
tahsil.  
22. Katghora —Korba Town and P.C 21 in Korba RIC, Katghora RIC and Pali  RIC 
(excluding P.Cs. 34 and 36 to 46) in Katghora tahsil.  
23. Tanakhar (ST) —Pasan RIC , Tanakhar RIC (excluding P.Cs. 14, 20, 22 and  30) and 
P.Cs. 34 and 36 to 46 in Pali RIC in Katghora tahsil.  
 BILASPUR DISTRICT  
24. Marwahi (ST) —Marwahi RIC, Gaurella RIC (excluding P.Cs. of 26 to 28) and  P.Cs. 31 
to 33 and 37 in Kota RIC in Bilaspur tahsil.  
25. Kota —P.Cs. 26 to 28 in Gaurella RIC, Kota  RIC (excluding P.Cs. 31 to 33 and 37) and 
P.Cs. 64 to 67 in Ghutku -I RIC in Bilaspur tahsil and the forest  villages in the area.  
26 Lormi —Lormi RIC (excluding P.Cs. 12 to 14, 17,  35 and 36) and Pandaria  RIC in 
Mungeli tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  
27. 1[Mungeli (S C)]—Mungeli and Kunda RICs and P.Cs. 17,  35 and 36 in Lormi  RIC in 
Mungeli tahsil.  
28. Jarhagaon (SC) —P.Cs. 12 to 14 in Lormi RIC, and Jarhagaon RIC and  Patharia RIC 
(excluding P.Cs. 84 to 91) in Mungeli tahsil.  
29. Takhatpur —Takhatpur RIC, Ghutku -II RIC (excluding P .C. 96) and  Ghutku -I RIC 
(excluding P.Cs. 64 to 67,  78 to 80,  97 and 98) in Bilaspur  tahsil.  
30. Bilaspur —Bilaspur Town inc luding Railway Colony and P.Cs. 109, 110 -A and 110 -B in 
Bilaspur RIC  in Bilaspur tahsil.  
31. Bilha —Bilha RIC and P.Cs. 94,  95, 112 and 117 in Bilaspur RIC in Bilaspur  tahsil and 
P.Cs. 81 to 91 in Patharia RIC in Mungeli tahsil.  
32. Masturi (SC) —Masturi RIC, P.Cs. 111, 130 and 131 in Bilaspur RIC and  P.Cs. 133, 135 
and 136 in Sipat (Nargoda) RIC in Bilaspur tahsil.  
33. Sipat —Sipat (Nargoda) RIC (excluding P.Cs. 133, 135 and 136), P.Cs. 107, 108 and 132 
in Bilaspur RIC, P.Cs. 78 to 80,  97 and 98 in Ghutku -I RIC and P .C 96 in Ghuktu -II RIC 
in Bilaspur  tahsil and the fores t villages in  the area.  
 JANJGIR -CHAMPA DISTRICT  
34. Akaltara —Baloda RIC and Akaltara RIC (excluding P.Cs. 58 and 60) in Janjgir tahsil 
and the forest villages in the area.  
35. Pamgarh —Pamgarh and Nawagarh RICs, P.Cs. 58 and 60 in Akaltara RIC  and P.Cs. 50, 
52 and 53 in Janjgir RIC in Janjgir  tehsil.  
36. Champa —Champa RIC and Janjgir RIC (excluding P.Cs. 50,  52 and 53) in  Janjgir tahsil.  
37. Sakti —Sakti RIC in Sakti tahsil and P.Cs. 73 to 80 in Rampur RIC in  Katghora tahsil.  
38. Malkharoda (SC) —Jaijaipur RIC and Malkharoda RIC (ex cluding P.Cs. 51, 52, 57, 59 
and 60) in Sakti tahsil.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 673(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  28 
 Serial No.  Name and extent of constituency  
(1) (2) 
39. Chandrapur —Chandrapur RIC and P.Cs. 51, 52, 57, 59 and 60 in  Malkharoda RIC in 
Sakti tahsil.  
 RAIPUR DISTRICT  
40. Raipur Town —Raipur t own (excluding wards 20 to 24, 29, 30, 34 and 35  and non -ward 
municipal area).  
41. Raipur Rural —Wards 20 to 24, 29, 30, 34 and 35 in Raipur town including  non-ward 
municipal area. Raipur -II RIC and Raipur -I RIC (excluding P.Cs.111, 112 and 115) in 
Raipur tahsil.  
42. Abhanpur —Abhanpur and Nawapara RICs in Raipur tahsil.  
43. Mandirhasod —Mandirhasod RIC and P.Cs. 111, 112 and 115 in Raipur -I RIC in Raipur 
tahsil.  
44. Arang (SC) —Arang and Kharora RICs in Raipur tahsil.  
45. Dharsiwa —Dharsiwa -I, Pharsiwa -II and Tilda RICs in Raipur tahsil.  
46. Bhatapara —Simga RIC and Bhatapara RIC (excluding P.Cs. 34 to 38) in  Baloda Bazar 
tahsil.  
47. Baloda Bazar —P.Cs. 34 to 38 in Bhatapara RIC and Baloda Bazar and Jarod  RICs in 
Baloda Baza r tahsil.  
48. Pallari (SC) —Pallari and Lawan RICs in Baloda Bazar tahsil and the forest  villages in the 
area.  
49. Kasdol —Kasdol and Bilaigarh RICs in Baloda Bazar tahsil and the forest  villages in the 
area.  
50. Bhatgaon (SC) —Bhatgaon RIC in Baloda Bazar  tahsil and the forest  villages in the area 
and Bhanwarpur RIC in Mahasamund tahsil.  
51. Rajim —Rajim RIC, Chhura RIC (excluding P.Cs. 31 to 35) and P.Cs. 36 to  39, 41 and 42 
in Gariaband RIC in Bindranawagarh tahsil.  
52. Bindranawagarh (ST) —Deobhog RIC, Gariaband RIC (excluding P.Cs. 36  to 39,41 and 
42) and P.Cs. 31 to 35 in Chhura RIC in Bindranawagarh tehsil and the forest villages in 
the area.  
 MAHASAMUND DISTRICT  
53. Saraipali —Saraipali and Khamharpali RICs Mahasamund tahsil.  
54. Basna —Basna RIC and Pithora RIC (excluding P.Cs. 25 to 28) in  Mahasamund tahsil and 
the forest villages in the area.  
55. Khallari —Khallari and Komakhan RICs and P.Cs. 25 to 28 in Pithora RIC in  
Mahasamund tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  
56. Mahasa mund —Mahasamund and Patewa RICs in Mahasamund tahsil and  the forest 
villages in the area.  
 DHAMTARI  DISTRICT  
57. Sihawa (ST) —Sihawa RIC and Dhamtari RIC (excluding Dhamtari town  and P.Cs. 50 to 
52) in Dhamtari tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  
58. Kurud —Kurud and Magarlod RICs in Dhamtari tahsil and the forest  villages in the area.  
59. Dhamtari —Bhothali RIC, Dhamtari town and P.Cs. 50 to 52 in Dhamtari  RIC in 
Dhamtari tahsil. 
  29 
 Serial No.  Name and extent of constituency  
(1) (2) 
 KANKER DISTRICT  
60. Bhanupratappur (ST) —Bhanupratappur tahsil and Charama RIC  (excluding P.Cs. 2 and 
13 to 16) and P.Cs. 20 to 24 and 26 in Kanker RIC in  Kanker tahsil.  
61. Kanker (ST) —Narharpur RIC, P.Cs. 2 and 13 to 16 in Charama RIC and  Kanker RIC 
(excluding P.Cs. 20 to 24 and 26) in Kanker tahsil.  
62. Narayanpur (ST) —Koilibeda and Antagarh RICs and P.Cs. 23 to 25 in  Narayanpur RIC 
in Narayanpur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  
 BASTAR  DISTRICT  
63. Keskal (ST) —Keskal RIC and P.Cs. 19 to 26 in Pharasgaon RIC in  Kondagaon tahsil and 
the forest villages in the area.  
64. Kondagaon (ST) —Pharasgaon RIC (excluding P.Cs. 19 to 26) and  Kondagaon RIC 
(excluding P.Cs. 35 and 37 to 43) in Kondagaon tahsil and  the forest villages in the area 
and Narayanpur RIC (excluding P.Cs. 23 to  25) in Narayanpur tahsil.  
65. Bhanpuri (ST) —Bhanpnri RIC and P.C 38 in Bakawand RIC in Jagdalpur  tahsil and 
P.Cs. 35 and 37 to 43 in Kondagaon RIC in Kondagaon tahsil and  the forest  villages in the 
area.  
66. Jagdalpur (ST) —Bakawand RIC (excluding P.C 38), Jagdalpur (B) RIC and  Jagdalpur 
(A) RIC (excluding P.Cs. 54 to 59) in Jagdalpur tahsil and the  forest villages in the area.  
67. Keslur (ST) —P.Cs. 54 to 59 in Jagdalpur (A) RIC and  Keslur in Jagdalpur  tahsil and the 
forest villages in the area and P.Cs. 7 to 9 in Chindgarh RIC in  Konta tahsil.  
68. Chitrakote (ST) —Chitiakote RIC in Jagdalpur tahsil and P.Cs. 1 to 9 in  Dantewara RIC 
in Dantewara tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  
 DANTEWARA DISTRICT  
69. Dantewara (ST) —Dantewara tahsil (excluding P.Cs. 1 to 9 in Dantewara  RIC) and the 
forest villages in the area.  
70. Konta (ST) —Konta tahsil (excluding P.Cs. 7 to 9 in Chindgarh RIC) and the  forest 
villages in the area.  
71. Bijapur (ST) —Bijapur tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  
 DURG DISTRICT  
72. Maro (SC) —Maro  and Nawagarh RICs and P.Cs. 46, 51, 52 and 55 to 57 in  Khandsara 
RIC in Bemetara tahsil.  
73. Bemetara —Bemetara and Anandgaon RICs and P.Cs. 47 to 50, 53 and 54 in  Khandsara 
RIC in Bemetara tahsil.  
74. Saja —Saja and Deokar RICs and Khandsara RIC (excluding P.Cs. 46 to 57)  10 Bemetara 
tahsil.  
75. Dhamdha —Dhamdha and Nankathi RICs and P.Cs. 46 to 48 and 50 to 52 in  Bhilai RIC 
in Durg tahsil.  
76. Durg —Durg -I and Durg -II RICs and S.A.F. Colony, Kosa Nala, Supela  Bazar West, 
Supela Bazar, Supela Bazar East and Supela Camp West in  Bhilainagar and ex -revenue 
village Chhaoni lying on the periphery of  Bhilainagar in Bhilai RIC in Durg tahsil.  
77. Bhilai—Bhilainagar (excluding S.A.F. Colony, Kosa Nala, Supela Bazar  West, Supela 
Bazar, Supela Bazar East, Supela, Camp West and ex -revenue  village Chhaoni lying on 
the periphery of Bhilainagar) in Bhilai RIC in  Durg tahsil.  
  30 
 Serial No.  Name and extent of constituency  
(1) (2) 
78. Patan —Bhilai RIC (excluding P.Cs. 46 to 48 and 50 to 52 and Bhilainagar)  and Patan 
RIC (excluding P.Cs. 95 to 98) in Durg tahsil.   
79. Gunderdehi —Bhatagaon and Gunderdehi RICs and P.Cs. 95 to 98 in Patan  RIC in Durg 
tahsil.  
80. Khertha —Anda RIC  in Durg tahsil and Khertha RIC in Balod tahsil.  
81. Balod —Gurur and Balod RICs in Balod tahsil and the forest villages in the  area.  
82. Dondi Lohara (ST) —Kusumkasa and Dondi Lohara RICs in Balod tehsil and the forest 
villages in the area.  
 RAJNANDGAON DISTRICT  
83. Chowki (ST) —Manpur and Mohala RICs and Chowki RIC (excluding P.Cs. 99 to 105) in 
Rajnandgaon tahsil.  
84. Khuiji —Chhuria and Khujji RICs and P.Cs. 99 to 105 in Chowki RIC in  Rajnandgaon 
tahsil and the forest villages in the area.  
85. Dongargaon —Dongargaon RIC in Rajnandgaon tahsil and Lal Bahadur  Nagar RIC 
(excluding P.C 88) in Khairagarh tahsil and the forest villages in  the area.   
86. Rajnandgaon —Rajnandgaon RIC in Rajnandgaon tahsil.  
87. Dongargarh (SC) —Ghumka RIC in Rajnandgaon tahsil, P.C 88 in Lal  Bahadur Nagar 
RIC and Dongargarh RIC and P.Cs. 52 and 55 to 61 in  Pandadah RIC  in Khairagarh 
tahsil.  
88. Khairagarh —Khairagarh and Chhuikhadan RICs, Pandadah RIC (excluding  P.Cs. 52 and 
55 to 61) and Gandai RIC (excluding P.Cs. 6 and 8 to 14) in  Khairagarh tahsil and the 
forest villages in the area.  
 KAWARDHA DISTRICT  
89. Birendranagar —P.Cs. 6 and 8 to 14 in Gandai RIC in Khairagarh tahsil and  
Birendranagar and Sahaspur Lohara RICs and Kawardha RIC (excluding  P.Cs. 28, 29, 34 
and 35 and Kawardha Town) in Kawardha tahsil and the  forest villages in the area.  
90. Kawardha —Pasrangpur and Bodla RICs and Kawardha Town and P.Cs. 28, 29, 34 and 
35 in Kawardha RIC in Kawardha tahsil and the  forest  villages i n the area. ” 
  31 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 19) 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED CASTES ) ORDER , 1950  
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, — 
(a) in Paragraph 2, for the figures “XXII ”, the figures “XXIII ” shall be  substituted;  
(b) in the Schedule, after Part XXII, the following shall be inserted,  namely: — 
“PART XXIII .—CHHATTISGARH  
1. Audhelia  
2. Bagri, Bagdi  
3. Bahna, Bajana  
4. Balahi, Balai  
5. Banchada  
6. Barabar, Basod  
7. Bargunda  
8. Basor, Burud, Bansor, Bansodi, Bansphor, Basar  
9. Bedia  
10. Beldar, Sunkar  
11. Bhangi, Mehtar, Balmiki, Lalbegi, Dharkar  
12. Bhanumati  
13. Chadar  
14. Chamar, Chamari, Bairwa, Bhambhi, Jatav, Mochi, Regar, Nona, Rohidas,  Ramnami, Satnami, 
Surjyabanshi, Surjyaramnami, Ahirwar, Chamar,  Mangan, Raidas  
15. Chidar  
16. Chikwa, Chikvi  
17. Chitar  
18. Dahait, Dahayat, Dahat  
19. Dewar  
20. Dhanuk  
21. Dhed, Dher  
22. Dohor  
23. Dom, Dumar, Dome, Domar, Doris  
24. Ganda, Gandi  
25. Ghasi, Ghasia  
26. Holiya  
27. Kanjar  
28. Katia, Patharia  
29. Khatik  
30. Koli, Kori  
31. Khangar, Kanera, Mirdha  
32. Kuchbandhia  
33. Mahar, Mehra, Mehar  
34. Mang, Mang Garodi, Mang Garudi, Dankhani Mang, Mang Mahasi,  Madari, Garudi, Radhe 
Mang  
35. Meghwal  
36. Moghia  
37. Muskhan  
38. Nat, Kalbelia, Sapera, Navdigar, Kubutar  
39. Pasi 
40. Rujihar  
41. Sansi, Sansia  
42. Silawat  
43. Zamral. ”. 
  32 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 20) 
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION (SCHEDULED TRIBES ) ORDER , 1950  
In the Constitution (Scheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, — 
(a) in Paragraph 2, for the figures “XIX”, the figu res “XX” shall be substituted;  
(b) in the Schedule,  
(i) for Part VIII, the following Part shall be substituted,  namely: — 
“PART VIII .—MADHYA PRADESH  
1. Agariya  
2. Andh  
3. Baiga  
4. Bhaina  
5. Bharia Bhumia, Bhuinhar Bhumia, Bhumiya, Bharia, Paliha, Pando  
6. Bhattra  
7. Bhil, Bhilala, Barela, Patelia  
8. Bhil Mina  
9. Bhunjia  
10. Biar, Biyar  
11. Binjhwar  
12. Birhul, Birhor  
13. Damor, Damaria  
14. Dhanwar  
15. Gadaba, Gadba  
16. Gond, Arakh, Arrakh, Agaria, Asur, Ba di Maria, Bada Maria, Bhatola,  Bhimma, Bhuta, 
Koilabhuta, Koliabhuti, Bhar, Bisonhorn Maria, Chota  Maria, Dandami Maria, Dhuru, Dhurwa, 
Dhoba, Dhulia, Dorla, Gaiki,  Gatta, Gatti, Gaita, 1[Gond Gowari ], Hill Maria, Kandra, Kalanga, 
Khatola,  Koitar, Koya, Kh irwar, Khirwara, Kucha Maria, 1[Kuch aki Maria ], Madia,  Maria, Mana, 
Mannewar, Moghya, Mogia, Monghya, Mudia, Muria,  Nagarchi, Nagwanshi, Ojha, 1[Raj], 
Sonjhari, Jhareka, Thatia, Thotya,  Wade Maria, Vade Maria, Daroi  
17. Halba, Halbi  
18. Kamar  
19. Karku  
20. Kawar, Kanwar, Kaur, Cherwa, Rathia, Tanwar, Chattri  
21. Keer (in Bhopal, Raisen and Sehore Districts)  
22. Khairwar, Kondar  
23. Kharia  
24. Kondh, Khond, 1[Kandh] 
25. Kol 
26. Kolam  
27. Korku, Bo P.Chi, Mouasi, 1[Nihal ], Nahul, 1[Bondhi] Bondeya  
28. Korwa, Kodaku  
29. Majhi  
30. Majhwar  
31. Mawasi  
32. Mina (in Sironj Sub-Division of Vidisha District)  
33. Munda  
34. Nagesia, Nagasia  
35. Oraon, Dhanka, Dhangad  
36. Panika [in (i) Chhattarpur, Panna, Rewa, Satna, Shahdol, Umaria, Sidhi and  Tikamgarh districts, 
and (ii) Sevda and Datia tahsils of Datia district)]  
37. Pao 
38. Pardhan, Pathari, Sarot i 
                                                           
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 673(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  33 
 39. Pardhi (in Bhop al, Raisen and Sehore Districts ) 
40. Pardhi, Bahelia, Bahellia, Chita Pardhi, Langoli Pardhi, Phans Pardhi,  Shikari, Takankar, Takia 
[in (i) Chhindwara, Mandla, Dindori and Seoni  Districts, (ii) Baihar tahsil of Balaghat District, 
(iii) Betul,  Bhainsdehi and  Shahpur tahsils of Betul District, (iv) Patan tahsil and Sihora and 
Majholi  blocks of Jabalpur District, (v) Katni (Murwara) and Vijaya Raghogarh  tahsils and 
Bahoribandh and Dhemerkheda blocks of Katni District, (vi)  Hoshangabad, Babai, Soh agpur, 
Pipariy and Bankhedi tahsils and  Kesla  block of Hoshangabad District, (vii) Narsinghpur District, 
and (viii)  Harsud tahsil of Khandwa District]  
41. Parja  
42. Sahariya, Saharia, Seharia, Sehria, Sosia, Sor  
43. Saonta, Saunta  
44. Saur 
45. Sawar, Sawara,  
46. Sonr. ”; 
(ii) after Part XIV , the following shall be added, namely :— 
“PART XX .—CHHATTISGARH  
1. Agariya  
2. Andh  
3. Baiga  
4. Bhaina  
5. Bharia Bhumia, Bhuinhar Bhumia, Bhumiya, Bharia, Paliha, Pando  
6. Bhattra  
7. Bhil, Bhilala, Barela, Patelia  
8. Bhil Mina  
9. Bhunjia  
10. Biar, Biyar  
11. Binjhwar  
12. Birhul, Birhor  
13. Damor, Damaria  
14. Dhanwar  
15. Gadaba, Gadba  
16. Gond, Arakh, Arrakh, Agaria, Asur, Badi Maria, Bada Maria, Bhatola,  Bhimma, Bhuta, 
Koilabhuta, 1[Koliabhuti ], Bhar, Bisonhorn Maria, Chota  Maria, Dandami Maria, Dhuru, 
Dhurwa, Dhoba, Dhulia, Dorla, Gaiki,  Gatta, Gatti, Gaita, 1[Gond Gowari ], 1[Hill Maria ], Kandra, 
Kalanga, Khatola,  Koitar, Koya, Khirwar, Khirwara, Kucha Maria, Kuchaki Maria, Madia,  
Maria, Mana, Mannewar, Moghya, Mogia, Monghya, Mudia, Muria,  Nagarchi, Nagwanshi, Ojha, 
1[Raj], Sonjhari, Jhareka, Thatia, Thotya,  Wade Maria,  Vade Maria, Daroi  
17. Halba, Halbi  
18. Kamar  
19. Karku  
20. Kawar, Kanwar, Kaur, Cherwa, Rathia, Tanwar, Chattri  
21. Khairwar, Kondar  
22. Kharia  
23. Kondh, Khond, Kandh,  
24. Kol 
25. Kolam  
26. Korku, Bo P.Chi, Mouasi, 1[Nihal ], Nahul, Bondhi, Bondeya  
27. Korwa, Kadaku  
28. Majhi  
29. Majhwar  
30. Mawasi  
31. Munda  
32. Nagesia, Nagasia  
33. Oraon, Dhanka, Dhangad  
34. Pao 
                                                           
1. Subs. by G.S.R. 673(E) (w.e.f dated 19 -8-2003).  34 
 35. Pardhan, Pathari, Saroti  
36. Pardhi, Bahelia, Bahellia, Chita Pardhi, Langoli Pardhi, Phans Pardhi,  Shikari, Takankar, Takia 
[in (i) Bastar, Dantewara, Kanker, Raigarh,  Jashpurnagar, Surguja and Koria district, (ii) 
Katghora, Pali, Kartala and  Korba tahsils of Korba district, (iii) Bilaspur, Pendra, Kota and 
Takhatpur  tahsils of Bilaspur district, (iv) Durg, Patan, Gunderdehi, Dhamdha, Balod,  Gurur and 
Dondilohara tahsils of Durg district, (v) Cho wki, Manpur and  Mohala Revenue Inspector Circles 
of Rajnandgaon district, (vi)  Mahasamund, Saraipali and Basna tahsils of Mahasamund district, 
(vii) Bindra Navagarh Rajim and Deobhog tahsils of Raipur district, and (viii)  Dhamtari, Kurud 
and Sihava tahsils  of Dhamtari district]  
37. Parja  
38. Sahariya, Saharia, Seharia, Sehria, Sosia, Sor  
39. Saonta, Saunta  
40. Saur 
41. Sawar, Sawara  
42. Sonr. ”. 
  35 
 THE FIF TH SCHEDULE  
(See section 42)  
1. Famine Relief Fund  
2. Guarantee Reserve Fund Investment Account  
3. Revenue Reserve Fund Investment Account  
4. State Agriculture Credit (Relief and Guarantee) Fund  
5. Cash Balance Investment Account  
6. Land Revenue and Stamp Fund  
7. Rural Development Fund  
8. Energy Development Cess Fund  
9. Compensatory Afforestation Fund  
10. Forest Development Cess Fund  
11. Road Safety Fund  
12. Depreciation/Renewal Reserve Fund  
13. Madhya Pradesh Calamity Relief Fund  
14. World Food Programme Project Fund. .  
15. Madhya Pradesh State Employees Family Benefit Fund  
16. School Building Fund  
17. Pensioners Welfare Fund  
18. Crop Insurance Fund.  
  36 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 49) 
APPORTIONMENT OF LIAB ILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS  
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in Paragraph 3, each of the  successor State shall in respect to 
pensions granted before the appointed day by the  existing State of Madhya Pradesh, pay the pensions 
drawn in its treasuries.  
2. Subject to the adjustments, the liability in respect of pensions of officers  serving in connection with 
the affairs of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh who  retire or proceed on leave preparatory to 
retirement before  the appointed day, but  whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before 
that day, shall be the  liability of the State of Madhya Pradesh.  
3. There shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the  appointed day and ending on 
the 31s t day of March of that financial year and in  respect of each subsequent financial year, the total 
payment made in all the  successor State in respect of pension referred to in Paragraphs 1 and 2. The total  
representing the liability of the existing State of  Madhya Pradesh in respect of  pension  shall be 
apportioned between th e successor State on th e population ratio  and any successor State paying more than 
its due share shall be reimbursed the  excess amount by the successor State or State paying less . 
4. The liability of the existing State of Madhya Pradesh in respect of  Pension granted before the 
appointed day and drawn in any area outside the  territories of the existing State shall be the liability of the 
State of Madhya Pradesh  subject to adjustments to be made in accordance with Paragraph 3 as if such  
pensions had b een drawn in any treasury in the State of Madhya Pradesh under  Paragraph 1.  
5 (1) The liability in respect of the pensions of any officer serving  immediately before the appointed 
day in connectio n with the affairs of the existing  State of Madhya Pradesh and retiring on or after that 
day, shall be that of the  successor State granting him the pension, but the portion of the pension 
attributable  to the service of any such officer before the appointed  day in connection with the  affairs of 
the existing State of Madhya Pradesh shall be allocated between the  successor State in the population 
ratio, and the Government granting the pension  shall be entitled to receive from each of the successor 
State its sh are or this liability . 
(2) If any such officer was serving after the appointed day in connection  with the affai rs of more than 
one successor State , the State Government other than  the one granting the pension shall reimburse to the 
Government by which pens ion is granted an amount which bears to the portion of the pension attributable 
to his  service after the appointed day the same ratio as the period of his qualifying service  after the 
appointed day under the reimbursing State bears to total qualifying service  of such officer after the 
appointed day reckoned for the purposes of pension.  
6 Any reference in this schedule to a pension shall be construed as including  a reference value of the 
pension.  
  37 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section  60) 
LIST OF GOVERNMENT  COMPANIES  
1. Madhya Pradesh State Indust ries Corporation Limited      Bhopal  
2. Madhya Pr adesh Laghu Udyog Nigam Limited       Bhopal  
3. Madhya Pra desh State Mi ning Corporation Limited      Bhopal  
4. Madhya Pradesh State Industrial Development Corporation Limited    Bhopal 
5. Madhya Pradesh  State Agro Industries Develop ment Corporation Limited   Bhopal  
6. Madhya Pradesh State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited     Bhopal  
7. Madhya Pradesh St ate Textile Corporation Limited      Bhopal  
8. Madhya Pradesh Rajya Van Vikas Nigam Limited      Bhopal  
9. Madhya Pradesh  State Tourism Development Cor poration Limited    Bhopal  
10. Madhya Pradesh Police Housing Corporation Limited      Bhopal  
11. Madhya Pradesh Lea ther Development Corpora tion Limited     Bhopal  
12. Madhya Pradesh Hastshilp Avam Hathkargha Vikas Nigam Limited    Bhopal  
13. Madhya Pradesh  Urja Vikas Nigam Limited       Bhopal  
14. Madhya Pradesh Stat e Electronics Development  Corporation Limited    Bhopal  
15. Madhya Pradesh Pichh ra Varg Tatha Alpsankhyak  Vitta Avam Vikas Nigam   Bhopal  
16. Madhya Pradesh Adivas i Vitta Avam Vikas Nigam      Bhopal  
17. Madhya Pradesh E xport Corporation Limited       Bhopal  
18. The Provi dent Investment Company Limited                Mumbai  
19. Madhya Pradesh Film Development Corporation Limited     Bhopal  
20. Optel T elecommunications Limited        Bhopal  
21. Madhya Pradesh Au dyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam  (Bhopal ) Limited    Bhopal  
22. Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Indore) Limited     Indore  
23. Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Raipur) Limited    Raipur  
24. Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Jabalpur)  Limited             Jabalpur  
25. Madhya Pradesh Audy ogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Gwalior)  Limited              Gwalior  
26. Madhya Pradesh Audyogik Kendra Vikas Nigam (Rewa) Limited      Rewa  
27. Madhya Pradesh Agro Pesticides Limited       Bhopal  
28. Madhya Pradesh Agro Oi ls and Cattlefeed Limited      Bhopal . 
  38 
 THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 66) 
CONTINUANCE OF FACILITIES IN CERTAIN STATE  INSTITUTION  
LIST OF TRAINING INSTITUTIONS /CENTRES  
1. Prevention of Food Adulteration Orga nisation State Laboratory Controller,  Lal Ghati, Bhopal.  
2. State Institute of Health Management and Communication , Gwalior.  
3. Madhya Pradesh State Seed Certification Agency , Office r Complex, B -2, Gautam Nagar, Bhopal.  
4. Madhya Pradesh State Forest Research Institute , Polipathar, Narmada Road,  Jabalpur.  
5. Pandit Kunjilal  Dubey Rashtriya Sansadiya Vidyapeeth, Old Vidhan Sabha  Campus, Bhopal.  
6. Mahatma Gandhi State Institute of Rural Development and Training , Adhartal, Jabalpur . 
7. Madhy Pradesh State Employment and Training Institution, Rajiv Gandhi  Bhawan, Shyamla 
Hills, Bhopal.  
8. State Academy of Administration, Hitkarni Nagar, 1100 Quarters, Bhopal.  
9. Medico Legal Institute, Gandhi Medical College, Bhopal.  
10. Ranger Training College, Balaghat.  
11. Agriculture Cooperative Staff Training Institute of Apex Bank, Kotra  Sultanabad, Bhop al. 
12. Jawaharlal Nehru Police Academy, Sagar.  
13. Tribal Research and Training Institute, Shyamla Hills, Bhopal.  
14. Jail Training Centre, Sagar.  
15. Armed Police College, Indore.  
16. Police Radio Training School, Indore.  
17. Central Training Institute, Home Guards and Civil De fence, Khamaria,  Jabalpur.  
18. Forensic Science Laboratory, Sagar.  
19. Madhya Pradesh Water and Land Management Institute, Walmi Hills, Near  Kaliasot Dam, Kolar 
Road, Bhopal.  
20. Judicial Officers Training Institute, High Court Campus, Jabalpur.  
21. Sanjay Gandhi Youth Le adership and Rural Development Training  Institute, Pachmarhi, District 
Hoshangabad.  
22. State level Training Institute , Mahalgaon, Gwalior.  
23. Artificial Insemination Training Institute, Bhopal/Mandla.  
24. Assistant Veterinary Field Officers Training Centre, Mahasamu nd, Shivpuri.  
25. Poultry Training Centre, Rewa.  
26. Food Analysis Unit, Bhopal.  
27. Fisheries Training Institute, Raipur and Naogaon.  
28. Central Semen Station, Bhopal.  
29. Poultry Research Centre, Bhopal.  
30. Soil Conservation Training Centre, Gwalior and Betul.  
31. Plant Protection Training Centre, Obedullaganj (Raisen).  
32. Officers Training Centre, Horticulture, Pachmarhi.  
33. Sister Tutor Training Institute, Ujjain.  
34. Central Research Laboratory Centre, Shyamla Hills, Bhopal.  
35. Bureau of Design for Hydel and Irrigation Project, Bho pal. 
36. Pre-Examination Training Centre for Backward Classes, Bhopal.  
37. State Institute of Education Management and Training, Bhopal.  
38. All India Services Pre -Examination Training Centre, Ravishankar  University Campus, Raipur.  
39. Excise Training Institute, Birlanagar.  
40. Aviation Workshop, State Hangar, Bhopal.  
 
__________  
--------------------------The Mizoram University Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE MIZORAM UNIVERSITY ACT, 2000  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Establishment of the University.  
4. Objects of the University.  
5. Powers of the University.  
6. Transfer of properties of North -Eastern Hill University.  
7. Jurisdiction.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed.  
9. The Visitor.  
9A. The Chief Rector . 
10. Officers of the University.  
11. The V ice-Chancellor.  
12. The Pro -Vice Chancellor.  
13. The Deans of Schools.  
14. The Registrar.  
15. The Finance Officer.  
16. The Librarian.  
17. Other officers.  
18. Authorities of the University.  
19. The Court.  
20. The Executive Council.  
21. The Academic Council.  
22. The College Development Council.  
23. The Boards of Studies.  
24. The Finance Committee.  
25. Other authorities of the University.  
26. Powers to make Statutes.  
27. Statutes how to be made.  
28. Power to make Ordinances.  
29. Regulations.  
30. Annual report.  
31. Annual accounts.  
32. Returns and information.  
33. Transfer of services of certain employees of the North -Eastern Hill University.  
34. Conditions of service of employ ees. 
35. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students.  
36. Right to appeal.  
37. Provident and pension funds.  
38. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies.  
39. Filling of casual vacancies.  
40. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies.  
41. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
42. Mode of proof of University record.  
43. Power to remove difficulties.  
44. Transitional provisions.   2 
 SECTIONS  
45. Com pletion of courses of studies in Colleges or Institutions affiliated to the University.  
46. Statutes, Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid before 
Parliament.  
47. Amendment of Act 24 of 1973  
THE SCHEDULE.  
 
  3 
 THE MIZORAM UNIVERSITY ACT, 2000  
ACT No. 8 OF 2000  
[25th April , 2000 .] 
An Act to establish and incorporate a teaching and  affiliating University in the State of Mizoram 
and to provide for  matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Mizoram University Act,  2000 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central  Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette,  appoint . 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, and in all Statutes made hereunder, unless the  context otherwise 
requires,— 
(a) “Academic Council” means the Academic Council of  the University;  
(b) “academic staff” means such categories of staff as are  designated as a cademic staff by the 
Ordinances;  
(c) “Board of Studies” means the Board of Studies of the  University;  
(d) “College Development Council” means the College  Development Council of the University;  
(e) “College” means a College maintained by, or admitted  to the privile ges of, the University;  
(f) “Court” means the Court of the University;  
(g) “Department” means a Department of Studies and  includes a Centre of Studies;  
(h) “distance education system” means the system of  imparting education through any means of  
communication, such as broadcasting, telecasting,  correspondence courses, seminars, contact 
programmes  or the combination of any two or more such means;  
(i) “employee” means any person appointed by the  University and includes teachers and other 
staff of th e University;  
 (j) “Executive Council” means the Executive Council of the  University;  
(k) “Hall”  means a unit of residence or of corporate life for the  students of the University, or of a 
College or an Institution,  maintained by the University;   
(l) “Institution” means an academic institution, not being a  College, maintained by, or admitted to 
the privileges of, the  University;  
(m) “North -Eastern Hill University” means the University  established under section 3 of the 
North -Eastern Hill University Act , 1973 (24 of 1973);  
(n) “Principal” means the Head of a College or an Institution  maintained by the University and 
includes, where there is no  Principal, the person for the time being duly appointed to act as  Principal, 
and in the absence of the Principal , or the acting  Principal, a Vice -Principal duly appointed as such;  
(o) “recognised Institution” means an institution of higher learning  recognised by the University 
within the State of Mizoram;  
(p) “recognised teachers” means such persons as may be  recogn ised by the University for the 
purpose of imparting  instructions in a College or an Institution admitted to the privileges of  the 
University;  
                                                           
1. 2nd July, 2001 , vide notification No. S.O. 604 (E), dated 29th June , 2001 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, s ec. 
3(ii). 4 
 (q) “Regulations” means the Regulations made by any authority  of the University under this Act 
for the time being in force;  
(r) “School” means a School of Studies of the University;  
(s) “Statutes” and “Ordinances” mean, respectively, the Statutes  and the Ordinances of the 
University for the time being in force;  
(t) “Teachers of the University” means Professors, Readers,  Lecturers and such other persons as 
may be appointed for  imparting instruction or conducting research in the University or in any  College 
or Institution maintained by  the University and are designated  as teachers by the Ordinances;  
 (u)“University ” means the Mizoram University established  and incorporated as a University 
under this Act;  
(v) “Vice -Chancellor” and “Pro Vice -Chancellor” mean,  respectively, the Vice -Chancellor and 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor of the University;  
3. Establishment of the Universit y.—(1) There shall be established a University by the name of  
“Mizoram University”.  
(2) The headquarters of the University shall be at Aizawl.  
(3) The first Vice -Chancellor and the first members of the  Court, the Executive Council, the 
Academic Council  and all persons who may hereafter become such  officers or members, so long as they 
continue to hold  such office or membership, are hereby constituted body  corporate by the name of 
“Mizoram University”.  
(4) The University shall have perpetual succession and a  common seal and shall sue and be sued by 
the said  name.  
4. Objects of the University .—The objects of the University shall be to disseminate and  advance 
knowledge by providing instructional and research  facilities in such branches  of learning as it may d eem 
fit; to make provisions for integrated courses in humanities,  natural and physical sciences, social sciences, 
forestry and  other allied disciplines in the educational programmes of the University; to take appropriate 
measures for promoting  innovations in teaching learning process, inter -disciplinary  studies and research; 
to educate and train manpower for the development of the State of Mizoram; and to pay special  attention 
to the improvement of the social and economic  conditions and welfare of the people o f the State, their  
intellectual, academic and cultural development.  
5. Powers of the University .—The University shall hav e the following powers, namely: — 
(i) to provide for instructions in such branches of learning  as the University may, from time to 
time,  determine  and to make provisions for research and for the  advancement and dissemination of 
knowledge;  
(ii) to grant, subject to such conditions as the University  may determine, diplomas or certificates 
to, and confer  degrees or other academic distinctions  on the basis of  examinations, evaluation or any 
other method of testing, on  persons, and to withdraw any such diplomas, certificates,  degrees or other 
academic distinctions for good and sufficient  cause;  
(iii) to organise and to undertake extramural studi es, training and extension services;  
(iv) to confer honorary degrees or other distinctions in the  manner prescribed by the Statutes;  
(v) to provide facilities through the distance education  system to such persons as it may 
determine;  
(vi) to institute Prin cipalships, Professorships, Readerships,  Lecturerships and other teaching or 
academic positions,  required by the University and to appoint persons to  such Principalships, 
Professorships, Readerships,  Lecturerships or other teaching or academic positions;  
(vii) to recognise an institution of higher learning for such  purposes as the University may 
determine and to  withdraw such recognition;  5 
 (viii) to recognise persons for imparting instructions in any  College or Insitution admitted to the 
privileges of the  University;  
(ix) to appoint persons working in any other University or  organisation as teachers of the 
University for a  specified period;  
(x) to create administrative, ministerial and other posts and  to make appointments thereto;  
(xi) to co -operate or collab orate or associate with any other  University or authority or institution 
of higher learning in  such manner and for such purposes as the University may  determine;  
(xii) to establish, with the prior approval of the Central  Government, such Centres and specialised 
laboratories or  other units for research and instruction as are, in the  opinion of the University 
necessary for the furtherance of  its object s; 
(xiii) to institute and award fellowships, scholarships,  studentships, medals and prizes;  
 (xiv) to establish and maintain Colleges, Institutions and  Halls;  
(xv) to make provision for research and advisory services  and for that purpose to enter into such 
arrangements  with other institutions, industrial or other organisations, as  the University may deem 
necessary;  
(xvi) to organise and conduct refresher courses, workshops,  seminars and other programmes for 
teachers, evaluators  and other academic staff;  
(xvii) to admit to its privileges colleges and institutions  within the State of Mizoram not 
maintained by  the University; to withdraw all or any of those privileges in  accordance with such 
conditions as may be prescribed  by the Statutes; to recognise, guide, supervise, and  control Halls not 
maintained by the University and  other accommodation for students, an d to withdraw any  such 
recognition;  
(xviii) to appoint on contract or otherwise visiting Professors,  Emeritus Professors, Consultants, 
Scholars and such  other persons who may contribute to the advancement of  the objects of the 
University;  
(xix) to confer autonomous status on a College or an  Institution or a Department, as the case may 
be, in  accordance with the Statutes;  
(xx) to determine standards of admission to the University,  which may include examination, 
evaluation or any  other method of test ing; 
(xxi) to demand and receive payment of fees and other  charges;  
(xxii) to supervise the residence of the students of the  University and to make arrangements for 
promoting  their health and general welfare;  
(xxiii) to lay down conditions of service of al l categories of  employees, including their code of 
conduct;  
(xxiv) to regulate and enforce discipline among the students  and the employees, and to take such 
disciplinary  measures in this regard as may be deemed by the  University to be necessary;  
 (xxv) to make arrangements for promoting the health and  general welfare of the employees;  
(xxvi) to receive benefactions, donations and gifts and to  acquire, hold, manage and dispose of 
any property,  movable or immovable, including trust and endowment  properties fo r the purposes of 
the University;  
(xxvii ) to borrow, with the approval of the Central  Government, on the security of the property of 
the University, money for the purposes of the University;  
(xxviii ) to do all such other acts and things as may be  necessary, incidental or conducive to the 
attainment of  all or any of its objects.  6 
 6. Transfer of properties of North -Eastern Hill University .—On and from the commencement of 
this Act, all properties  of the North -Eastern Hill University in the State of Miz oram  shall stand transferred 
to, and vest in, the University and shall  be applied to the objects for which the University is established.  
7. Jurisdiction .—(1) The Jurisdiction of the University shall extend to the whole  of the State of 
Mizoram . 
(2) On and from the commencement of this Act, all Colleges,  Institutions, Schools and Departments 
affiliated to, or  admitted to the privileges of, or maintained by, the North -Eastern Hill University shall 
stand affiliated to, or  admitted to the privileges of, or main tained by, the  University.  
(3) On and from the date of commencement of this Act, the  North -Eastern Hill University shall cease 
to exercise its  jurisdiction in the State of Mizoram.  
8. University open to all classes, castes and creed .—The University shall be open to persons of 
either sex and of  whatever caste, creed, race or class, and it shall not be lawful  for the University to adopt 
or impose on any person, any test  whatsoever of religious belief or profession in order to entitle  him to be 
appointed as a  teacher of the University or to hold  any other office therein or be admitted as a student in 
the University or to graduate thereat or to enjoy or exercise any  privilege thereof.  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to  prevent the Universi ty from making special 
provisions for the  employment or admission of women, physically handicapped  or of persons belonging 
to the weaker sections of the society  and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled  Tribes.  
9. The Visitor .—(1) The P resident of India shall be the Visitor of the University.  
(2) The Visitor may, from time to time, appoint one or more  persons to review the work and progress 
of the University,  including Colleges and Institutions maintained by it, and to  submit a report th ereon; and 
upon receipt of that report, the  Visitor may, after obtaining the views of the Executive  Council thereon 
through the Vice -Chancellor, take such  action and issue such directions as he considers necessary  in 
respect of any of the matters dealt wit hin the report of  the University shall be bound to comply with such  
directions.  
(3) The Visitor shall have the right to cause an inspection to be  made by such person or persons as he 
may direct, of the  University, its buildings, laboratories and equipments, and  of any College or Institution 
maintained by the University  or admitted to its privileges; and also of the examinations,  teaching and 
other work conducted or done by the  University and to cause an inquiry to be made in like  manner in 
respect  of any matter connected with the  administration or finances of the University, Colleges or  
Institutions.  
(4) The Visitor shall, in every matter referred to in sub -section  (2), give notice of his intention to 
cause an inspection or  inquiry to be mad e,— 
(a) to the University, if such inspection or inquiry is to be  made in respect of the University or 
any College or  Institution maintained by it, or  
(b) to the management of the College or Institution, if the  inspection or inquiry is to be made in 
respect of  College or Institution admitted to the privileges of the  University, and the University or the 
management, as  the case may be, shall have the right to make such  representations to the Visitor, as it 
may consider  necessary.  
(5) After considering the represe ntations, if any, made by the  University or the management, as the 
case may be, the  Visitor may cause to be made such inspection or inquiry as  is referred to in sub -section 
(3). 
(6) Where any inspection or inquiry has been caused to be  made by the Visitor,  the University or the 
management  shall be entitled to appoint a representative, who shall have  the right to be present and be 
heard at such inspection or  inquiry . 
(7) The Visitor may, if the inspection or inquiry is made in  respect of the University or an y College or 
Institution  maintained by it, address the Vice -Chancellor with  reference to the result of such inspection or 
inquiry together  with such views and advice with regard to the action to be  taken thereon, as the visitor 7 
 may be pleased to offer, and  on receipt of address made by the Visitor, the Vice -Chancellor  shall 
communicate, to the Executive Council, the views of  the Visitor with such advice as the Visitor may offer 
upon  the action to be taken thereon.  
(8) The Visitor may, if the inspection or i nquiry is made in  respect of any College or Institution 
admitted to the  privileges of the University, address the management  concerned through the Vice -
Chancellor with reference to  the result of such inspection or inquiry, his views thereon  and such advice  as 
he may be pleased to offer upon the  action to be taken thereon.  
(9) The Executive Council or the management, as the case may  be, shall communicate, through the 
Vice -Chancellor to the  Visitor such action, if any, as it proposes to take or has  been taken  upon the result 
of such inspection or inquiry.  
(10) Where, the Executive Council or the management, does  not, within a reasonable time, take action 
to the satisfaction  of the Visitor, the Visitor may, after considering any  explanation furnished or 
represe ntation made by the  Executive Council or the management, issue such  directions as he may think 
fit and the Executive Council or  the management, as the case may be, shall comply with  such directions.  
(11) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this section, the Visitor may, by order in 
writing, annul any  proceeding of the University which is not in conformity  with the Act, the Statutes or 
the Ordinances:  
Provided that before making any such order, he  shall call upon the Registrar to show cause w hy such 
an order should not be made, and, if any cause is shown within a  reasonable time, he shall consider the 
same.  
(12) The Visitor shall have such other powers as may be  prescribed by the Statutes.  
2[9A. The Chief Rector .—The Governor of the state of Mizoram shall be the Chief Rector  of the 
University. ] 
10. Officers of the University .—The following shall be the officers of the University: — 
(1) the Vice -Chancellor;  
(2) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor;  
(3) the Deans of Schools;  
(4) the Registrar;  
(5) the Finance Officer;  
(6) the Librarian; and  
(7) such other officers as may be declared by the  Statutes to be officers of the University.  
11. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in  such 
manner and on such terms and co nditions of service as  may be prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be the principal executive and  academic officer of the University and 
shall exercise  general supervision and control over the affairs of the  University and give effect to the 
decisions of all the  authorities of the University.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor may, if he is of opinion that  immediate action is necessary on any matter, 
exercise any  power conferred on any authority of the University by or  under this Act and shall rep ort to 
such authority the action  taken by him on such matter:  
Provided that if the authority concerned is of opinion  that such action ought not to have been taken,  it 
may refer the matter to the Visitor whose  decision thereon shall be final:  
Provided further that any person in the  service of the University who is aggrieved by the  action taken 
by the Vice -Chancellor under this sub -section  shall have the right to appeal against such  action to the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 24 of 2007, s. 2 (w.e.f. 28 -5-2007).  8 
 Executive Council within three  months from the date on whi ch decision on such  action is communicated 
to him and thereupon the  Executive Council may confirm, modify or reverse  the action taken by the Vice -
Chancellor.  
(4) The Vice -Chancellor, if he is of the opinion that any  decision of any authority of the Univers ity is  
beyond the powers of the authority conferred by  the provisions of this Act, the Statutes or the  Ordinances 
or that any decision taken is not in the  interest of the University, may ask the authority  concerned to 
review its decision within sixty days  of such decision  and if the authority refuses to review  the decision 
either in whole or in part or no  decision is taken by it within the said period of  sixty days, the matter shall 
be referred to the  Visitor whose decision thereon shall be final.  
(5) The V ice-Chancellor shall exercise such other powers and  perform such other duties as may be 
prescribed by  the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
12. The Pro -Vice -Chancellor .—The Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed in such manner  and 
shall exercise such powers and perform such duties, as may  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
13. The Deans of Schools .—Every Dean of a School shall be appointed in such manner and  shall 
exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be  prescribed by the Statutes.  
14. The Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed in such manner as may be  prescribed by the 
Statutes.  
(2) The Registrar shall have the power to enter into  agreement, sign documents and authenticate 
records on  behalf of the University and shall exercise such powers and  perform such duties as may be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
15. The Finance Officer .—The Finance Officer shall be appointed in such manner and  shall exercise 
such powers and perform such duties as may be  prescribed by the Statutes.  
16. The Librarian .—The Librarian shall be appointed in such manner and shall  exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be  prescribed by the Statutes.  
17. Other officers .—The manner of appointment and powers and duties of the other  officers of the 
University shall be p rescribed by the Statutes.  
18. Authorities of the University .—The following shall be the  authorities of the University: — 
(1) the Court;  
(2) the Executive Council;  
(3) the Academic Council;  
(4) the College Development Council;  
(5) the Board of Studies;  
(6) the Finance Committee; and  
(7) such other authorities as may be declared by the Statutes to  be the authorities of the 
University.  
19. The Court .—(1) The constitution of the Court and the term of office of its  members shall be 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
(2) Subject to the provision s of this Act, the Court shall have the  following powers and functions , 
namely:— 
(a) to review, from time to time, the broad policies and  programmes of the University and to 
suggest measures  for the improvement and development of the University;  
(b) to consider and pass resolutions on the annual  report and the annual accounts of the University 
and the audit report on such accounts;  
(c) to advise the Visitor in respect of any matter which  may be referred to it for advice; and  9 
 (d) to perform such other functions as may be  prescribed by the Statutes.  
20. The Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall be the principal executive body  of the 
University.  
(2) The constitution of the Executive Council, the term of office of  its members and its powers and 
functions shall be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
21. The Academic Council .—(1) The Academic Council shall be the principal academic body  of the 
University and shall, subject to the provisions of this  Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, co -ordinate 
and exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the  University.  
(2) The constitution of the Academic Council, the term of  office of its members and its powers and 
functions shall be  prescribed by the Statutes.  
22. The College Development Council .—(1) The College Development Council shall be responsible 
for admitting Colleges to the privileges of the University.  
(2) The constitution of the College Development Council, the  term of office of its members and its 
powers and  functions shall  be prescribed by the Statutes.  
23. The Boards of Studies .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Boards of Studies  shall 
be prescribed by the Statutes.  
24. The Finance Committee .—The constitution, powers and functions of the Finance  Committee 
shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
25. Other authorities of the University .—The constitution, powers and functions of other 
authorities, as  may be declared by the Statutes to be the authorities of the  University, shall be prescribed 
by the Statutes.  
26. Powers to make Statutes .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes may provide  for all 
or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) The constitution, powers and functions of authorities and  other bodies of the University, as 
may be  constituted from  time to time.  
(b) The appointment and continuance in office of the members  of the said authorities and bodies, 
the filling up of  vacancies of members, and all other matters relating to  those authorities and other 
bodies for which it may b e necessary or desirable to provide;  
(c) The appointment, powers and duties of the officers of the  University and their emoluments;  
(d) the appointment of teachers, academic staff and other  employees of the University, their 
emoluments and  conditions of service;  
(e) the appointment of teachers, academic staff working in  any other University or organis ation 
for a specific period  for undertaking a joint project;  
(f) the conditions of service of employees including  provisions pension, insurance and provident  
fund, the  manner of termination of service and disciplinary action  relating to employees of the 
University;  
(g) the principles governing the seniority of service of the  employees of the University;  
(h) the procedure for arbitration in cases of dispute bet ween  employees or students and the 
University;  
(i) the procedure for appeal to the Executive Council by any  employee or student against the 
action of any officer or  authority of the University;  
(j) the conferment of autonomous status on a College or an  Institution or a Department;  
(k) the establishment and abolition of Schools, Departments,  Centres , Halls, Colleges and 
Institutions;  10 
 (l) the conferment of honorary degrees;  
(m) the withdrawal of degrees, diplomas, certificates and  other academic distinctions;  
(n) the conditions under which Colleges and Institutions may  be admitted to the privileges of the 
University and the  withdrawal of such privileges;  
(o) the management of Colleges and Institutions established  by the University;  
(p) the delegation of powers vested in the authorities or  officers of the University;  
(q) the maintenance of discipline among the employees and  students;  
(r) all other matters which by this Act are to be or may be  provided for by the Statutes.  
27. Statutes how to  be made .— (1)The first Statutes are those set out in the Schedule.  
(2) The Executive Council may, from time to time, make new or  additional Statutes or may amend or 
repeal the Statutes  referred to in sub -section ( 1): 
Provided that the Executive Council shall not make  amend or repeal any Statu tes affecting the status, 
powers or  constitution of any authority of the University until such  authority has been given an 
opportunity of expressing an  opinion in writing on the proposed changes, and any opinion  so expressed 
shall be considered by the Executive Council.  
(3) Every new Statute or addition to the Statutes or any  amendment or repeal of a Statute shall require 
the assent  of the Visitor who may assent thereto or withhold assent  or remit to the Executive Cou ncil for 
re-consideration.  
(4) A new Statute or a Statute amending or repealing an  existing Statute shall have no validity unless 
it has been  assented to by the Visitor.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections,  the Visitor may make new or 
additional Statutes  or amend or repeal the Statutes referred to in sub -section  (1), during the period of three 
years immediately after the  commencement of this Act;  
Provided that the Visitor may, on the expiry of the  said period of three years,  make, within one year 
from the  date of such expiry, such detailed Statutes as he may  consider necessary and such detailed 
Statutes shall be laid  before both Houses of Parliament.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub -sections,  the Visitor may direct the 
University to make  provisions in the Statutes in respect of any matter  specified by him and if the 
Executive Council is unable to  implement such direction within sixty days of its receipt,  the Visitor may, 
after considering the reaso ns, if any,  communicated by the Executive Council for its inability to  comply 
with such direction, make or amend the Statutes  suitably.  
28. Power to make ordinances .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the Statutes, the  
Ordinances may provide for  all or any of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the admission of students to the University and their  enrolment as such;  
(b) the courses of study to be laid down for all degrees,  diplomas and certificates of the 
University;  
(c) the medium of instruction and examination;  
(d) the award of degrees, diplomas, certificates and other  academic distinctions, qualifications for 
the same and  the means to be taken relating to the granting and  obtaining of the same;  
(e) the fees to be charged f or courses of study in the  University and for admission to the 
examinations,  degrees and diplomas of the University;  
(f) the conditions for award of fellowships, scholarships,  studentships, medals and prizes;  
(g) the conduct of examinations, including the term of  office and manner of appointment and the 
duties of  examining bodies, examiners and moderators;   11 
 (h) the conditions of residence of the students of the  University;  
(i) the special arrangements, if any, which may be made  for the residence, discipline  and teaching 
of women  students and the prescribing of special courses of  studies of them;  
(j) the establishment of Cent res of Studies, Boards of  Studies, Speciali sed Laboratories and other  
Committees;  
(k) the manner of co -operation and collaboration with  other Universities, institutions and other 
agencies  including learned bodies or associations;  
(l) the creation, composition and functions of any other  body which is considered necessary for 
improving the  academic life of the University;  
(m) the institution  of fellowships, scholarships,  studentship, medals and prizes;  
(n) the supervision of management of Colleges and  Institutions admitted to the privileges of the  
University;  
(o) the setting up of a machinery for redressal or  grievances of employees; and  
(p) all other matters which by this Act or the Statutes, are  to be or may be, provided for by the 
Ordinances.  
(2) The first Ordinances shall be made by the Vice -Chancellor  with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and  the Ordinances so made may be amended, repealed or  added to at any time by 
the Executive Council in the  manner prescribed by the Statutes.  
29. Regulations .—The authorities of the University may make Regulations,  consistent with this Act, 
the Statutes and the Ordinances for  the conduct of their own business and that of the  Committees, if any, 
appointed by them and not provided  for by this Act, the Statutes or the Ordinances , in the  manner 
prescribed by the Statutes.  
30. Annual report .—(1) The annual report of the University shall be  prepared under the direction of 
the Executive  Council, which shall include, among other matters,  the steps taken by the University 
towards the  fulfil ment of its objects and shall be submitted to  the Court on or after such date as may be  
prescribed by the S tatutes and the Court shall  consider the report in its annual meeting.  
(2) The Court shall submit the annual report to the  Visitor along with its comments, if any.  
(3) A copy of the annual report, as prepared under sub -section ( 1), shall also be submitted to the 
Central  Government, which shall, as soon as may be,  cause the same to be laid before both Houses of  
Parliament.  
31. Annual accounts .—(1) The annual accounts and balance -sheet of the  University shall be 
prepared under the directions of  the Executive Council and shall, once at least every  year and at intervals 
of not more than fifteen  months, be audited by the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India or by such 
persons as he  may authori se in this behalf.  
(2) A copy of the annual accounts together with the audit report thereon shall be submitted to the 
Court  and the Visitor along with the observations of the  Executive Council.  
(3) Any observations made by the Visitor on the  annual accounts shall be brought to the notice of  the 
Court and the observations of the Court, if any,  shall, after being considered by the Executive  Council, be 
submitted to the Visitor.  
(4) A copy of the annual accounts together with the  audit report as submitted to the Visitor, shall also  
be submitted to the Central Government, whic h shall, as soon as may be, cause the same to be laid  before 
both Houses of Parliament.  
(5) The audited annual accounts after having been laid  before both Houses of Parliament shall be  
published in the Gazette of India.   12 
 32. Returns and information .—The University shall furnish to the Central Government  such returns 
or other information with respect to its  property or activities as the Central Government may, from  time to 
time, require.  
33. Transfer of services of certain employees of the North -Eastern Hi ll University .—(1) Every 
person who, immediately before the  commencement of this Act, is holding or discharging  the duties of 
any post or office in connection with the  affairs of the North -Eastern Hill University in any  area which on 
that date falls within  the State of  Mizoram shall be deemed to have been transferred to  the services of the 
Mizoram University on the same  terms and conditions and to the same rights and  privileges as to pension, 
gratuity, provident fund and  other matters as he would have been had under the  North -Eastern Hill 
University Act, 1973  (24 of 1973) . 
(2) Any dispute between a person referred to in sub -section  (1) and the University shall, at the request 
of such, person, be referred to a Tribunal of Arbitration  and the provisions of sub-sections ( 2),(3),(4) and 
(5) of section 34 shall, as far as may be, apply to a  reference made under this sub -section.  
34. Conditions of service of employees .—(1) Every employee of the University shall be  appointed 
under a written contract, which shall be lodged with the University and a copy of which  shall be furnished 
to the employee concerned.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of the contract between the  University and any employee shall, at the 
request  of the employee, be referred to a Tribunal of  Arbitrat ion consisting of one member appointed by  
the Executive Council, one member nominated by  the employee concerned and an empire appointed  by 
the Visitor.  
(3) The decision of the Tribunal shall be final, and no  suit shall lie in any civil court in respect of the 
matters decided by the Tribunal.  
(4) Every request made by the employee under sub -section  (2), shall be deemed to be a submission to  
arbitration upon the terms of this section within the  meaning of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act,  1996  
(26 of 1996 ). 
(5) The procedure for regulating the work of the  Tribunal shall be prescribed by the Statutes.  
35. Procedure of appeal and arbitration in disciplinary cases against students .—(1) Any student 
or candidate for an examination whose  name has been removed from the rolls of the  University by the 
orders or resolution of the Vice -Chancellor, Discipline Committee or Examination  Committee, as the case 
may be, and who has been  debarred from appearing at the examinations of the  University for more than 
one year, m ay, within ten  days of the date of receipt of such orders or copy of  such resolution by him, 
appeal to the Executive  Council and the Executive Council may confirm,  modify or reverse the decision 
of the Vice -Chancellor or the Committee, as the case may be.  
(2) Any dispute arising out of any disciplinary action  taken by the University against a student shall, 
at the request of such student, be referred to a  Tribunal of Arbitration and the provisions of sub -sections  
(2), (3), (4) and ( 5) of section 34 shall, a s far as may be, apply to a reference made under this  sub-section.  
36. Right to appeal .—Every employee or student of the University or of a  College or Institution 
maintained by the University or  admitted to its privileges shall, notwithstanding  anything contained in 
this Act, have a right to appeal  within such time as may be prescribed by the Statutes,  to the Executive 
Council against the decision of any  officer or authority of the University or of the Principal  or the 
management of any College or an  Institution, as the case may be, and thereupon the  Executive Council 
may confirm, modify or reverse the  decision appealed against.  
37. Provident and pension funds .—(1)The University shall constitute for the benefit of its  
employees such provident or pension  fund or provide such  insurance schemes as it may deem fit in such 
manner and  subject to such conditions as may be prescribed by the  Statutes.  
(2) Where such provident fund or pension fund has been  so constituted, the Central Government may 
declare  that the p rovisions of the Provident Funds Act, 1925  (28 of 1925) , shall apply to such fund, as if it 
were a Government  provident fund.   13 
 38. Disputes as to constitution of University authorities and bodies .—If any question arises as to 
whether any person has been  duly elected or appointed as, or is entitled to be, a  member of any authority 
or other body of the University,  the matter shall be referred to the Visitor whose decision  thereon shall be 
final.  
39. Filling of casual vacancies .—All casual vacancies among th e members (other than ex officio  
members) of any authority or other body of the  University shall be filled, as soon as may be, by the 
person  or body who appoints, elects or co -opts the member  whose place has become vacant and person 
appointed,  elected or co-opted to a casual vacancy shall be a member  of such authority or body for the 
residue of the term for  which the person whose place he fills would have been a  member.  
40. Proceedings of University authorities or bodies not invalidated by vacancies .—No ac t or 
proceedings of any authority or other body of  the University shall be invalid merely by reason of the  
existence of a vacancy or vacancies among its members.  
41. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie aga inst 
any officer or other employee of the University for anything  which is in good faith done or intended to be 
done in  pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, the Statutes  or the Ordinances.  
42. Mode of proof of University record .—A copy of any re ceipt, application, notice, order,  
proceeding, resolution of any authority or Committee of  the University, or other documents in possession 
of the  University, or any entry in any register duly maintained by  the University, if certified by the  
Registrar, shall be received as prima facie evidence of such  receipt, application, notice, order, proceeding, 
resolution, or  documents or the existence of entry in the register and shall be  admitted as evidence of the 
matters and transactions therein  where  the original thereof would, if produced, have been  admissible in 
evidence, notwithstanding anything contained in  the Indian Evidence Act, 1872  (1 of 1872) or in any 
other law for the time  being in force.  
43. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any diffic ulty arises in giving effect to the provisions  of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published  in the Official Gazette make such provisions, 
not inconsistent  with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary  or expedi ent for remo ving 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this  section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement  of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon  as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
44. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act and the  Statutes:— 
(a) the first Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor in  such manner and on such 
conditions as may be deemed fit and  each of the s aid officer shall hold office for such term, not  
exceeding five years as may be specified by the Visitor;  
(b) the first Registrar and the first Finance Officer shall be  appointed by th e Visitor and each of 
the said o fficers shall  hold office for a term of three years;  
(c) the first Court and the first Executive Council shall consist of  not more than thirty members 
and eleven members,  respectively, who shall be nominated by the Visitor and shall  hold office for a 
term of three years;  
(d) the first College De velopment Council shall consist of not  more than ten members, who shall 
be nominated by the Visitor  and they shall hold office for a term of three years;  
(e) the first Academic Council shall consist of not more than  twenty -one members, who shall be 
nominated by the Visitor  and they shall hold office for a te rm of three years:  
Provided that if any vacancy occurs in the above offices or  authorities, the same shall be filled by 
appointment or  nomination, as the case may be, by the Visitor , and the perso n so appointed or  
nominated shall hold office for so long as the  officer or member in whose place he is appointed or  
nominated would have held office, if such vacancy had not  occurred.  14 
 45. Completion of courses of studies in Colleges or Institutions affiliated to the University .— 
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, or in the  Statutes or the Ordinances, any student of a 
College,  Institution, School or Department, who, immediately before  the admission of such College, 
Institution, School or  Department, to the privileges of the University, was studying  for a degree, diploma 
or certificate of the North -Eastern Hill  University, shall be permitted by the University, to complete  his 
course for that degree, diploma or certificate, as the case  may b e, and the Mizoram University and such 
College,  Institution, School or Department, shall provide for the  instructions and examination of such 
student in accordance  with the syllabus of studies of the North Eastern Hill  University.  
46. Statutes , Ordinances and Regulations to be published in the Official Gazette and to be laid 
before Parliament .—(1) Every Statute, Ordinance or Regulation made under  this Act shall be published 
in the Official Gazette.  
(2) Every Statute, Ordinance  or Regulation made under  this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made,  before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,  for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised  in one session or in two or more successive sessions,  and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately  following the session or the successive sessions  aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any  modification in the Statute, Ordinance or Regulation  or both Houses agree that the Statute, 
Ordinance or Regulation should not be made, the Stat ute, Ordinance or  Regulation shall thereafter have 
effect only in such  modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be;  so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under 
that Statute, Ordinance or  Regulation.  
(3) The power to make Statutes, Ordinances or Regulations  shall include the power to give 
retrospective effect from  a date not earlier than the date of commencement of this  Act, to the  Statutes, 
Ordinances or Regulatio ns or any of them but no  retrospective effect shall be given to any Statute,  
Ordinance or Regulation so as to prejudicially affect the  interests of any person to whom such Statute, 
Ordinance or  Regulation may be applicable.  
47. Amendment of Act 24 of 1973 .—In the North -Eastern Hill University Act, 1973, — 
(i) in section 1, in sub -section ( 2), for the words “Union  Territories of Arunachal Pradesh and 
Mizoram”, the  words “State of Arunachal Pradesh” shall be  substituted;  
(ii) in section 2, in clause ( l), for t he words “Union  territories of Arunachal Pradesh and 
Mizoram”, the  words “State of Arunachal Pradesh” shall be  substituted;  
(iii) in section 6, in sub -section ( 1), for the words “Union  territories of Arunachal Pradesh and 
Mizoram”, the  words “State of Arun achal Pradesh” shall be  substituted.   15 
  
THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 27)  
THE STATUTES OF THE UNIVERSITY  
1. The Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Visitor from a panel of 
not less than three  persons who shall be recommended by a Committee as constituted under clause ( 2): 
Provided that if the Visitor does not approve of any of the persons included in the  panel, he may call 
for a fresh panel.  
(2) The Committee referred to in clause ( 1) shall consist of three persons, none of whom  shall be an 
employee of the University or an institution associated with the University, or  a member of the Executive 
Council or Academic Council or of any other authority of the  University. Out of the three persons, two 
shall be nominated by the Executive  Council  and one by the Visitor and the nominee of the Visitor shall 
be the convener of the  Committee.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor shall be a whole -time salaried officer of the University . 
(4) The Vice -Chancellor shall hold office for a term of five years from  the date on which he  enters 
upon his office, or until he attains the age of sixty -five years, whichever is earlier, and  he shall be eligible 
for re -appointment :  
Provided that notwithstanding the expiry of the said period of five years, he shall  continue in office 
until his successor is appointed and enters upon his office:  
Provided further that the Visitor may direct any Vice -Chancellor after his term has  expired, to 
continue in office for such period, not exceeding a total period of one year, as  may be s pecified by him or 
till his successor is appointed and enters upon his office,  whichever is earlier.  
(5) The emoluments and other conditions of service of the Vice -Chancellor shall be as  follows:— 
(i) The Vice -Chancellor shall be paid a monthly salary and allowances other than  the house rent 
allowance, at the rates fixed by the Central Government from time to  time and he shall be entitled, 
without payment of rent, to use a furnished  residence through out his term of office and no charge 
shall fall on the  Vice Chancellor in respect of the maintenance of such residence.  
(ii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to such terminal benefits and allowances as  may be 
fixed by the Executive Council with the approval of the visitor from time  to time:  
Provided that whe re an employee of the University or a College or an  Institution maintained by or 
affiliated to  it, or of any other University or any Institution maintained by or affiliated to such other 
University,  is appointed as the Vice -Chancellor, he may be allowed to  continue to contribute to  any 
provident fund of which he is a member and the University shall contribute to  the account of such 
person in that provident fund at the same rate  at which the person had been contributing immediately 
before his appointment as the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that where such employee had been member of any  pension scheme, the 
University shall make the necessary contribution to such  scheme.  
(iii) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to travel ling allowance at such rates as may be fixed by 
the Executive Council.  
(iv) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to leave on full pay at the rate of thirty  days in a 
calendar year and the leave shall be credited to his account in advance in  two half -yearly instal ments 
of fifteen days each on the 1st day of January and July  every year:  
Provided that if the Vice Chancellor assumes or relinquishes charge of the  office of the Vice -
Chancellor during the currency of a half year, the leave shall be  credited proportionately at the rate of 
two and-a- half days for each completed  month of service.   16 
 (v) In addition to the leave referred to in sub -clause ( iv), the Vice -Chancellor shall  also be entitled 
to half pay leave at the rate of twenty days for each completed  year of service. This half pay le ave 
may also  be availed of as commuted leave on full  pay on medical certificate. When commuted leave 
is availed, twice the amount  of half pay leave shall be debited against half pay leave due.  
(6) If the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant due to death, resignation or  otherwise, or if he 
is unable to perform his duties due to ill health or any other cause, the  Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall perform 
the duties of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the Pro -Vice -Chancellor is not available, the senior m ost professor shall perform the 
duties of the Vice -Chancellor until a new Vice -Chancellor  assumes office or until the existing  
Vice -Chancellor attends to the duties of his office, as the  case may be.  
2. Powers and duties of the Vice -Chancellor .—(1) The Vice -Chancellor shall be ex officio Chairman 
of the Executive Council, the  Academic Council and the Finance Committee and shall , in the absence of 
the Chancellor,  preside at the convocations held for  conferring degrees.  
(2) The Vice -Chancellor shall be entitled to be present at, and address, any meeting of any  authority 
or other body of the University, but shall not be entitled to vote thereat unless he  is a member of such 
authority or body.  
(3) It shall be the duty of the Vice -Chancellor to see that this Act, the Statutes, the  Ordinances and the 
Regulations are duly observed and he shall have all the powers  necessary to ensure such observance.  
 (4) The Vice -Chancellor shall exercise control over the affairs of the University and shall  give effect 
to the decisions of all the authorities of the University.  
(5) The Vice -Chancellor shall have all the powers necessary for the proper maintenance of  discipline 
in the University and he may delegate any such powers to such person or  persons as he deems fit.  
(6) The Vice -Chancellor shall have the power to convene or cause to be convened the  meeting of the 
Executive Council, the Academic Council and the Finance  Committee.  
3. Pro-Vice-Chancellor .—(1) Every Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall be appointed by the Executive 
Council on the  recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that where the recommendation of the Vice -Chancellor is not accepted by  the Executive 
Council, the matter shall be referred to the Visitor who may either appoint the  person recommended by 
the Vice -Chancellor or ask the Vice -Chancellor to recommend  another person to the Executive Council:  
Provided further that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the  Vice -Chancellor, 
appoint a Professor to discharge the duties of a Pro -Vice -Chance llor in  addition to his own duties as a 
Professor.  
(2) The term of office of a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall be such as may be decided by the  Executive 
Council but it shall not in any case exceed five years or until the expiration of the  term of office of the 
Vice -Chancellor, whichever is earlier:  
Provide that a Pro -Vice -Chancellor whose term of office has expired shall be  eligible for  
re-appointment:  
Provided further that , in any case, a Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall retire on attaining the  age of sixty -five 
years: 
Provided also that the Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall, while discharging the duties of the  Vice -Chancellor 
under clause ( 6) of Statutes 2, continue in office notwithstanding the  expiration of his  term of office as 
Pro-Vice -Chancellor, until a new Vice -Chance llor or the  Vice -Chancellor, as the case may be, assumes 
office:  
Provided also that when the office of the Vice -Chancellor becomes vacant and  there is no  
Pro-Vice -Chancellor to perform the functions of the Vice -Chancellor, the  Executive Council may appoint 
a Pro -Vice -Chancellor and the Pro -Vice -Chancellor so  appointed shall cease to hold office as such as 
soon as a Vice -Chancellor is appointed and  enters upon his office.  17 
 (3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of a Pro-Vice -Chancellor shall  be such 
as may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time to time.  
(4) The Pro -Vice -Chancellor shall assist the Vice -Chancellor in respect of such matters as  may be 
specified by the Vice -Chancellor in this behalf, from time to time, and shall also  exercise such powers 
and perform such duties as may be assigned or delegated to him by the  Vice -Chancellor.  
4. Registrar .—(1) The Registrar shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation 
of a Selection Committee c onstituted for the purpose and shall be a whole -time salaried  officer of the 
University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Regist rar shall be such  as may 
be prescribed by the Exec utive Council from time to time:  
Provided that the Registrar shall retir e on attaining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that a Registrar shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age of  sixty years, continue in 
office until his successor is appointed and enters upon his  office or until the expiry of a period of one 
year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Registrar is vacant or when the Registrar is, by reason of illness,  absence or 
any other cause, unable to perform the duties of his office, the duties of the  officer shall be performed by 
such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the  purpose.  
(5) (a) The Registrar shall have power to take disciplinary action against such of the  employees, 
excluding teachers and academic staff, as may be specified in the order  of the Executive Council and to 
suspend them pending inquiry, to  administer warnings to them or to impose on them the penalty of 
censure or the  withholding of increment:  
Provided that no such penalty shall be imposed unless the person has  been given a reasonable 
opportunity of showing cause against the action  proposed to be taken in regard to him.  
(b) An appeal shall lie to the Vice -Chancellor against any order of the Registr ar imposing any of the 
penalties specified in sub -clause ( a). 
(c) In a case where the inquiry discloses that a punishment beyond the power of the  Registrar is called 
for, the Registrar shall, upon concluding of the inquiry, make a  report to the Vice -Chancellor along with 
his recommendations:  
Provided that an appeal shall lie to the Executive Council against an  order of the Vice -Chancellor 
imposing any penalty.  
(6) The Registrar shall be ex officio Secretary of the Executive Council, the Academic  Council and 
the College Development Council, but shall not be deemed to be a member  of any of these authorities and 
he shall be ex officio Member -Secretary of the Court.  
(7) It shal l be the duty of the Registrar — 
(a) to be the custodian of the records, the common seal and such other property of  the University 
as the Executive Council shall commit to his charges;  
(b) to issue all notices convening meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the  Academic 
Council, the Col lege Development Council, and of any Committees  appointed by those authorities;  
(c) to keep the minutes of all the meetings of the Court, the Executive Council, the  Academic 
Council, the College Development Council and of any committees  appointed by those authorities;  
(d) to conduct the official correspondence of the Court, the Executive Council, the  Academic 
Council and the College Development Council;  
(e) to arrange for and superintend the examinations of the University in accordance  with the 
manner presc ribed by the Ordinances;  18 
 (f) to supply to the Visitor copies of the agenda of the meetings of the authorities of  the 
University as soon as they are issued and the minutes of such meetings;  
(g) to represent the University in suits or proceedings by or again st the University,  sign powers of 
attorney and verify pleading or depute his representative for the  purpose; and  
(h) to perform such other duties as may be specified in the Statutes, the Ordinances  or the 
Regulations or as may be required from time to time  by the Executive  Council or the Vice -
Chancellor . 
5. The Finance Officer .—(1) The Finance Officer shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the  
recommendations of a Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a  whole -time 
salaried officer of the University.  
(2) He shall be appointed for a term of five years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(3) The emoluments and other terms and conditions of service of the Finance Officer shall be  such as 
may be prescribed by the Executive Council from time  to time:  
Provided that a Finance Officer shall retire o n attaining the age of sixty years:  
Provided further that the Finance Officer shall, notwithstanding his attaining the age  of sixty years, 
continue in office until his successor is ap pointed and enters upon his  office or until the expiry of a period 
of one year, whichever is earlier.  
(4) When the office of the Finance Officer is vacant or when the Finance Officer is, by reason of  
illness, absence or any other cause, unable to perform t he duties of his office, the duties of the  office shall 
be performed by such person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
 (5) The Finance Officer shall be ex officio Secretary of the Finance Committee, but shall not  be 
deemed to be a member of such Committee.  
(6) The Finance Officer shall — 
(a) exercise general supervision over the funds of the University and shall advise it  as regards its 
financial policy; and  
(b) perform such other financial functions as may be assigned to him by the  Executive Council or 
as may be prescribed by the Statutes or the Ordinances.  
(7) Subject to the control of the Executive Coun cil, the Finance Officer shall — 
(a) hold and manage the property and investments of the University including trust  and endowed 
property; 
(b) ensure that the limits fixed by the Executive Council for recurring and nonrecurring  
expenditure for a year are not exceeded and that all moneys are  expended on the purpose for whi ch 
they are granted or allotted;  
(c) be responsible for the prepar ation of annual accounts and the budget of the  University and for 
their presentation to the Executive Council;  
(d) keep a constant watch on the state of the cash and bank balances and on the state  of 
investments;  
(e) watch the progress of the collection of  revenue and advise on the methods of  collection 
employed;  
(f) ensure that the registers of buildings, land, furniture and equipment are  maintained up -to-date 
and that stock -checking is conducted, of equipment and  other consumable materials in all off ices, 
Special Centres, Specialis ed Laboratories, Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University;  
(g) bring to the notice o f the Vice -Chancellor unauthoris ed expenditure and other  financial 
irregularities and suggest disciplinary action against persons at fault;  and 19 
 (h) call for from any office, Centre, Laboratory, College or Institution maintained by  the 
University and information or returns that he may consider necessary for the  performance of his 
duties.  
(8) Any receipt given by the Finance Officer or  the person or persons  duly authoris ed in this  behalf by 
the Executive Council for any money payable to the University shall be  sufficient discharge for payment 
of such money . 
6. Deans of Schools of Studies .—(1) Every Dean of a School of Studies shall be appointed by the 
Vice -Chancellor from  among the Professors in the School for a period of three years and he shall be 
eligible for re -appointment:  
Provided that a Dean o n attaining the age of sixty  years shall cease to hold  office as such:  
Provided further that if at any time there is no Dean in a School, the Vice - Chancellor, Pro -Vice-
Chancellor or a Dean authoris ed by the Vice -Chancellor in this  behalf, shall exercise the powers of the 
Dean of the School.  
 (2) When the office of the Dean is vacant or when the Dean is, by reason of illness, absence  or any 
other cause, unable to perform duties of his office, the duties of the office shall be  performed by such 
person as the Vice -Chancellor may appoint for the purpose.  
(3) The Dean shall be the Head of the Scho ol and shall be responsible for the conduct and  
maintenance of the standards of teaching and research in the School and shall have such  other functions 
as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The Dean shall have the right to be present and to speak at any meeting of the Boards of  Studies 
or Committees of the School, as the case may be, but shall not have the right to vote  thereat unless he is a 
member thereof.  
7. Heads of Departments .—(1) In the case of Departments which have more than one Professor, the 
Head of the  Department shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of the  Vice -
Chancellor from among the Professors.  
(2) In the case of Departments where there is no Professor or there is only one Professor, the  
Executive Council shall have the option to appoint, on the recommendation of the  Vice  Chancellor, either  
the Professor or a Reader as the Head of the Department:  
Provided that it shall be open to a Professor or Reader to decline the offer of  appointment as the Head 
of the D epartment . 
(3) A Professor  appointed as the Head of the Department shall hold office as such for a period  of 
three years and shall be eligible for re -appointment.  
(4) A Head of a Department may resign his office at any time during his tenure of office.  
(5) A Head of a Department shall perform such functions as may be prescribed by the  Ordinances.  
8. Proctor .—(1) The Proctor shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the recommendation of 
the Vice -Chancellor and shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be  assigned to him 
by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(2) The Proctor shall hold office for a term of two years and shall be eligible for reappointment.  
9. Librarian .—(1) The Librarian shall be appointed by the Executive Council on the 
recommendations of  the Selection Committee constituted for the purpose and he shall be a whole -time 
officer  of the University.  
(2) The Librarian shall exercise such powers and perform such duties as may be assigned to  him by 
the Executive Council.  
10. Meetings of the Court .—(1) An annual meeting of the Court shall be held on a date to be fixed by 
the Executive  Council unless some other date has been fixed by the Court in respect of any year.  20 
 (2) At an annual meeting of the Court, a report on the working  of the University during the  previous 
year, together with a statement of the receipts and expenditure, the balance  sheet as  audited, and the 
financial estimates for the next year shall be presented.  
(3) A copy of the statement of receipts and expenditure,  the balance -sheet and the  financial estimates 
referred to in clause ( 2) shall be sent to every member of the Court at  least seven days before the date of 
the annual meeting.  
(4) Twelve members of the Court shall form a quorum for a meeting of the Court.  
(5) Special meetings of the Court may be convened by the Executive Council or the  Vice -Chancellor 
or if there is no Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice -Chancellor or if there is no  Pro Vice -Chancellor, by the 
Registrar.  
11. Quorum for meetings of the Executive Counci l.—Five members of the Executive Council shall 
form a quorum for a meeting of  the Executive Council.  
12. Powers and functions of the Executive Council .—(1) The Executive Council shall have the power 
of management and  administration of the revenue and property of the University and the conduct  of all 
administrative affairs of the University not otherwise provided for.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Statutes and the Ordinances, the Executive  Council shall, 
in addition to all other powers vested in it, have the following powers,  namely:— 
(i) to create teaching and academic posts, to determine the number and emoluments  of such posts 
and to define the duties and conditions of service of Professors,  Readers, Lecturers and other 
academic staff and Principals of Colleges and  Institutio ns maintained by the University:  
Provided that no action shall be taken by the Executive Council in  respect of the number, 
qualification and the emoluments of teachers and  academic staff otherwise than after conside ration of 
the recommendations of the  Academic Council;  
(ii) to appoint such Professors, Readers, Lecturers and other academic staff, as may  be necessary, 
and Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the  University on the recommendation of 
the Selection Committee constituted for the  purpose and to fill up temporary vacancies therein;  
(iii) to create administrative, ministerial and other necessary posts and to make  appointments 
thereto in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances;  
(iv) to grant leave of absence to any officer of the University other than the  Chancellor and the  
Vice -Chancellor, and to make necessary arrangements for the discharge of the  functions of such 
officer during his absence;  
(v) to regulate and enforce discipline amo ng employees in accordance with the  Statutes and the 
Ordinances;  
(vi) to manage and regulate the finances, accounts, investments, property, business  and all other 
administrative affairs of the University and for that purpose to  appoint such agents as it ma y think fit;  
(vii) to fix limits on the total recurring and the total non -recurring expenditure for a  year on the 
recommendation of the Finance Committee;  
(viii) to invest any money belonging to the University, including any unapplied  income, in such 
stock s, funds, share or securities, from time to time as it may  think fit or in the purchase of 
immovable property in India, with the like powers of  varying such investment from time to time;  
 (ix) to transfer or accept transfers of any movable or immovable pro perty on behalf of  the 
University;  
(x) to provide buildings, premises, furniture and apparatus and other means needed  for carrying 
on the work of the University;  
(xi) to enter into, vary, carry out and cancel contrasts on behalf of the University;  21 
 (xii) to entertain, adjudicate upon, and if thought fit, to redress any grievances of the  employees 
and students of the University who may, for any reason, feel  aggrieved;  
(xiii) to appoint examiners and moderators and, if necessary, to remove them, and to  fix the ir fees, 
emoluments and travelling and other allowances, after consulting the  Academic Council;  
(xiv) to select a common seal for the University and provide for the custody and use of  such seal;  
(xv) to make such special arrangements as may be necessary for the residence and  discipline of 
women students;  
(xvi) to delegate any of its powers to the Vice -Chancellor, the Pro -Vice -Chancellor,  the Deans, 
the Registrar or the Finance Officer or such other emplo yee or  authority of the University or to a 
committee appointed by it as it may deem fit;  
(xvii) to institute fellowships, scholarships, studentships, medals and prizes;  
(xviii) to provide for inviting Writers -in-Residence and determine the terms and  condit ions or 
such invitations;  
(xix) to provide for the appointment of Visiting Professors, Emeritus Professors;  Consultants and 
Scholars and determine the terms and conditions of such  appointments; and  
(xx) to exercise such other powers and perform such other duties as may be conferred  or imposed 
on it by the Act, or the Statutes.  
13. Quorum for meetings of the Academic Council .—Nine  members of the Academic Council shall 
form a quorum for a meeting of the  Academic Council.  
14. Powers and functions of the Academic Council .—Subject to the Act, the Statutes and the 
Ordinances, the Academic Council shall, in addition to all  other powers vested in it, hav e the following 
powers, namely: — 
(a) to exercise general supervision over the academic policies of the Unive rsity and to give  
directions regarding methods of instructions, co -ordinating teaching among the Colleges  and the 
Institutions, evaluation of research or improvement in academic standards;  
(b) to bring about inter -School co -ordination, to establish or appo int committees or boards,  for 
taking up projects on an inter -School basis;  
 (c) to consider matters of general academic interest either on its own initiative or on a  reference 
by a School or the Executive Council and to take appropriate action thereon;  and 
(d) to frame such regulations and rules consistent with the Statutes and the Ordinances  regarding 
the academic functioning of the University, discipline, residences, admissions,  award of fellowships 
and studendships, fees, concessions, corporate life and attendance.  
15. School of Studies and Departments .—(1) The University shall have such Schools of Studies as 
may be specified in the Statutes.  
(2) Every School shall have a School Board and the members of the first School Board shall  be 
nominated by the Executive Council and shall hold office for a period of three years.  
(3) The powers and functions of a School Board shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(4) The conduct of the meetings of a School Board and the quorum required for such  meetings shall 
be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(5) (a) Each School shall consist of such Departments as may be assigned to it by the  Ordinances:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the  Academic Council, establish 
Centres of Studies to which may be assigned such  teachers of the University as the Executive Council 
may consider necessary.   22 
 (b) Each Department shall consist of  the following members, namely: — 
(i) Teachers of the Department;  
(ii) Persons conducting research in the Department;  
(iii) Dean of the School;  
(iv) Honorary Professors, if any, attached to the Department ; and 
(v) Such other persons as may be members of the Department accordance  with the provisions of 
the Ordinances.  
16. Board of Studies .—(1) Each Department shall have a Board  of Studies.  
(2) The composition of the Board of Studies and the term of office of its members shall be  prescribed 
by the Ordinances.  
(3) Subject to the overall control and supervision of the Academic Council, the functions of  a Board 
of Studies shall be  approve subjects for research for various degrees and other requirements of research 
degrees and to recommend to the concerned School Board  in the manner as prescribed by the 
Ordinances — 
(a) courses  of studies and appointment of examiners for courses, but excluding  research degrees;  
(b) appointment of supervisors of research; and  
(c) measures for the improvement of the standard of teaching and research:  
Provided that the above functions of a Board of  Studies shall, during the  period of three years 
immediately after the commencement of the Act, be  performed by the Department.  
17. Finance Committee .—(1) The Finance Committee shall consist of the following members, 
namely:— 
(i) the Vice -Chancellor.  
(ii) the Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) three persons nominated by the Executive Council, out of whom at least one shall  be a 
member of the Executive Council; and  
(iv) three persons nominated by the Visitor.  
 (2) Five members of the Finance Committee shall form a q uorum for a meeting of the  Finance 
Committee.  
(3) All the members of the Finance Committee, other than ex officio  members, shall hold  office for a 
term of three years.  
(4) A member of the Finance Committee shall have the right to record a minute of dissent  if he does 
not agree with any decision of the Finance Committee.  
(5) The Finance Committee shall meet at least thrice every year to examine the accounts and  to 
scrutinize proposals for expenditure.  
(6) All proposals relating to creation of posts, and those items which have not been included  in the 
Budget, should be examined by the Finance Committee before they are considered by  the Executive 
Council.  
(7) The annual accounts and the financial estimates of the University prepared by the  Finance Officer 
shall be laid before the Finance Committee for consideration and  comments and thereafter submitted to 
the Executive Council for approval.  
(8) The Finance Committee shall recommend limits for the total recurring expenditure and  the total 
non-recurring expend iture for the year, based on the income and resources of  the University  (which, in the 
case of productive works, may include the proceeds of loans) . 23 
 18. Selection Committee .—(1) There shall be a Selection Committee for making recommendations to 
the Executive Council for appointment to the posts of Professor, Reader, Lecturer,  Registrar , Finance 
Officer, Librarian and Principals of Colleges and Institutions maintained by the University.  
(2) The Selection Committee for appointment to the posts specifie d in column 1 of the Table below 
shall consist of the Vice -Chancellor, Pro -Vice -Chancellor, a nominee of the Visitor and the person 
specified in the corresponding entry in column 2 of the said Table: — 
 
1 2 
Professor  (i) The Head of the Department concerned if he is a Professor.  
(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) Three persons not in the service of the University, nominated by the Executive 
Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the Academic Council for their 
special knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with which the Professor will be 
concerned.  
Reader/Lecturer  (i) The Head of the Department concerned.  
(ii) One Professor to be nominated by the Vice -Chancellor.  
(iii) Two persons not in the service of the U niversity, nominated by the Executive 
Council, out of a panel of names recommended by the Academic Council for their 
special knowledge of, or interest in, the subject with which the Reader or a Lecturer  
will be concerned.  
Registrar/Finance 
Officer  (i) Two  members of the Executive Council nominated by it; and  
(ii) One person not in the service of the University, nominated by the Executive 
Council.  
Librarian  (i) Two persons not in the service of the University , who have special knowledge of 
the subject of the Library Science/Library Administration to be nominated by the 
Executive Council.  
(ii) On e person not in the service of the University, nominated by the Executive 
Council.  
Principal of 
College or 
Institutio n 
maintained by 
the university  Three persons not in the service of the University of whom two shall be nominated by 
the Executive Council and one by the Academic Council for their special knowledge 
of, or interest in, a subject in which instruction is bein g provided by the College or 
Institution.  
NOTE:  1. Where the appointment is being made for an inter -disciplinary project, the head of the 
project shall be deemed to be the Head of the Department concerned.  
2. The Professor to be nominated shall be Professor concerned with the speciality for which the 
selection is being made and that the Vice -Chancellor shall consult the Head of the Department and the 
Dean of School before nominating the Professor.  
(3) The Vice -Chancellor, or in his absence, the Pro -vice-Chancellor shall preside at the meetings of a 
Selection Committee:  
Provided that the meetings of the Selection Committee shall be fixed after prior consultation with, 
and subject to the convenience of Visitor’s nominee and the persons nominated by the  Executive Council 
under clause ( 2):  24 
 Provided further that the proceedings of the Selection Committee shall not be valid unless, — 
(a) Where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council 
is four in all, at least three o f them attend the meeting; and  
(b) Where the number of Visitor’s nominee and the persons nominated by the Executive Council 
is three in all, at least two of them attend the meeting.  
(4) The meeting of a Selection Committe e shall be convened by the Vice -Chancellor or in his  absence 
by the Pro -Vice -Chancellor.  
(5) The procedure to be followed by a Selection Committee in making recommendations  shall be laid 
down in the Ordinances.  
(6) If the Executive Council is unable to accept the recommendations made by a Selection  committee, 
it shall record its reasons and submit the case to the Visitor for final orders.  
(7) Appointments to temporary posts shall be made in the manner indicated below:  
(i) If the temporary vacancy is for duration  longer than one academic session, it  shall be filled on 
the advice of the Selection Committee in accordance with the  procedure ind icated in the foregoing 
clauses:  
Provided that if the Vice -Chancellor is satisfied that in the interests of  work it is necess ary to fill the 
vacancy, the appointment may be made on a purely  temporary basis by a local Selection Committee 
referred to in sub -clause ( ii) for a  period not exceeding six months.  
(ii) If the temporary vacancy is for a period less than a year, an appointment to such  vacancy shall be 
made on the recommendation of a local Selection Committee  consisting of the Dean of the School 
concerned, the Head of the Department and a  nominee of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided that if the same person holds the offic es of the Dean and the Head of the Department, the 
Selection Committee may contain two nominees of the Vice -Chancellor:  
Provided further that in the case of sudden casual vacancies of teaching  posts caused by death or any 
other reason, the Dean may, in con sultation with the Head  of the Department concerned, make a 
temporary appointment for a month and  report to the Vice -Chancellor and the Registrar about such 
appointment.  
(iii) No teacher appointed temporarily shall, if he is not recommended by a regular  Selection 
Committee for appointment under the Statutes, be continued in service on  such temporary employment, 
unless he is subsequently selected by a local  Selection Committee of a regular Selection Committee, for a 
temporary or  permanent appointment, as the  case may be.  
19. Special mode of appointment .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in Statute 18, the 
Executive Council may invite a  person of high academic distinction and professional attainments to 
accept a post of  Professor or Reader or any other academic post in the University, as the case may be, on  
such terms and conditions as it deems fit, and on the person agreeing to do so appoint him to  the post.  
(2) The Executive Council may appoint a teacher or any other academic staff working in any  other  
University or organis ation for undertaking a joint project in accordance with the  manner laid down in the 
Ordinances.  
20. Appointment for a fixed tenure .—The Executive Council may appoint a person selected in 
accordance with the procedure laid down  in Sta tute 18 for a fixed tenure on such terms and conditions as 
it deems fit.  
21. Recognised teachers .—(1) The qualifications of recognis ed teachers shall be such as may be 
prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(2) All applications for the recognition of teachers shall  be made in such manner as may be laid down 
in the Ordinances.  
(3) No teacher shall be recognis ed as a teacher except on the recommendation of a Selection  
Committee constituted for the purpose in the manner laid down in the Ordinances.  25 
 (4) The period of registration of a teacher shall be determined by the Ordinances made in that behalf.  
(5) The Academic Council may, by a special resolution passed by a majority of not less than   
two-thirds of the members present and voting, withdr aw recognition from a teac her: 
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until notice in writing has been given to the  person 
concerned calling upon him to show cause, within such time as may be specified in the  notice, why such 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any  evidence he may produce in 
support of them have been considered by the Academic  Council.  
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order of withdrawal under clause ( 5) may, within three months from 
the date of communication to him of such order, appeal to the Executive Council which may pass such 
orders  thereon as it thinks fit.  
22. Committee s.—(1) Any Authority of the University may appoint as many standing or special 
committee as it  may deem fit, and may appoint to such Committees persons  who are not members of such  
authority.  
(2) Any such Committee appointed under clause ( 1) may deal with any subject delegated to it  subject 
to subsequent confirmation by the authority appointing.  
23. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of t he teachers, etc .—(1) All the teachers 
and other academic staff of the University shall, in the absence of any  agreement to the contrary, be 
governed by the terms and conditions of service and code of  conduct as are specified in the Statues, the 
Ordinances  and the Regulations.  
(2) Every teacher and member of the academic staff of the University shall be appointed on a  written 
contract, the form of which shall be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
(3) A copy of every contract referred to in clause ( 2) shall be de posited with the Registrar.  
24. Terms and conditions of service and code of conduct of other employees .—All the employees of 
the University, other than the teachers and other academic staff of the  University, shall, in the absence of 
any contract to the contrary, be governed by the terms and  conditions of service and code of conduct as 
are specified in the Statu tes, the Ordinances and the  Regulations.  
25. Seniority List .—(1) Whenever, in accordance with the Statu tes, any person is to hold an office or 
be a member  of an authority of the University by rotation according to seniority, such seniority shall be  
determined according to the length of continuous service of such person in his grade and, in  accordance 
with such other principles as the Executive Counc il may, from time to time,  prescribe.  
(2) It shall be the duty of the Registrar to prepare and maintain in respect of each class of  persons to 
whom the provisions of these Statu tes apply, a complete and up -to-date seniority list in accordance with 
the provisions of clause ( 1). 
(3) If two or more persons have equal length of continuous service in a particular grade or  the relative 
seniority of any person or persons is otherwise in doubt, the Registrar may, on  his own motion and shall, 
at the request of a ny such person, submit the matter to the  Executive Council whose decision thereon shall 
be final.  
26. Removal of employees of the University .—(1) Where there is an allegation of misconduct against 
a teacher, a member of the academic  staff or other employee  of the University, the Vice -Chancellor, in the 
case of the teacher or  member of the academic staff, and the authority competent to appoint (hereinafter 
referred  to as the appointing authority) in the case of other employees may, by order in writing, place  such 
teacher, member of the a cademic staff or other employee , as the case may be, under  suspension and shall 
forthwith report to the Executive Council the circumstances in  which the order was made:  
Provided that the Executive Council may, if it is of the opinion, that the circumstances of the case do 
not warrant the suspension of the teacher or a member of the academic staff, revoke such order.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the terms of the contract of appointment or of any  other 
terms and cond itions of service of the employees, the Executive Council in respect of  teachers and other 
academic staff, and the appointing authority, in respect of other  employees, shall have the power to 26 
 remove a teacher or a member of the academic staff, or as  the ca se may be , other employee on grounds of 
misconduct.  
(3) Save as aforesaid, the Executive Council, or as the case may be, the appointing authority,  shall no t 
be entitled to remove any teacher, member of the academic staff or other  employee except for a good  
cause and after giving three months’ notice or on  payment of three months’ salary in lieu thereof.  
 (4) No teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall be removed under  clause ( 2) or 
clause ( 3) unless he has been given a reasonable opport unity of showing  cause against the action proposed 
to be taken in regard to him.  
(5) The removal of a teacher, member of the academic staff or other employee shall take  effect from 
the date on which the order of removal is made:  
Provided that where the tea cher, member of the academic staff or other employee is  under suspension 
at the time of his removal, such removal shall take effect from the date  on which he was placed under 
suspension.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of  this Statute, a teacher,  member 
of the academic staff  or other employee may resign, — 
(a) if he is a permanent employee, only after giving three months’ notice in writing  to the 
Executive Council or the appointing authority, as the case may be, or by  paying three months’ salary 
in lieu thereof;  
(b) if he is not a permanent employee, only after giving one month’s notice in  writing to the 
Executive Council or, as the case may be, the appointing authority or  by paying one month’s s alary in 
lieu thereof:  
Provided that such resignation shall take effect only on the date on which the  resignation is accepted 
by the Executive Council or the appointing authority as the  case may be.  
27. Honorary degrees .—(1) The Executive Council may, on the recommendation of the  Academic 
Council and by a  resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and  
voting, make proposals to the Visitors for the conferment of honorary degrees:  
Provided that in case of emergency, the Executive Council may, on its own  motion, make such 
proposals.  
(2) The Executive Council may, by a resolution passed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the 
members present and voting, withdraw, with the previous sanction of the  Visitor, any honorary degree 
conferred by  the University.  
28. Withdrawal of Degrees, etc. —The Executive Council may, by a special resolution passed by a 
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and voting, withdraw any degree or academic 
distinction conferred  on, or any certifi cate or diploma granted to, any person by the University for goods 
and sufficient  cause:  
Provided that no such resolution shall be passed until a notice in writing has been given  to that person 
calling upon to him to show cause within such time as may be s pecified in the  notice why such a 
resolution should not be passed and until his objections, if any, and any  evidence he may produce in 
support of them, have been considered by the Executive Council.  
29. Maintenance of discipline among students of the Unive rsity.—(1) All powers relating to discipline 
and disciplinary action in relation to students of the  University shall vest in the Vice -Chancellor . 
(2) The Vice -Chancellor may delegate all or any of his powers as he deems proper to a  proctor and to 
such other officers as he may specify in this behalf.  
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of his powers relating to the maintenance of discipline  and 
taking such action, as may seem to him appropriate for the maintenance of discipline, the  Vice -Chancellor 
may, in exercise of his powers, by order, direct that any student or  students be expelled, or rusticated, for 
a specified period, or be not admitted to a course  or courses of  study in a College, Institution or 27 
 Departmen t or a School of the University f or a stated period, or be punished with fine for an amount to be 
specified in the order, or be  debarred from taking an examination or examinations conducted by the 
University,  College, Institution or Department or a School for one or more years, or that the res ults of the 
student or students concerned in the examination or examinations in which he or  they have appeared be 
cancelled.  
(4) The Principals of colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads of  teaching 
Departments in the University shall  have the authority to exercise all such  disciplinary powers over the 
students in their respective Colleges, Institutions, Schools and  teaching Departments in the University as 
may be necessary for the proper conduct of such  Colleges, Institutions, Schools  and teaching 
Departments.  
(5) Without prejudice to the powers of the Vice -Chancellor, the Principal and other persons  specified 
in clause ( 4), detailed rules of discipline and proper conduct shall be made by the  University. The 
Principals of Colleges, Institutions, Deans of Schools of Studies and Heads  of teaching Departments in 
the University may also make the supplementary rules as they  deem necessary for the aforesaid purposes.  
(6) At the time of admission, every student shall be  required to sign  a declaration to the  effect that he 
submits himself to the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Vice -Chancellor and  other authorities of the 
University.  
30. Maintenance of discipline  among Students of College, etc .—All powers relating to discipline and 
disciplina ry action in relation to students of a College or an  Institution, not maintained by the University, 
shall vest in the Principal of the College or  Institution, as the case may be, in accordance with the 
procedure prescribed by the Ordinances.  
31. Admission of Colleges, etc., to the privileges of the University. —(1) Colleges and other 
Institutions situated within the jurisdiction of the University may be  admitted to such privileges of the 
University as the Executive Council and the College  Development Council  may decide on th e following 
conditions, namely: — 
(i) Every such college or Institution shall have a regularly constituted Governing  Body, consisting 
of not more than fifteen persons approved by the Executive  Council and including among others, two 
teachers of the University to be  nominated by the Executive Council and three representatives of the 
teaching  staff of whom the Principal of the College or Institution shall be one.  The procedure for 
appointment of members of the Governing Body and other  matters affecting the management of a 
College or an Institution shall be prescribed  by the Ordinances:  
Provided that the said condition shall not apply in the case of  College s or Institutions maintained by 
Government which shall, however, have an  Advisory Committee consisting of not more than fifteen 
persons which shall  consist of among others, three teachers including the Principal of the College or  
Institution, and two teachers of the University nominated by the Executive  Council.  
(ii) Every such  College or Institution shall  satisfy the Executive Council  and the  College 
Development Council on  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the suitability and adequacy of its accommodation and equipment for  teaching;  
(b) the qualifications and adequacy of its teaching staff and the conditions of  their service;  
(c) the arrangements for the residence, welfare, discipline and supervision of  students;  
(d) the adequacy of financial provision made for the continued maintenance  of the College or 
Institution; and  
(e) such other matters as are essential for the maintenance of the standards of  University 
education.  
(iii) No College or Institution shall be admitted to any privileges of the University  except on the 
recommendation of the A cademic Council made after considering the  report of a Committee of 
Inspection appointed for the purpose by the  Academic Council.  28 
 (iv) Colleges and Institutions desirous of admission to any privileges of the  University shall be 
required to intimate their i ntension to do so in writing so as to  reach the Registrar not later than the 
15th August, preceding the year from which  permission applied for is to have effect.  
(v) A College or an Institution shall not, without the previous permission of the  Executive 
Council, College Development Council and the Academic Council,  suspend instruction in any subject 
or cour se of study which it is authoris ed to  teach and teaches.  
(2) Appointment to the teaching staff and Principal of Colleges or Institutions admitted to the  
privileges of the University shall be made in the manner prescribed by the Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and Institutions  maintained by 
Government.  
(3) The service conditions of t he administrative and other non -academic staff of every  College or 
Institution referred to in clause ( 2) shall be such as may be laid down in the  Ordinances:  
Provided that nothing in this clause shall apply to Colleges and  Institutions maintained by 
Government.  
(4) Every College or Insti tution admitted to the privileges of the University shall be  inspected at least 
once in every two Academic years by a Committee appointed by the  Academic Council, and the report of 
the Committee shall be submitted to the Academic  Council, which shall forwa rd the same to the College 
Development Council and  Executive Council with such recommendations as it may deem fit to make.  
(5) The College Development Council and the Executive Council, after considering the  report and the 
recommendations, if any, of the A cademic Council, shall forward a copy of  the report to the Governing 
Body of the College or Institution with such remarks, if any, as  they may deem fit for suitable action.  
(6) The Executive Council may, after consulting the College Development Council and  Academic 
Council, withdraw any privileges granted to a College or an Institution, at any  time it considers that the 
College or Institution does not satisfy any of the conditions on  the fulfil ment of which the College or 
Institution was admitted to such pr ivileges:  
Provided that before any privileges are so withdrawn, the Governing  Body of the College or 
Institution concerned shall be given an opportunity to represent to the  Executive Council why such action 
should not be taken.  
(7) Subject to the conditions set forth in clause ( 1), the Ordinances may prescribe — 
(i) such other conditions as may be considered necessary;  
(ii) the procedure for the admission of colleges and Institutions to the privileges of  the University 
and for the withdrawal of those privileges.  
32. Convocations. —Convocation of the University for the conferring of degrees or for other purposes 
shall be held in  such manner as may be prescribed by the Ordinances.  
33. Acting Chairman of meetings. —Where no provision is made for a Pre sident or Chairman to 
preside over a meeting of any  authority of the University or any Committee of such authority or when the 
President or  Chairman so provided for is absent, the members present shall elect one from among 
themselves to  preside at such mee ting. 
34. Resignation. —Any member, other than an ex officio  member of the Court, the Executive Council, 
the Academic  Council or any other authority of the University or any Committee of such authority may 
resign by  letter addressed to the Registrar and the  resignation shall take effect as soon as such letter is  
received by the Registrar.  
35. Disqualification. —(1) A person shall be disqualified for being chosen as, and for being, a member 
of any of the  authorities of the University, — 
(i) if he is of unsound mind;  
(ii) if he is  an undischarged  insolvent ; 29 
 (iii) if he has been convicted by a court of law of an offence involving moral turpitude  and 
sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment for not less than six months.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether a person is or had been subjected to any of the  
disqualifications mentioned in clause ( 1), the question shall be referred to the Visitor and his  decision 
shall be final and no suit or other proceeding shall lie in any civil court against such  decision.  
36. Residence condition for membership and office. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
statutes, a person who is not ordinarily resident in  India shall not be eligible to be an officer of the 
University or a member of any authority of the  University.  
37. Membership of authorities by virtue of membership of other bodies. — Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Statutes, a person who holds any post in the  University or is a member of any authority 
or body of the University in his capacity as a member of  a particular authority or body or as the holder of 
a particular appointment shall hold such office or  membership only for so long as he continues to be a 
member of that particular authority or body  or the holder of that particular appointment, as the case  may 
be. 
38. Alumni Association. —(1) There shall be an Alumni Association for the University.  
(2) The subscription for membership of the Alumni Association shall be prescribed by the  
Ordinances.  
(3) No member of the Alumni Association shall be entitled to vote or stand for election  unless he has 
been a member of the Association for at least one year prior to the date of the  election and is a degree 
holder of the University of at least five years standing:  
Provided that the condition relating to the completi on of one year’s membership  shall not apply in the 
case of the first election.  
39. Students’ Council. —(1) There shall be constituted in the University, a Students’ Council for every 
academic year,  consisting of — 
(i) the Dean of Students’ Welfare who shall be the Chairman of the Students’ Council;  
(ii) all students who have won prizes in the previous academic year in the fields of  studies, fine 
arts, sports and extension work;  
(iii) twenty students to be nominated by the Academic Council on the basis of merit in  studies, 
sports, activities and all -round development of personality:  
Provided that any student of the University shall have the right to bring up any  matter concerning the 
University before the Students’ Council i f so permitted by the  Chairman, and he shall have the right to 
participate in the discussions at any meeting when  the matter is taken up for consideration.  
(2) The functions of the Students’ Council shall be to make suggestions to the appropriate  authoriti es 
of the University in regard to the programmes of studies, students’ welfare and  other matters of 
importance, in regard to the working of the University in general and such  suggestions shall be made on 
the basis of consensus of opinion.  
(3) The Students’  Council shall meet at least once in an academic year preferably in the  beginning of 
that year.  
40. Ordinances how made. —(1) The first Ordinances made under sub -section ( 2) of section 28 may 
be amended, repealed or  added to at any time by the Executive Council in the manner specified below.  
(2) No Ordinances in respect of the matters enumerated in section 28, other than those  enumerated in 
clause ( n) of sub -section  (1) thereof, shall be made by the Executive Council  unless a draft of such 
Ordinances has been proposed by the Academic Council.  
(3) The Executive Council shall not have power to amend any draft of any Ordinance proposed  by the 
Academic Council under clause ( 2), but may reject the proposal or return the draft to the  Academic 
Council for re -consideration, either in whole or in part, together with any  amendment which the 
Executive Council may suggest.  30 
 (4) Where the Executive Council has rejected or returned the draft of an Ordinance proposed by  the 
Academic Council, the Academic Council may consid er the question afresh and in case the  original draft 
is reaffirmed by a majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present  and voting and more than  
half the total number of members of the Academic Council, the draft  may be sent back to the Execut ive 
Council which shall either adopt it or refer it to the Visitor  whose decision shall be final.  
(5) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall come into effect immediately.  
(6) Every Ordinance made by the Executive Council shall be submitted to the Visitor within two  
weeks from the date of its adoption. The Visitor shall have the power to direct the University  within four 
weeks of the receipt of the Ordinance to suspend the operation of any such  Ordinance and he shall, as 
soon as possible, inform  the Executive Council about his objection to  the proposed Ordinance. The 
Visitor may, after receiving the comments of the University, either  withdraw the order suspending the 
Ordinance or disallow the Ordinance, and his decision  shall be final.  
41. Regulations. —(1) The authorities of the University may make Regulations consistent with the 
Act, the  Statutes and the Ordinances for the f ollowing matters, namely: — 
(i) laying down the procedure to be observed at their meetings and the number of  members 
required to form a quorum;  
(ii) providing for all matters which are required by the Act, the Statutes or the  Ordinances to be 
prescribed by Regulations;  
(iii) providing for all other matters solely concerning such authorities or committees  appointed by 
them and not provided for by the Act, the Statutes or the  Ordinances.  
(2) Every authority of the University shall make Regulations providing for the giving of notice  to the 
members of such authority of the dates of meeting and of the business to be  considered a t meetings and 
for the keeping of a record of the proceedings of  meetings.  
(3) The Executive Council may direct the amendment in such manner as it may specify of any  
Regulation made under the Statutes or the annulment of any such Regulation.  
42. Delegation  of Powers .—Subject to the provisions of the Act and Statutes, any officer or authority  
of the University may delegate his or its powers to any other officer or authority or person under his or  its 
respective control and subject to the condition that overa ll responsibility for the exercise of the  powers so 
delegated shall continue to vest in the officer or authority delegating such powers.  
--------------------------The Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout-Design Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE SEMICONDUCTOR INTEGRATED CIRCUITS  
 LAYOUT -DESIGN ACT, 2000  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE REGISTER AN D CONDITIONS OF REGISTRATION  
3. Registrar of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits layout -design.  
4. Power of Registrar to transfer pending matters.  
5. Registry.  
6. Register of Layout -Designs.  
7. Prohibition of registration of certain layout -designs.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION  
8. Application for registration.  
9. Withdrawal of acceptance.  
10. Advertisement of application.  
11. Opposition to registration.  
12. Correction and amendment.  
13. Registration.  
14. Jointly owned layout -design.  
15. Duration of registration.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION  
16. No action of infringement of unregistered layout -design.  
17. Rights conferred by registration.  
18. Infringement of layout -design.  
19. Registration to be prima facie  evidence of validity.  
 
 2 
 CHAPTER V  
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION  
SECTIONS  
20. Power of Registered Proprietor to assign and give receipts.  
21. Assignability and transmissibility of registered layout -design.  
22. Conditions for assignment otherwise than in connection with the goodwill of a business.  
23. Registration of assignments and transmissions.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
USE O F LAYOUT -DESIGN AND REGISTERED USERS  
24. Registered users.  
25. Registration as registered user.  
26. Power of Registrar for cancellation of registration as registered user.  
27. Power of Registrar to call for information relating to agreement in respect of registered users.  
28. Right of registered user to take proceedings against infringement.  
29. Registered user not to have right of assignment or transmission.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER  
30. Power to rectify the register.  
31. Correction of register.  
 
CHAPTER VIII 
APPELLATE  BOARD  
32. Establishment of Layout -Design Appellate Board.  
33. Composition of Appellate Board.  
34. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson, or other Members.  
35. Term of office of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and Members.  
36. Vice -Chairp erson  or senior -most  Member to a ct as Chairperson or discharge his function in 
certain circumstances.  
37. Salar ies, allowances and other terms  and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson 
and other Members.  
38. Resignation and removal.  
39. Staff of Appel late Board.  
40. Application to the Appellate Board to determine royalty.  
41. Power of the Board to cancel registration.  
42. Appeal to Appellate Board.  
43. Procedure and powers of Appellate Board.  
44. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc.  
45. Bar to appear before Appellate Board.  
46. Conditions as to making of interim order.  3 
 SECTIONS  
47. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases from one Bench to another.  
48. Procedure for application for rectification, etc., before Appellate Board.  
49. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings.  
50. Registrar to refer c ertain disputes to the Board.  
51. Power of the Board to permit certain uses.  
52. Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Appellate Board.  
53. Appeal.  
54. Powers of High Courts to make rules.  
55. Transitional provisions.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
56. Penalty for infringement of layout -design.  
57. Penalty for falsely representing a layout -design as registered.  
58. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connected with the Semiconductor 
Integrated Circuits Layout -Design Registry.  
59. Penalty for falsificati on of entries in the register.  
60. Forfeiture of goods.  
61. Exemption of certain person s employed in ordinary course of business.  
62. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused.  
63. Offences by companies.  
64. Cognizance of certain offences.  
65. Costs of defence or prosecution.  
66. Information as to commission of offence.  
67. Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out of India.  
 
CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
68. Protection of security of India.  
69. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
70. Certain persons to be public servants.  
71. Implied warranty on sale of layout -design, etc.  
72. Powers of Registrar.  
73. Exercise of discretionary power by Registrar.  
74. Evidence before Registrar.  
75. Death of party to a proceeding.  
76. Extention of time.  
77. Abandonment . 
78. Preliminary advice by the Registrar.  
79. Registered user to be impleaded in certain proceedings.  
80. Evidence of entries in register, etc., and things done by the Registrar.  
81. Registrar and other officers not compellable to produce register , etc.  
82. Certificate of validity.  4 
 SECTIONS  
83. Address for service.  
84. Agen ts. 
85. Layout -design registered by an agent or representative without authority.  
86. Indexes.  
87. Documents open to public inspection.  
88. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament.  
89. Fees and surcharge.  
90. Savings in respect of Chapter IX.  
91. Declaration as to ownersh ip of layout -design not registerable under the Registration Act, 1908.  
92. Government to be bound.  
93. Convention countries.  
94. Provision as to reciprocity.  
95. Power of Central Government to remove difficulties.  
96. Power to make rules.  
  5 
 THE SEMICONDUCTOR INTEGRATED CIRCUITS LAYOUT -DESIGN ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 37 OF 2000  
[4th September , 2000 .]  
An Act to provide for the protection of semiconductor integrated circuits layout -designs and for 
matters connected t herewith or incidental thereto . 
WHEREAS  the Final Act embodying the results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade 
Negotiations done at Marrakesh on the 15th day of April, 1994 provides for establishment of the World 
Trade Organisation;  
AND WHEREAS the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of  Intellectual Property Rights is part of the 
said Final Act;  
AND WHEREAS the Government of India, having ratified the said Final Act, should, inter alia , make 
provisions for giving effect to section 6 in Part II of the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects o f 
Intellectual Property Righ ts relating to Layout -Design (To pographies) of Integrated Circuits.  
 BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Semiconductor 
Integrated Ci rcuits Layout -Design Act, 2000.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and diff erent dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act, and 
any reference in any such provision to the commenceme nt of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unles the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Appellate Board ” means the Appellate Boar d established under section 32;  
(b) “assignment ” means an assignment in writing b y act of the parties concerned;  
(c) “Bench ” means a Bench of the Appellate Board;  
(d) “Chairperson ” means the Chai rperson of the Appellate Board;  
(e) “commercial exploitation ”, in relation to Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design, 
means to sell, lease, offer or exhibit for sale or otherwise distribute such semiconductor integrated 
circuit  for any commercial purpose;  
(f) “convention country ” means a country not ified as such under section 93;  
(g) “Judicial Member ” means a Member of the Appellate Board appointed as such under this Act, 
and includes the Chairperson or such Vice -Chairperson who poss esses any of the qualifications 
specified in  sub-section ( 3) of section 34;  
                                                           
1. 1st May,  2004  (Ss. 3 and 5), vide notification No.  S.O. 278(E), dated 1 2th February, 2004 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,  
Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
15th January, 2014  (Ss. 93 and 94) , vide notification  No. S.O. 84(E) , dated 1 0th January, 2014 , see Gazette  of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec.  3(ii).  6 
 (h) “layout -design ” means a layout of transistors and other circuitry elements and includes lead 
wires connecting such elements and expressed in any manner in a semicond uctor integ rated circuit;  
(i) “Member ” means a Judicial Member or a Technical Member of the Appellate Board and 
includes the Chairp erson and the Vice -Chairperson;  
(j) “notify" means to notify in the Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Journal published by the 
Registrar;  
(k) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(l) “register ” means the Register of Layout -Designs referred to in section 6;  
(m) “registered ” (with its grammatical variations) m eans registered under this Act;  
(n) “registered  layout -design" means a layout -design whi ch is actually on the register;  
(o) “registered proprietor ”, in relation to a layout -design, means the person for the time being 
entered in the register as p roprietor of the layout -design;  
(p) “registered user ” mean s a person who is for the time being registered as such under section 
25; 
(q) “Registrar ” means the Registrar of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design referred 
to in section 3;  
(r) “semiconductor integrated circuit ” means a product having transis tors and other circuitry 
elements which are inseparably formed on a semiconductor material or an insulating material or 
inside the semiconductor material and designed to perform an  electronic circuitry function;  
(s) “Technical Member ” means a Member of the  Appellate Board who is not a Judicial Member 
and includes the Chairperson or such Vice -Chairperson who possesses any of the qualifications 
specified in  sub-section ( 4) of section 34;  
(t) “transmission ” means transmission by operation of law, devolution on  the personal 
representation of a deceased person or any other mode of  transfer not being assignment;  
(u) “Vice -Chairperson ” means the Vice -Chai rperson of the Appellate Board;  
(v) any reference to the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design Registr y shall be 
construed as including a reference to any office of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -
Design Registry.  
CHAPTER II  
THE REGISTER AND CONDITIONS OF REGISTRATION  
3. Registrar of Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layou t-Design .—(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint a person to be known as the Registrar of 
Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Desig n for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other officers with such designation as it thinks fit for 
the purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and direction of the Registrar, such functions of the 
Registrar under this Act as he may from time to time authorise them to discharge.  
4. Power of Registr ar to tra nsfer pending matters .—Without prejudice to the generality of the 
provisions of sub -section ( 2) of section 3, the Registrar may, by order in writing and for reasons to be 
recorded therein, withdraw any matter pending before an officer appointed under the s aid sub -section ( 2) 
and deal with such matter himself either de novo  or from the stage it was so withdrawn or transferred the 7 
 same to another officer so appointed who may subject to the special  direction in the order of tran sfer deal 
with the matter either  de novo  or from the stage it was so transferred.  
5. Registry .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, there shall be established a Registry which shall be 
known as the Semiconductor Integrated C ircuits Layout -Design Registry.  
(2) The head office of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design Registry shall be at such 
place as the Central Government may specify and for the purposes of facilitating the registration of 
layout -designs, there  may be established, at such pl aces as the Central Governmen t may think fit, branch 
offices of the Semiconductor Integrated C ircuits Layout -Design Registry.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define the territorial limits 
within which an office of the Semiconductor Integrated C ircuits Layout -Design Regis try may exercise its 
functions.  
(4) There shall be seal of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design Registry.  
6. Register of Layout -Designs .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, a record called the Register of 
Layout -Designs shall be kept at the head office of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design 
Registry wherein shall be entered all registered layout -designs with the names, addresses and descriptions 
of the proprietor and such other matters related to the r egistered layou t-designs as may be prescribed.  
(2) Subject to the superintendence and direction of the Central Government, the register shall be kept 
under the control a nd management of the Registrar.  
(3) There shall be kept at each Branch office of the Se miconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design 
Registry a copy of the register and other documents as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, direct.  
7. Prohibition of registra tion of certain layout -designs .—(1) A layo ut-design— 
(a) which is not original; or  
(b) which has been commercially exploited anywhere in India  or in a convention country; or  
(c) which is  not inherently distinctive; or  
(d) which is not inherently capable of being distinguishable from any other regi stered la yout-
design,  
shall not be  registered as a layout -design:  
Provided that a layout -design which has been commercially exploited for not more than two years 
from the date on which an application for its registration has been filed either in India or in a conve ntion 
country shall be t reated as not having been comme rcially  exploited for the purposes of this sub -section.  
(2) A layout -design shall be considered to be original if it is the result of its creator's own intellectual 
efforts and is not commonly known to  the creators of layout -designs and manufacturers of semiconductor 
integrated circuits at the time of its cre ation :  
Provided that a layout -design consisting of such combination of elements and interconnections that 
are commonly known among creators of layout -designs and manufacturers of semiconductor integrated 
circuits shall be considered as original if such combinatio n taken as a whole is the result of its crea tor's 
own intellectual efforts.  
(3) Where an original layout -design has been created in execution of a commission or a contract of 
employment, the right of registration to such layout -design under this Act shall belong, in the absence of 
any contractual provision to the contrary, to th e person who commissioned the work or to the employer.  8 
 CHAPTER III  
PROCEDURE FOR AND DURATION OF REGISTRATION  
8. Application for registration .—(1) Any person claiming to be the creator of a layout -design, who 
is desirous of registering it, shall apply in writing to the Registrar in the prescribed manner for the 
registration of his layout -design.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in the office of the Semic onductor Integrated 
Circuits Layout -Design Registry within whose territorial limits the principal place of business in India of 
the applic ant or in the case of joint app lication  the principal place of business in India of the applicant 
whose name is first mentioned in the application, as having a place of business in India, is situate:  
Provided that, where the applicant or any of the joint applicant does not carry on business in India, the 
application shall be filed in the office of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design Registry 
within whose  territorial limits the place m entioned  in the address for service in India as disclosed  in the 
application is situate.  
(3) Subj ect to the provisions of this Act, the Registrar may refuse the application or may accept it 
absolutely or subject to such amendments or modifications, as he may think fit.  
9. Withdrawal of acceptance .—Where after the acceptance of an application for regis tration of 
layout -design, but before its registration, the Registrar is satisfied that the layout -design is prohibited of 
registration under section 7, the Registrar may, after hearing the applicant if he so desires, withdraw the 
acceptance and proceed as if the application had not been accepted.  
10. Advertisement of application .—(1) When an application for registration of a layout -design has 
been accepted, the Registrar shall, within fourteen days after the date of acceptance, cause the application 
as acce pted to be advertised in the prescribed manner . 
(2) Where after a dvertisement of an application — 
(a) an error in the app lication has been corrected; or  
(b) the application has been permitted to be amended under sectio n 12,  
the Registrar may in his discreti on cause the application to be advertised again or, in any case falling 
under clause ( b), may, instead of causing the application to be advertised again, notify in the prescribed 
manner the correction or amendment made in the application.  
11. Opposition to  registration .—(1) Any person may, within three months from the date of the 
advertisement or re -advertisement of an application for registration or within such further period, not 
exceeding one month in the aggregate, as the Registrar, o n application made to him in the prescribed 
manner and on payment of the prescribed fee, allows, give notice in writing in the prescribed manner to 
the Registrar of opposition to the registration.  
(2) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice on the ap plicant for registration and, within two 
months from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the notice of opposition, the applicant shall send 
to the Registr ar in the prescribed manner a c ounter -statement of the grounds on which he relies for his 
application and if he does not do so, he shall be deemed to have abandoned his application.  
(3) If the applicant sends such counter -statement, the Registrar shall serve a copy thereof on the 
person giving notice of opposition.  
(4) Any evidence upon which the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be submitted in the 
prescribed manner and within the prescribed time to the Registrar, the Registrar shall give an opportunity 
to them to be heard, if they so desire.  9 
 (5) The Registrar shall, after hearing the part ies, if so required, and considering the evidence, decide, 
after taking into account any ground of objection whether reli ed upon by the opponent or not.  
(6) When a person giving notice of opposition or an applicant sending a counter -statement after 
receipt  of a copy of such notice neither resides nor carries on business in India, the Registrar may require 
him to give security for the costs of proceedings before him and, in default of such security being duly 
given, may treat the opposition or application, a s the case may be, as abandoned.  
12. Correction and amendment .—The Registrar may o n such terms as he thinks just — 
(a) at any time, whether before or after acceptance of an application for registration under section 
8, permit the correction of any error in or in connection with the application or permit an a mendment 
of the application; or  
(b) permit correction of any error in, or an amendment of, a notice of opposition or a counter -
statement under section 11.  
13. Registration .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 9, when an application for the registration 
of the layout -desig n has been accepted and either — 
(a) the application has not been opposed and time for notic e of opposition has expired; or  
(b) the  application has been opposed and the opposition has been decided in favour of the 
applicant,  
the Registrar shall register the said layout -design in the register and the layout -design shall be registered 
as of the date of the making of the said applicatio n and that date shall be deemed to  be the date of 
registration.  
(2) On the registration of a layout -design, the Registrar shall issue to the applicant a certificate in the 
prescribed form of the registration thereof sealed with the seal of the Semiconducto r Integrated Circuits 
Layout -Desig n Registry.  
(3) Where registration of a layout -design is not completed within twelve months from the date of the 
application by reason of default on the part of the applicant, the Registrar may, after giving notice to the 
applicant in the prescribed manner, treat the application as abandoned unless it is completed within the 
time specifie d in that behalf in the notice.  
(4) The Registrar may amend the register or a certificate of registration for the purpose of correcting a 
clerical error or an obvious mistake.  
14. Jointly owned layout -design .—(1) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), nothing in this Act shall 
authorise the registration of two or more persons who claim to be the creator of a layout -design.  
(2) Where the relati on between two or more persons claiming to be the creator  of layout -design are 
such that— 
 (a) both of them or all of them have put the combined intellectual effort in creating such design; 
or  
(b) in relation to the creation of such layout -design both of them or all of them are connected in 
such manner that intellectual effort of each of them are not distinguishable in creation of such layout -
design,  
those persons may be registered as joint propri etor of the layout -design and this Act shall have effect in 
relation to any right to the use of the layout -design vested in those persons as if in those rights vested in a 
single person.   10 
 15. Duration of registration .—The registration of a layout -design sh all be only for a period of ten 
years counted from the date of filing an application for registration or from the date of first commercial 
exploitation anywhere in India or in any country  whichever is earlier.  
CHAPTER IV  
EFFECT OF REGISTRATION  
16. No actio n of infringement  of unregistered layout -design .—No person shall be entitled to 
institute any proceeding to prevent, or to recover damages for, the infringement of an unregistered layout -
design.  
17. Ri ghts conferred by registration .—Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the registration of 
a layout -design shall, if valid, give to the registered proprietor of layout -design the exclusive right to the 
use of th e layout -design and to obtain r elief in respect of infringement in the manner provided by th is Act.  
 Explanation .—For removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the rights conferred by the 
registration of a layout -design shall be available to the registered proprietor of that layout -design 
irrespective of the fact as to  whether the layout -design is in corporated in an article or not.  
18. Infringement of layout -design .—(1) A registered layout -design is infringed by a person who, 
not being the registered proprietor of the layout -design  or a registered user thereof, — 
(a) does any act of reproducing, whether by incorporating in a semiconductor integrated circuit or 
otherwise, a registered layout -design in its entirety or any part thereof, except such act of  reproducing 
any part thereof which is not original within the meaning sub-section ( 2) of section 7;  
(b) subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 5), does any act of importing or selling or otherwise 
distributing for commercial purposes a registered layout -design or a semiconductor integrated circuit 
incorporating such r egistered layout -design or an a rticle  incorporating such a semiconductor 
integrated circuit containing such registered layout -design for the use of which such person is not 
entitled under this Act.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17, sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 5), the 
performance of the act of reproduction referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1), where such act is 
performed for the limited  purposes of scientific evaluat ion, analysis, research or teaching, shall not 
constitute act of infrin gement wit hin the meaning of that clause.  
(3) Where a person, on the basis of scientific evaluation or analysis of a registered layout -design, 
creates another layout -design which is original within the meaning of sub -section ( 2) of section 7, that 
person s hall have the right to incorporate such another layout -design in a semiconductor integrated circuit 
or to perform any of the acts referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 5) in respect of such another 
layout -design and such incorporation or performan ce of any act shall not be regarded as infringement 
within the meaning of sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Where a layout -design is created by the process of scientific evaluation or analysis of the 
registered layout -design as referred to in sub -section ( 3), the use o f such layout -design by the proprietor 
of such registered layout -design shall be regarded as infringement within the meaning of sub -section ( 1) 
after the date of registration of suc h layout -design under this Act.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in c lause ( b) of sub -section ( 1), the performance of any of the 
acts referred to in that clause by a person shall not be regarded as infringement within the meaning of that 
clause if such act is performed or directed  to be performed in respect of a semiconduct or integrated circuit 
incorporating a registered layout -design or any article incorporating such a semiconductor integrated 
circuit where such person does not possess any knowledge or has no reasonable ground t o know while 11 
 performing or directing to be per formed such act in respect of such semiconductor integrated circuit or 
article that it incorporated a registered layout -design but after the time when such person has received 
notice of such knowledge, he may continue  to perform or directing to be performe d such act in respect of 
the stock on hand or ordered before such time and, then, he shall be liable to pay the proprietor of the 
registered layout -design a sum by way of royalt y to be determined by negotiati on between registered 
proprietor of the register ed layout -design and that person or by the Appellate Board having regard to the 
benefit accrued to such person by performing or directing to be performed such act in respect of such 
semiconductor integrated circuit or article, as the case may be.  
(6) Where  any other person purchases a semiconductor integrated circuit incorporating a registered 
layout -design or any article incorporating such a semiconductor integrated circuit referred to in  
sub-section ( 5) from a per son referred to in that sub -section, then, such other person shall be entitled to 
the immunity from infringement in respect of that semiconductor integrated circuit or article, as the case 
may be, to the extent and in the manner as if the word “person ” referred in that sub -section in cludes the 
word any other person referred in this sub -section.  
(7) Nothing contained in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) shall be construed as constituting an act of 
infringement where any person performs any of the acts specified in that clause with the written  consent 
of the registered  proprietor of a registered layou t-design or within the control of the person obtaining such 
consent, or in respect of a registered layout -design or a semiconductor integrated circuit incorporating a 
registered layout -design or an y article incorporating such a semiconductor integrated circuit, that has been 
put on the market by or with the consent of the registered proprietor of  such registered layout -design.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where any person by a pplication of independent 
intellect has created a layout -design which is identical to a registered layout -design, then, any act of such 
person in resp ect of the layout -design so cre ated shall not be the infringement  of the registered layout -
design.  
19. Reg istration to be prima facie  evidence of validity .—(1) In all legal proceedings relating to a 
layout -design registered under this Act (including application under section 30), the original registration 
of the layout -design and all subsequent assign ments  and transmissions of layout -design shall be prima 
facie evidence of the validity thereof.  
(2) In all legal proceedings as aforesaid, a registered layout -design shall not be held to be invalid on 
the ground that it was not a registerable layout -design unde r section 7 except upon evidence of originality 
and that such evidence was not submitted to the Registrar before registration.  
CHAPTER V  
ASSIGNMENT AND TRANSMISSION  
20. Power of Registered Propriet or to assign and give receipts .—The person for the time bei ng 
included in the register as proprietor of a layout -design shall, subject to the provisions of this Act and to 
any right appearing from the register to be vested in any other person, have power to assign the layout -
design, and to give effectual receipts for any consideration for such assignment.  
21. Assignability and transmissibili ty of registered layout -design .—Notwithstanding anything in 
any other law to the contrary, a registered layout -design shall, subject to the provisions of this Chapter, be 
assignable and transmissible whether with or without the goodwill of the business concerned.  
22. Conditions for assignment otherwise than in connection w ith the goodwill of a business .—
Where an assignment of a registered layout -design is made otherwise tha n in connection with the 
goodwill of business in which such layout -design has been or is use d, the assignment shall not take  effect 12 
 unless the assignee, not later than the expiration of six months from the date on which the assignment is 
made or within suc h extended period, if any, not exceeding three months in th e aggregate, as the Registrar 
may allow, apply to the Registrar for directions with respect to the advertisement of the assignment, and 
advertises it in such form and manner and within such period as the Registrar may direct.  
23. Registration of  assignments and transmissions .—(1) Where a person becomes entitled by 
assignment or transmission to a registered layout -design, he shall apply in the prescribed manner to the 
Registrar to register his title,  and the Registrar shall, o n receipt of the application and on proof of his title 
to his satisfaction, register him as the proprietor of the layout -design and shall cause particulars of the 
assignment or transmission  to be entered on the register:  
Provided  that where the validity of an assignment of transmission is in dispute between the parties, 
the Registrar may refuse to register the assignment or transmission until the rights of the party have been 
determined by a competent court.  
(2) Except for the pur pose of an application before the Registrar under sub -section ( 1) or an appeal 
from an order thereon, or an application under section 30 or an appeal from an order thereon, a document 
or instrument in respect of which no entry has be en made in the register  in accordance with sub -section 
(1), shall not be admitted in evidence by the Registrar or the Appellate Board or any court in proof of title 
to the layout -design by assignment or transmission unless the Registrar or the Appellate Board or the 
court, as th e case may be, otherwise directs.  
CHAPTER VI  
USE OF LAYOUT -DESIGN AND REGISTERED USERS  
24. Registered users .—Subject to the provisions of section 25, a person other than the registered 
proprietor of a layout -design may be registered as a registered user thereof.  
25. R egistration as registered user .—(1) Where it is proposed that a person should be registered as 
a registered user of a layout -design, the registered proprietor and the proposed registered user shall jointly 
apply in wri ting to the Registrar in  the pr escribed  manner and every such appli cation shall be 
accompanied by — 
(a) the agreement in writing or a duly authenticated copy thereof, entered into between the 
registered proprietor and the proposed registered user with respect to the permitte d use of the layout -
design; and  
(b) an affidavit made by the registered proprietor or by some person authorised to the satisfaction 
of Registrar to act o n his behalf — 
(i) giving particulars of the relationship, existing or proposed, between the registered 
proprietor and the proposed registered user, including particulars showing the degree of control 
by the proprietor over the permitted use which the relationship will confer and whether it is a 
term of their relationship that the proposed registered user sh all be sole registered user or that 
there shall be any other restriction as to persons for whose registration as registered user 
application may be made;  
(ii) stating the conditions or restrictions, if any, proposed with respect to the place of 
permitted u se or any other matter;  
(iii) stating whether the permitted use to be for a period or without limit of period, and, if for 
a period, the duration thereof; and  
(c) such further documents or other evidence as may be required by the Reg istrar or as may be 
prescribed.  13 
 (2) Where  the requirement of sub -section (1) have been complied with, the Registrar shall registe r the 
proposed registered user.  
(3) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner of the registration of a person as a 
registered user to other registered user s of the layout -design, if any.  
(4) The Registrar shall, if so requested by the applicant, take steps of securing that information given 
for the purposes of an application under this section (other than matters entered in the register)  is not 
disclosed to rivals in trade.  
26. Power of Registrar for cancellation of r egistration as registered user .—(1) Without prejudice 
to the provisions of section 30, the registration of a person as registered user — 
(a) may  be cancelled by the Registrar on application in writing in the prescribed manner of the 
registered proprietor or of the registered user or of any other registered user of the layout -design;  
(b) may  be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in writing in the prescribed manner of 
any person on any of the following grounds, namely: — 
(i) that the registered user has used the layout -design otherwise than in accordance with the 
agreement under clau se (a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 25;  
(ii) that the proprietor or the registered user misrepresented, or failed to disclose, some fact 
material to the application for registration which if accurately represented or disclosed would not 
have justified the  regis tration of the registered user;  
(iii) that the circumstances have changed since the date of registration in such a way that at 
the date of such application for cancellation they would not have justified registration of the 
registered us er; 
(iv) that the registration ought not to have been effected having regard to right vested in the 
applicant by virtue of a contract in the perform ance of which he  is interested;  
(c) may be cancelled by the Registrar on his own motion or on the application in writing i n the 
prescribed manner by any person on the ground that any stipulation in the agreement between the 
registered proprietor and the r egistered user regarding the to pographical  dimensions of the layout -
design is either not being enforced or is  not being com plied with;  
(d) may be cancelled by the Registrar if the layout -design is no longer registered.  
(2) The Registrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner in respect of every application under this 
section to the registered proprietor and each registere d user (not being the applicant) of the layout -design.  
(3) The procedure for cancelling a registration shal l be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that before cancelling of registration, the registered proprietor shall be given a reasonable 
opportunity of  being heard.  
27. Power of Registrar to call for information relating to agreement in respect of registered 
users .—(1) The Registrar may, at any time during the continuance of the registration of the registered 
user, by notice in writing, req uire the regis tered propri etor to confirm to him within one month that the 
agreement filed under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of secti on 25 continues to be in force.  
(2) If the registered proprietor fails to furnish the confirmation within one month as required under 
sub-section ( 1), the registered user shall cease to be the registered user on the day immediately after the 
expiry of said period and the Registrar shal l notify the same.  14 
 28. Right of registered user to take pr oceedings against infringement .—Subject to any agreement 
subsisting between the parties, a registered user may make complaint before the competent criminal court 
for the infringement in his own name as if he were th e registered proprietor.  
29. Registered user not to have right of assignment  or transmis sion.—Nothing in this Act shall 
confer on a registered user of a layout -design any assignable or transmissible right to the use thereof.  
 Explanation I.—The right of a registered user of a layout -design shall not deem to have been 
assigned or transmitted within the meaning of this section i n the following cases, namely: — 
(a) where the registered user being an individual enters into a partnership with any othe r person 
for carrying on the business concerned; but in any such case the firm may use the layout -design, if 
otherwise in force, only for so long as the registere d user  is a member of the firm;  
(b) where the registered user being a firm subsequently underg oes a change in its constitution; but 
in any such case the reconstituted firm may use the layout -design, if otherwise in force, only for so 
long as any partner of the original firm at the time of its registration as registered user, continues to be 
a partn er of the reconstituted firm.  
Explanation II.—For the purposes of Explanation I , “firm” has the same meaning as in the Indian 
Partnership Act, 1932  (9 of 1932) . 
CHAPTER VII  
RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF THE REGISTER  
30. Power to rectify the register .—(1) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the 
register of any entry, or by any entry made in the register without sufficient cause, or by any entry 
wrongly remaining on the register, or by any error or de fect in any entry in the register, may apply in the 
prescribed manner to the Appellate Board or to the Registrar, and the Appellate Board or the Registrar, as 
the case may be, may make such order for making, expunging or varyin g the entry as it may think it.  
(2) The Appellate Board or the Regis trar may in any proceedings under this section decide any 
question that may be necessary or expedient to decide in connection with the rectification of the register.  
(3) The Appellate Board or the Registrar, of its own motion, may, after giving notice in t he prescribed 
manner to the parties concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, make any order 
referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
(4) Any order of the Appellate Board rectifying the register shall direct that notice of the rectification 
shall be served upon the Registrar in the prescribed manner who shall upon receipt of such notice, rectify 
the register accordingly.  
31. Correction of register .—(1) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner  by 
the registered proprietor, — 
(a) correct any error in the name, address or description of the registered proprietor of a layout -
design, or any other entry  relating to the layout -design;  
(b) enter any change in the name, address or description of the person who is registered as  
propri etor of a layout -design;  
(c) cancel the entry of a  layout -design on the register,  
and may make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of registration, and for that 
purpose, may require the certificate of regi stration to be produced to  him. 15 
 (2) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed manner by a registered user of a layout -
design, and after notice to the registered proprietor, correct any error, or enter any change in the name, 
address or description of the registered u ser. 
CHAPTER VIII  
APPELLATE  BOARD  
32. Establishment of  Layout -Design Appellate Board .—The Central Government shall, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, establish an Appellate Board to be known as the Layout -Design 
Appellate Board to exercise the jurisd iction, powers and authority co nferred  on it by or under this Act.  
33. Composition of Appellate Boar d.—(1) The Appellate Board shall consist of a Chairperson, 
Vice -Chairperson, and such other Members as the Central Government may deem fit and, subjec t to the 
other provisions of this Act, t he jurisdiction, powers and aut hority  of the Appellate Board may b e 
exercised by a Bench thereof.  
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a Bench shall consist of one Judicial Member and one 
Technical Member  and shall sit at such place  as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, speci fy. 
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in su b-section ( 2), the Chairperson — 
(a) may, in addition to discharging the functions of the Judicial Member or Technical Member of 
the Bench to which he is appointed, discharge the function of the Judicial Member or, as the case may 
be, the Techni cal Member, of any other Bench;  
(b) may transfer a Member f rom one Bench to another Bench;  
(c) may authorise V ice-Chairperson, the Judicial Member or the Technical Member appointed to 
one Bench to discharge also the functions of the Judicial Member or the Technical Member, as the  
case may be, of another Bench.  
(4) Where any Benches are constituted, the Central Government may, from time to time, by 
notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the business of the Appellate Board amongst the 
Benches and specify the matters wh ich may be dealt by each Bench.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is he reby declared that the expression “matter ” includes 
an application or appeal under section 40 or section 42.  
(5) If the Members of a Bench differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on 
which they differ, and make a reference to th e Chairperson who shall either hear the point or points 
himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members and 
such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of the majority of the Members who have 
heard the case including those who first heard it.  
34. Qualifications for appointment as Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson, or other Members .—(1) 
A person shall not be qualified for appoin tment as Chairperson unless he — 
(a) is, or has be en, a Judge of a H igh Court; or  
(b) has, for at least two years, held th e office of a Vice -Chairperson.  
(2) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as  a Vice -Chairperson, unless he — 
(a) has, for at least two years, held the office of a Judicial M ember or a Technical  Member; or  16 
 (b) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that Service 
or any highe r post for at least five years.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judicial Member unless he — 
(a) has been a memb er of the Indian Legal Service and has held the post in Grade I of that Servi ce 
for at least three years; or  
(b) has, for at least ten years , held a civil judicial office.  
(4) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Technical Member, unless he  possesses a 
Master's Degree in Physics or Bachelor's Degree in Electronics Engineering or Electrical Engineering or 
Computer Engineering from an University or Institution  established under law for the time being in force 
and has held a post equivalent to the post of Joint Secretary to the Government of India or any higher post 
for at least five years an d possesses at least five years’  experience in the area of semiconductor s. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), the Chairperson, Vice -Chairpers on and every other 
Member shall be appoi nted by the President of India.  
(6) No appointment of a person as the Chairperson shall be made except after consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India.  
35. Term of office of Chairperson , Vice -Chairperson and Membe rs.—The Chairperson, Vice -
Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the date on which he 
enters upon h is office or until he attains, — 
(a) in the case of Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson, t he age of sixty -five years; and  
(b) in the case of Member, the age of sixty -two years, whichever is earlier.  
36. Vice -Chairperson or senior -most Member to act as Chairperson or discharge his fun ction in 
certain circumstances .—(1) In the event of occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson 
by reason of his death, resi gnation or otherwise, the Vice -Chairperson and in his absence the senior -most 
Member shall act as Chairperson until the date on which a new Chairperson, appointed in accordance 
with the provisions o f this Act to fill such v acancy, enters upon his office.  
(2) When the Chairperson in unable to discharge his functions owing to his absence, illness or any 
other cause, the Vice -Chairperson and in his absence the senior -most Member shall discharge the 
functions of the Chairperson  until the date on which the Ch airperson  resumes his duty.  
37. Salaries, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson, Vice -
Chairperson and other Members .—(1) The salaries and allowance payable to, and other terms and 
conditions of service (including pension, gratuity and other retirement benefits) of, the Chairperson,  
Vice -Chairperson and other Members shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a person who, immediately before the date 
of assuming office as the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or other Member, was in service of Government 
shall be deemed to have retired from service on the date on which he ente rs upon as the Chairperson, 
Vice -Chairperson or other Member, as the case may be.  
38. Resignation and removal .—(1) The Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and any other Member may, 
by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the Preside nt of India, resign h is office:  
Provided that the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or any other Member shall, unless he is permitted by 
the President of India to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three 17 
 months from the date of receipt of suc h notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters 
upon his office or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is earlier .  
(2) The Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed from his office 
except by an order by the President of India on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an 
enquiry made by a Judge of the Supreme Court in which the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or other 
Member has been informed of the charges against him and given a reasonable opportunity of being hea rd 
in respect of those charges.  
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, regulate the procedure for the investigation of 
misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson or other Member referred to in  
sub-section ( 2). 
39. Staff of Appellate Board .—(1) The Central Government shall determine the nature and 
categories of the officers and other employees required to assist the Appellate Board in the discharge of 
its functions and provide the  Appellate Board wi th such offi cers and other employees as it may think fit.  
 (2) The salaries and other allowances and conditions of service of the officers and other employees of 
the Appellate Board shal l be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The officers and other employees o f the Appellate Board shall discharge their functions under the 
general superinte ndence of the Chairperson in the manner as may be prescribed.  
40. Application to the Appellate Board to d etermine royalty .—(1) The registered proprietor of a 
registered layout -design may make an application to the Appellate Board for determination of royalty 
under  sub-section ( 5) of section 18.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form and be accompanied by such 
affidavits, documents or any other evidence and by such fee in respect of the filing of such application 
and by such other fees fo r the service or execution of p rocesses  as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Board shall, after giving not ice to 
the opposite party to file opposition within the prescribed time and manner and after giving  opportunity of 
being hea rd to the applicant and the opp osite part y, dispose of the application.  
(4) An order or decision made by the Appellate Board in disp osing of the application under sub -
section ( 3) shall be executable by a civil court having local jurisdiction as if it were a decree made by that 
court.  
41. Power of the Board to cancel registr ation .—(1) Any person may make an application, in the 
prescribe d form accompanied by prescribed fee, to the Appellate Board for cancellation of the registration 
of a layout -design reg istered under this Act or regis tration  of assignment or transmission relating thereto, 
as the c ase may be, on the ground that — 
(a) in the case of the registration of a layout -design, the layout -design is prohibited for being  
registered under section 7; or  
(b) in the case of the registration of assignment or transmission relating to a registered layout -
design, such assignment or transmis sion is contrary to any provision of the law for the time being in 
force.  
(2) The Appellate Board shall, on receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), give notice to the 
opposite parties in the prescribed manner and after giving them an opportunity of being heard, make such 
order as it may deem fit regardin g cancellation of registration:  18 
 Provided that where the ground of cancellation has been established with respect only to a part of a 
layout -design, the Board shall cancel only such part and the rem aining part of the layout -design if capable 
of performing as a semiconductor integrated c ircuit  shall be retained as registered on the register in the 
name of the registered proprietor of such layo ut-design.  
(3) Any cancellation of the registration of a la yout-design either in whole or in part under sub -section 
(2) shall be deemed to be effective on the date from which the period of ten years referred to in section 15 
is countable in respect of that  layout -design.  
(4) The Appellate Board shall, without delay after making any order of cancellation under sub -section 
(2), send a copy of such order to the Registrar who shall correct the register to give effect to such order.  
42. Appeal to Appellate Board .—(1) Any person aggrieved by an order or decision of the Registrar 
under this Act, or the rules made thereunder may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Board within three 
months from the date on which the order or decision sought  to be appealed against is commu nicated to 
such person preferring the appeal.  
(2) No appeal shall be admitted if it is preferred after the expiry of the period s pecified under sub -
section ( 1): 
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the period specified therefor, if the 
appellant satisfies the Appellate Board that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the appe al within the 
specified period.  
(3) An appeal to the Appellate Board shall be in the prescribed form and shall be verified in the 
prescribed manner and shal l be accompanied by a copy of the order or decision appealed against and by 
such fees as may be prescribed.  
43. Procedure  and powers of Appellate Board .—(1) The Appellate Board shall not be bound by the 
procedure laid down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1 908 (5 of 1908) but shall be guided by principles of  
natural justice and, subject to the provisions of this Act and the  rules made thereunder, the Appellate 
Board shall have powers to regulate its own procedure including the fixing of p laces and times of i ts 
hearing.  
(2) The Appellate Board shall have, for the purpose of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while 
trying a suit in respect of the followin g matters, n amely :— 
(a) receiving evidence;  
(b) issuing commission s for examination of witnesses;  
(c) requis itioning any public record; and  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Any proceeding before the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a ju dicial proceeding within the 
meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 
1860), and the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and 
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
44. Bar of jurisdiction of courts, etc .—No court or other authority shall have or, be entitled to, 
exercise any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation to the matters referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 40 or sub -section ( 1) of section 42.  19 
 45. Bar to  appear before Appellate Board .—On ceasing to hold office, the Chairperson, Vice -
Chairperson or other Members shall not appear before the Appellate Board or the Registrar.  
46. Conditions as to making o f interim order .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provisions of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of 
injunction  or stay or any other manner) shall be mad e on, or in any proceedings rel ating to, an appeal 
unless—  
(a) copies of such appeal and of all documents in support of the plea for such interim order are 
furnished to the party against whom such appeal is m ade or proposed to be made; and  
(b) opportunity  is given to such party to be heard in the matter.  
47. Power of Chairperson to transfer c ases from one Bench to another .—On the application of 
any of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be 
heard, or on his own motion without such notice, the Cha irperson  may transfer any case pending before 
one Bench, for disposal, to any other Bench.  
48. Procedure for application for rectification , etc., before Appellate Board .—(1) An application 
for rectification of the register made to the Appellate Board under section 30 shall be in such form as may 
be prescribed.  
(2) A certified copy of every order or judgment of the Appellate Board relating to a registered layout -
design under this Act shall be communicated to the Registrar by the Board and the Registrar shall give 
effect to the order of the Board and shall, whe n so directed, amend the entries in, or rectify, the register in 
accordance with such order.  
49. Appearance of Registrar in legal proceedings .—(1) The Re gistrar shall have the right to appe ar 
and be heard — 
(a) in any legal proceedings before the Appellate Board in which the relief sought includes 
alteration or rectification of the register or in which any question relating to the practice of the 
Semiconductor Integrated Circuit Layout -Design  Registry is raised;  
(b) in any appeal to the Board from an order of the Registrar on an application for r egistration of 
a layout -design— 
(i) which is not opposed, and the application is either refused by the Registrar or is accepted 
by him subject to any amendments or modificat ions, or  
(ii) which has been opposed and the Registrar considers that his appearance is necessary in 
the public interest,  
and the Registrar shall appear in any case if so directed by the Board.  
(2) Unless the Appellate Board otherwise directs, the Registr ar may, in lieu of appearing, submit a 
statement in writing signed by him, giving such particulars as he thinks proper of the proceedings before 
him relating to t he matter in issue or of the gr ounds  of any decision given by him affecting it, or of the 
practice of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design Registry in like cases, or of other 
matters relevant to the issues and within his knowledge as Registrar, and such statement shall b e evidence 
in the proceeding.  
50. Registrar to refer  certain dis putes to the Board .—If any question arises in any proceedings 
before Registrar, whether a layout -design has been commercially exploited for more than two years 
anywhere in a convention coun try for the purpose of registra tion of such layout -design under thi s Act, the 
Registrar shall refer such question to the Appellate Board, and the decision of the Board thereon shall be 
final.  20 
 51. Power of th e Board to permit certain uses .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this 
Act, the Appellate Board may on an application made in the prescribed manner before it on behalf of the 
Government or by any person authorised by the Government and after giving notice of such application to 
the registered proprietor of a layout -design and providing the opportunity of being  heard to the parties 
concerned permit the use of such registered layout -design by the Government or by such person so 
autho rised, as the case may be, subject to any or all of the following conditions as the Board deems fit 
under the circ umstances of such use, namely: — 
(a) that the use of the layout -design shall be for non -commercial public purposes or for the 
purposes relating to national emergenc y or of extreme public urgency;  
(b) that the duration of the use of the layout -design shall be limited for a period specified by the 
Board.  
(c) that the use of the layout -design shall be non -assignable and non -transmissible;  
(d) that the use of the layout -design shall be to the extent which the Board deems necessary to 
remedy  the anti -competitive practice;  
(e) that  the use of the layout -design shall be predominantly for the supply of semiconductor 
integrated circuits or articles incorporating semiconductor integrated circui ts in domestic market of 
India:  
Provided that Board shall not permit the use of a registered layout -design, by any such person 
authorised by the Government, under this sub -section unless the Board is satisfied that such person so  
authorised has made efforts to enter into agreement wit h the r egistered proprietor of such layout -design 
on reasonable commercial terms and conditions for permitted use of such layout -design and such efforts 
had not been successful within prescribed period:  
Provided further that the first proviso shall not be applicable in a case where the person so authorised 
produces to the Board a certificate issued by the Government to the effect that such use is required due to 
national emergency or any other circumsta nces which the Government considers to be of extreme urgency 
or of public non -commercial use.  
(2) The Appellate Board shall, while granting the permission for the use of a registered layout -design 
under sub -section ( 1), determine the amount of royalty to be paid by the Government or the person 
authorised by the Government, as the case may be, to the registered proprietor of such layout -design for 
such permitted use.  
(3) The Appellate Board may, on the application of the registered proprietor of a layout -design 
referred to in sub -section ( 1), may review the permission granted under that sub -section and, after giving 
notice and opportuni ty of hearing to the parties co ncerned  in the prescribed manner, cancel or amend such 
permission if the Board is satisfied that any of the conditions subject to which the permission was granted 
has not been observed or the circumstances which led to the granting of such permission has ceased to 
exist or substantially altered.  
52. Costs of Registrar in proceedings before Ap pellate Board .—In all proceedings under this Act 
before the Appellate Board the costs of the Registrar shall be in the discr etion of the Board, but the 
Registrar shall not be ordered to pay the costs of any of the parties.  
53. Appeal .—(1) Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate Board under this 
Act may, within the prescribed period appeal to the High Cour t within whose the jurisdiction of head 
office or the branch offic e of the Semiconductor Integrat ed Circuits Layout -Design Registry against the 
decision or order of which  the appeal arises is situated.  21 
 (2) Every such appeal shall be preferred by petition i n writing and shall be in such form and shall 
contain such pa rticulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the provisions of the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) shall apply to appeals bef ore a High Court under this Act.  
54. Power s of High Courts to make rules .—The High Court may make rules consistent with this 
Act as to the conduct and procedure of all proceeding under this Act before it.  
55. Transitional provisions .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, till the establishment 
of the Appellate Board under section 32, the Intellectual Property Appellate Board establishment under 
section 83 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999 ) shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and a uthority 
conferred on the Appellate Board under this Act subject to the modification that in any Bench of such 
Intellectual Property Appellate Board constituted for the purposes  of this section, for the Techn ical 
Member referred to in sub -section ( 2) of se ction 84 of the Trade Marks Act, 1999, the Technical Member 
shall be appointed under this Act and he shall be deemed to be the Technical Member for constituting the 
Bench under the said sub -section  (2) of se ction  84 for the purposes of this Act.  
CHAPTER IX  
OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PROCEDURE  
56. Penalty for  infringement of layout -design .—Any person who contravenes knowingly and 
wilfully any of the provisions of section 18 shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to three years, or with fine which shall not be less tha n fifty  thousand rupees but which may extend 
to ten lakh rupees, or with both.  
57. Penalty for falsely representing  a layout -design as registered .—(1) No person shall make any 
representation with respect to a layout -design not being a registered layout -design, to the effect that it  is a 
registered layou t-design.  
(2) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1), he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to fifty  
thousand rupees, or with both.  
(3) For the purposes of thi s section, the use in India in relation to a layout -design of the word 
“registered ”, or of any other expression referring whether expressly or impliedly to registration, shall be 
deemed to import a reference to regis tration i n the register, except — 
(a) where that word or other expression, is used in direct association with other words delineated 
in characters at least as large as those in which that word or other expression is delineated and 
indicating that the refere nce is to registration as a layo ut-design under the law of a country outside 
India being a country under the law of which the registration ref erred to is in fact in force; o r 
 (b) where that other expression is of itself such as to indicate that the reference is to such 
registration as  is men tioned in clause ( a); or 
(c) where that word is used in relation to a layout -design registered as a layout -design under the 
law of a country outside India and in relation solely to such layout -design.  
58. Penalty for improperly describing a place of business as connected with the Semiconductor 
Integrated Circuits Layout -Design Registry .—If any person uses on his place of business, or on any 
document issued by him, or oth erwise, words which would reaso nably lead to the belief that his place of 
business is, or is officially connected with, the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design 22 
 Registry, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with 
fine, or wit h both.  
59. Penalty for falsificat ion of entries in the register .—If any person makes, or causes to be made, 
a false entry in the register, or a writing falsely purporting to be a copy of an entry in the register, or 
produces or tenders, or causes to be pro duced or tendered, in evidence any such writing, knowing the 
entry or writing to be false, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years, or with fine, or with both.  
60. Forfeiture of goods .—(1) Where a person is convict ed of an offence under section 56, the court 
convicting him may direct the forfeiture to Government of all goods and things by means of, or in relation 
to, which the offence has been committed.  
(2) When a forfeiture  is directed on a conviction and an appea l lies against the conviction, an appeal 
shall lie against the forfeiture als o. 
(3) When a forfeiture is directed on a conviction, the court, before whom the person is convicted, may 
order any forfeited articles to be destroyed or otherwise disposed of as the court thinks fit.  
61. Exemption of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business .—Where a person 
accused of an o ffence under section 56 proves — 
(a) that in the case which is the subject of the charge he was so employed that it relates to the 
duty of his employment, and was not interested in the profit accruing from such commission of 
offence except the duty of his employment; and  
(b) that, having taken all reasonable precautions against committing the offence charged, he had, 
at the time of co mmission of the alleged offence, no reason to suspect the genuineness of the 
registered layout -design or a semiconductor integrated circuit in which such lay out-design is 
incorporated; and  
(c) that , on demand made by or on behalf of the prosecutor, he gave all the information in his 
power with respect to the commission of such offence,  
he shall be acquitted.  
62. Procedure where invalidity of registra tion is pleaded by the accused .—(1) Where the off ence 
charged under section 56 is in relation to a registered layout -design and the accused pleads that the 
registration of the layout -design is invalid, the followi ng procedure shall be followed: — 
(a) if the court is satisfied that such defence is prima fa cie tenable, it shall not proceed with the 
charge but shall adjourn the proceeding for three months from the date on which the plea of accused 
is recorded to enable  the accused to file an applica tion before the Appellate Board under this Act, for 
the recti fication of the register on the ground th at the registration is invalid;  
(b) if the accused proves to the court that he has made such application within the time so limited 
or within such further time as the time court may for sufficient cause may allow, t he further 
proceedings in the prosecutio n shall stand stayed till the d isposal  of such application for rectification;  
(c) if within a period of three months or within such extended time as may be allowed by the 
court the accused fails to apply to the Appel late Board for rectification of the register, the court shall 
proceed with the case as if the registration were valid .  
(2) Where before the institution of a complaint of an offence referred to in sub -section ( 1), any 
application for the rectification of t he register concerning the layout -design in question on the ground of 
invalidity of the  registration thereof has alrea dy been properly made to and is pending before the 23 
 Appellate Board or the Registrar, the Court shall stay the further proceedings in the p rosecution pending 
the disposal of the application aforesaid and shall determine the c harge against the accused in co nformity  
with the result of the application for rectification in so far as the complainant relies upon the registration 
of his layout -design.  
63. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is a company, 
the company as well as eve ry person in charge of, and responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he exercised all 
due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwith standing anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is at tributable  to any neglect on the part of, any 
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded a gainst an d 
punished acc ordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association or individuals; 
and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
64. Cognizance of certain offences .—No court shall take cognizance — 
(a) of an offence under section 56 or section 57 except on the complaint in writing made by the 
registered proprietor or the registered user of a layout -design in respect of which the offence has been 
committed;  
(b) of an offence under section 58 or section 59 except on complaint in writing made by the 
Registrar or any officer authorised by him in writing.  
65. C osts of defence or prosecution .—In any prosecution under this Act, the court may order such 
costs to be pa id by the accused to the complainant, or by the complainant to the accused, as the court 
deemed reasonable havin g regard to all the circumstanc es of the case and the conduct of the parties. Costs 
so awarded shall be recoverable as if they were a fine.  
66. Informati on as to commission of offence .—An officer of the Government whose duty it is to 
take part in the enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be compelled in any court to say 
when  he got any information as to the commission of any off ence against this Act.  
67. Punishment of abetment in I ndia of acts done out of India .—If any person, being within India, 
abets the commission, without India, of any act which, if committed in India, would, under this Act, be an 
offence, he may be tried for  such abetment in any place in India in which he may be found, and be 
punished therefor with the punishment to which he would be liable if he had himself committed in that 
place the act which he abetted.   24 
 CHAPTER X  
MISCELLANEOUS  
68. P rotection of security of India .—Notwithstanding anything contained in  this Act, the Registrar 
shall— 
(a) not disclose any information relating to the registration of a layout -design or any application  
relating to the registration of a layout -design under this Act which the Cent ral Government considers 
prejudicial to the intere st of the security of India; and  
(b) take  any action, including the cancellation of registration of a layout -design registered under 
this Act, which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in the  
interest of security of India.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “interest of the security of India ” 
means any action necessary for the security of India which relates to the use of a layout -design or a 
semiconductor integrated circuit incorporating a layou t-design or an art icle incorporating such 
semiconducto r integrated circuit and which — 
(a) relates to fissionable materials or the materials from which they are derived; or  
(b) relates to the traffic in arms, ammunition and implements of war and to such traffic in other 
good s and materials as is carried on directly or indirectly for the purpose of supplyi ng a military 
establishment; or  
(c) is taken in time of war or other emergency in international relations.  
69. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other lega l proceedings shall lie against 
any person in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this 
Act. 
70. Certain persons to be public servants .—Every  person appointed, under this Act and every 
Member of the Appellate Board shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 
of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
71. Implied warranty on sale of lay out-design, etc .—Where a registered layout -design, or a 
semiconductor integrated circuit in which a registered layout -design is incorporated, or an article 
incorporating such a semiconductor integrated circuit is sold o r has been contracted for sale, the seller 
shall be deemed to warrant tha t the registration, of such layout -design or the layout -design so 
incorporated is genuine within the meaning of this Act unless the contrary is express ed in writing signed 
by or on be half of the seller and delivered at the time of the sale or contract to s ell of such layout -design, 
or semiconductor integrated circuit or article, as the case may be, and accepted by the buyer.  
72. Powers of Registrar .—In all proceedings under this Act before the Registrar, — 
(a) the Registrar shall have all the powers, of a ci vil court for the purposes of receiving evidence, 
administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of witnesses, compelling the discovery and production 
of documents and issu ing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses;  
(b) the Registrar may, subject to a ny rules in this behalf, made under section 96 make such orders 
as to costs as he considers reasonable, and any such order shall be executa ble as decree to a civil 
court;  
(c) the Registrar may, on an application made in the prescribed manner, review his own decision.  25 
 73. Exercise of di scretionary power by Registrar .—Subject to the provisions of section 76, the 
Registrar shall not exercise any discretionary or other power vested in  him by this Act or the rules made 
thereunder adversely t o a person applying for the exe rcise  of the power without (if so required by that 
person within the prescribed time) giving to the person an opportunity of being heard.  
74. Evidence before Registrar .—In any proceeding under this Act before the Registrar, evidence 
shall be given  by affidavit:  
Provided that the Registrar may, if he thinks fit, take oral evidence in lieu of, or in addition to, such 
evidence by affidavit.  
75. Death of party to a proceedin g.—If a person who is a party to a proceeding under this Act (not 
being a proceeding before the Appellate Board or a court) dies pending the proceeding, the Registrar may, 
on request, and on proof to his satisfaction of t he transmission of the interest of the deceased person, 
substitute in the proceeding his successor in interest in his place, or, if the Registrar is of opinion that the 
interest of the deceased person is sufficiently represented by the surviving parties, permit the proceeding 
to continue without the substitution of his successor in interest.  
76. Extension of time .—(1) If the Registrar is satisfied, on application made to him in the prescribed 
manner and accompanied by the prescribed fee, that there is suffic ient cause for extending the time for 
doing any act (n ot being a time expressly provi ded in the Act), whether the time so specified has expired 
or not, he may, subject to such conditions as he may think fit to impose, extend the time and inform the 
parties  accordingly.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to require the Registrar to hear the parties, before 
disposing of an application for extension of time and no appeal shall lie from any order of the Registrar 
under this section.  
77. Abandonment .—Where, in the opinion of the Registrar, an applicant is in default in the 
prosecution of an application filed under this Act, the Registrar may, by notice require the applicant to 
remedy the default within a time specified and after givi ng him, if so desi red, an opportunity of being 
heard, treat the application as abandoned, unless the default is remedied within the time specified in the 
notice.  
78. Preli minary advice by the Registrar .—(1) The Registrar may, on application made to him in the 
prescribed man ner by any person who proposes to apply for the registration of a layout -design, give 
advice as to whether the layout -design appears to him prima facie  to be original.  
(2) If, on an application for the registration of a layout -design as to which the Registrar has given 
advice as aforesaid in the affirmative made within three months after the advice was given, the Registrar, 
after further investigation or consideration, gives notice, to the applicant of objection on the ground that 
the layout -design is  not original, the applicant shall be entitled, on giving notice of withdrawal of the 
application within the prescribed period, to have repa id to him any fee paid on the fi ling of the 
application.  
79. Registered user to be im pleaded in certain proceedings .—(1) In every proceeding under 
Chapter VII or under section 42, every registered user of a layout -design, who is not himself an applicant 
in respect of any proceeding under that Chapter or section  shall be made a party to the proceeding.  
(2) Notwithstandin g anything contained in any other law, a registered user so made a party to the 
proceeding shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in the 
proceeding.  
80. Evidence of entries in register, etc., an d things done by the Registrar .—(1) A copy of any 
entry in the register or of any document referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 87 purporting to be 26 
 certified by the Registrar and sealed with the seal of t he Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design 
Registry shall be  admitted in evidence in all courts and in all proceedings without further proof  or 
production of the original.  
(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the Registrar as to any entry, matter or thing that 
he is authorised by this Act or the rul es to make or do shall be prima facie  evidence of the entry having 
been made, and of the contents thereof, or of the matter or things having been done or not done.  
81. Registrar and other officers not compel lable to produce register, etc .—The Registrar or any 
other officer of the Semiconductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design Registry shall not, in any legal 
proceedings to which he is not a party, be compellable t o produce the register or any other document in 
his custody, the contents of which can be prov ed by the production of a certified copy issued under this 
Act or to appear as a witness to prove the matters therein recorded unless by order of the court made or 
special cause.  
82. Certificate of validity .—If in any legal proceeding for rectification of the register before the 
Appellate Board a decision is on contest given in favour of the registered proprietor of the layout -design 
on the issue as  to the validity of the registr ation  of the layout -design, the Appellate Board may grant a 
certificate to that  effect, and if such a certificate is granted, then, in any subsequent legal proceedings in 
which the said validity comes into question, the said proprietor on obtaining a fina l order or judgment in 
his favour affirming validity of the registration of the layout -design shall, unless the said final order or 
judgment for sufficient reason directs otherwise, be entitled to his full cost, charges and expenses as 
between legal pract itioner  and client.  
83. Address f or service .—An address for service stated in an application or notice of opposition 
shall, for the purposes of the application or notice of opposition, be deemed to be the address of the 
applicant or opponent, as the case may be, and all doc uments  in relation to the a pplication or notice of 
opposition may be served by leaving them at or sending them by post to the address for service of the 
applicant or opponent, as the case may be.  
84. Agents .—Where, by or under this Act, any act, other then the making of an affidavit , is required 
to be done before the Registrar by any person, the act may, subject to the rules made in this behalf, be 
done, instead of by that person himself, by a pe rson duly authorised in  the prescribed manner, who is — 
(a) a legal practition er, or  
(b) a person registered in the prescribed mann er as a layout -design agent, or  
(c) a person in the sole and regular employment of the principal.  
85. Layout -design registered by an agent or re presentative without authority .—If an agent or a 
representative of the proprietor of a registered layout -design, without authority uses or attempts to register 
or registers the layout -design in his own name, the proprietor shall be entitled to oppose the registration 
applied for or secur e its cancellation or rectification of the register so as to bring him as the registered 
proprietor of the said layout -design by assignment in his favour:  
Provided that such action shall be taken within three years of the registered proprietor of the layou t-
design becoming aware of the conduct of the agent or representative.  
86. Indexes .—There shall be kept under the direction an d supervision of the Registrar — 
(a) an inde x of registered layout -designs,  
(b) an index of layout -designs in respect of which applications for registration ar e pending.  
 27 
 (c) an index of the names of the proprietors of registered layout -designs, and  
(d) an index of the names of registered users.  
87. Docum ents open to public inspection .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section ( 4) of 
section 25, — 
(a) the register and any document upon which any entry in the register is based;  
(b) every  notice of opposition to the registration of a layout -design application for rectification 
before the Registrar, counter -statement thereto, and any affidavit or document filed by the parties in 
any procee dings before the Registrar; and  
(c) the indexes ment ioned in section 86 and such other documents as the Central Government 
may, by notification in  the Official Gazette, specify;  
shall, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, be open to public inspection at the Semiconductor 
Integrated C ircuits Layo ut-Design Registry.  
(2) Any person may, on an application to the Registrar and on payment of such fees as may be 
prescribed, obtain a certified copy of any entry in the register or any document referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
88. Reports of Registrar to be placed before Parliament .—The Central Government shall cause to 
be placed before both Houses of Parliament once a year a report respecting the execution by or under the 
Registrar of this Act.  
89. Fees and surcharge .—(1) There shall be paid in respect of applications and registration and other 
matters under this Act such fees and surcharge as may be prescr ibed by the Central Government.  
(2) Where a fee is payable in respect of the doing of an act by the Registrar, the Registrar shall not do 
that a ct until the fee has been paid.  
(3) Where a fee is payable in respect of the filing of a document at the Semiconductor Integrated 
Circuits Layout -Design Registry, the document shall be deemed not to have been filed at the Registry 
until the fee has been paid.  
90. Savings in respect of Chapter IX .—Nothing in Chapter IX shall be construed so as to render 
liable to any prosecution or punishment any servant of a master resident in India who in good faith acts in 
obedience to the instructions of such master, and, on dem and made by or on behalf of prosecutor, has 
given full information as to his master and as to the instructions which he has received from his master.  
91. Declaration as to ownership of layout -design not registerable un der the Registration Act, 
1908 .—Notwit hstanding anything contained in the Registration Act, 1908 ( 16 of 1908), no document 
declaring or purporting to declare the ownership or title of a person to a layout -design other than a 
registered layout -design shall be registered under that Act.  
92. Gove rnment to be bound .—The provisions of this Act shall be binding on the Government.  
93. Convention countries .—With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or arrangement 
with any country outside India which affords to citizens of India similar priv ileges as granted to its own 
citizens, the Central Government may, by notification  in the Official Gazette, specify such country to be a 
convention country for providing the citizens of such convention country the similar privileges as granted 
to the ci tizens of India under this Act.  28 
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section “country ” includes any group of countries or union of 
countries or inter -governmental organisation and the expression "convention country" shall be construed 
accordingly.  
94. Pro vision as to reciprocity .—Where any country specified by the Central Government in this 
behalf by notification in the Official Gazette under section 93 does not accord to citizens of India the 
same rights in respect of registration and protection of layout -design as it accords to its own nationals, no  
national of such country shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with any other person, — 
(a) to apply for the registration of, or be registered as the proprietor of, a layout -design;  
(b) to be registered a s the assignee of the proprietor of  a registered layout -design; or  
(c) to apply for registration or be registered as a registered user of a layout -design under  
section 25.  
95. Power of Central Gov ernment to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving 
effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official 
Gazette, make such provisi ons not inconsistent with the p rovisions  of this Act as may appear to be 
necessa ry for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of five years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
96. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or  any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the other matters relating to the registered layout -designs to be entered in the register unde r 
sub-section ( 1) of section 6;  
(b) the manner of applying to the Registrar for registration unde r sub -section ( 1) of section 8;  
(c) the manner of advertising the application under  sub-section ( 1) of section 10;  
(d) the manner of notifying the correction or amendment in application under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 10;  
(e) the manner of making application, the fee to be pa id and the manner of giving notice under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 11;  
(f) the manner of sending counter statement under  sub-section ( 2) of section 11;  
(g) the manner of submitting evidence under  sub-section ( 4) of section 11;  
(h) the form of issuing certificate under  sub-section ( 2) of section 13;  
(i) the manner of giving notice under  sub-section ( 3) of section 13;  
(j) the manner of making applications to register the title under sub -section  (1) of section 23;  
(k) the manner of applyi ng to Registrar under  sub-section ( 1) of section 25;  
(l) the document to be prescribed under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 25;  
(m) the manner of issuing notice under  sub-section ( 3) of section 25;  29 
 (n) the manner of applications under clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) of section 26;  
(o) the manner of making applications under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 26;  
(p) the manner of making applications under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(q) the manner of issuing notice under  sub-section ( 2) of section 26;  
(r) the procedure of cancelling registration under  sub-section ( 3) of section 26;  
(s) the manner of applying to the Appellate Board under  sub-section ( 1) of section 30;  
(t) the manner of giving notice under  sub-section ( 3) of section 30;  
(u) the manner of serving notice under  sub-section ( 4) of section 30;  
(v) the manner of making application under  sub-section ( 1) of section 31;  
(w) the manner of making application under sub -section ( 2) of section 31;  
(x) the salaries and all owances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the 
Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and other Members under  sub-section ( 1) of section 37;  
(y) the procedure for investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Chairperson,  
Vice -Chairperson  and other Members under  sub-section ( 3) of section 38;  
(z) the salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and other employees 
of the Appellate Board under  sub-section ( 2) of section 39;  
(za) the manner of general superintenden ce by the Chairperson under  sub-section ( 3) of  
section 39;  
(zb) the form of application, the affidavit, documents and other evidence and fee payable in 
respect of, filing of such application and other fees for the services or execution of process to be 
accompanied therewith under  sub-section ( 2) of section 40;  
(zc) the time limit for filing the opposition under  sub-section ( 3) of section 40;  
(zd) the form of making application and the fee to be a accompanied therewith under  sub-section 
(1) of section 41;  
(ze) the manner of giving notice under  sub-section ( 2) of section 41;  
(zf) the form of appeal, the manner of verification of such appeal and the fee to be accompanied 
therewith under  sub-section ( 3) of section 42;  
(zg) any other matter to be prescribed under clause ( d) of sub-section ( 2) of section 43;  
(zh) the form of application under  sub-section ( 1) of section 48;  
(zi) the manner of making application under  sub-section ( 1) of section 51;  
(zj) the period to be prescribed under the first proviso to  sub-section ( 1) of section 51;  
(zk) the manner of giving notice and opportunity of hearing to the parties under  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 51;  
(zl) the period to be prescribed under  sub-section ( 1) of section 53;  
(zm) the form of petition and particulars to be  contained therein under  sub-section ( 2) of  
section 53;  
(zn) the manner of reviewing decisions by the registrar under clause ( c) of section 72;  30 
 (zo) the time to be prescribed under section 73;  
(zp) the manner of making application and the fee to be accompanied therewith under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 76;  
(zq) the manner of making application under  sub-section ( 1) of section 78;  
(zr) the period of giving notice of withdrawal of application under  sub-section ( 2) of section 78;  
(zs) the manner of authori sing a person under section 84;  
(zt) the manner of registering a person as a layout -design agent under clause ( b) of section 84;  
(zu) the conditions to be prescribed under  sub-section ( 1) of section  87; 
(zv) the fee payable under  sub-section ( 2) of section 87;  
(zw) the fees and the surcharge to be paid under  sub-section ( 1) of section 89;  
(zx) any other matter which is requi red to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government  under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may 
be comprise d in one session or in two or mo re successive sessions, and if, before the exp iry of the session 
immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any 
modification in the rule or both Houses  agree that the  rule should not be made, the ru le shall thereafter 
have  effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modification or annulment shall be without p rejudice to the validity of any thing previously done under 
that rule.  
--------------------------The Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000--------------------------
1 
 THE UTTAR PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2000  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
PART  I 
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
 
PART II  
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF UTTAR  PRADESH  
3. Formation of Uttaranchal State.  
4. State of  Uttar Pradesh and territorial divisions thereof.  
5. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution.  
6. Saving powers of State Governments.  
 
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
7. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution . 
8. Allocation of sitting members.  
 
The House of the People  
9. Representation in the House of the people.  
10. Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies.  
11. Provisions as to sitting members.  
 
The Legislative Assembly  
12. Provisions as  to Legislative Assemblies.  
13. Allocation of sitting members.  
14. Composition of provisional Legislative Assembly of Uttaranchal.  
15. Duration of Legislative Assemblies.  
16. Speaker and Deputy Speaker.  
17. Rules of procedure.  2 
 The Legislative Council of Uttar Pradesh  
SECTIONS  
18. Legislative Council of Uttar Pradesh.  
19. Amendment of the Delimitation of Council Constituencies.  
20. Provision as to certain sitting members.  
21. Deputy Chairman.  
 
Delimitation of constituencies  
22. Delimitation of constituencies.  
23. Power of Election Commission to maintain Delimitation Orders up -to-date.  
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes  
24. Amendment of the Scheduled Castes Order.  
25. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order.  
 
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
26. High Court of Uttaranchal.  
27. Judges of Uttaranchal High Court.  
28. Jurisdiction of Uttaranchal High Court.  
29. Special provision relating to Bar Council and advocates.  
30. Practice and procedure in Uttaranchal High Court.  
31. Custody of seal of Uttaranchal High Court.  
32.  Form of writs and other processes.  
33. Powers of Judges.  
34. Procedure as to appeals t o Supreme Court.  
35. Transfer of proceedings from Allahabad High Court to Uttaranchal High Court.  
36. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to Uttaranchal High Court.  
37. Interpretation.  
38. Savings.  
 
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EXPENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
39. Authorisation of expenditure of Uttaranchal State.  
40. Reports relating to accounts of Uttar Pradesh State.  
41. Distribution of revenue.  
 
  3 
 PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
SECTIONS  
42. Application of Part.  
43. Land and goods.  
44. Treasury and bank balances.  
45. Arrears of taxes.  
46. Right to recover loans and advances.  
47. Investments and credits in certain funds.  
48. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings.  
49. Public Debt.  
50. Floating Debt.  
51. Refund of taxes collected in excess.  
52. Deposits, etc.  
53. Provident fund.  
54. Pension s. 
55. Contracts.  
56. Liability in respect of actionable wrong.  
57. Liability as guarantor.  
58. Items in suspense.  
59. Residuary provision.  
60. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement.  
61. Power of Central Government to order allocation or adjustment in certain cases.  
62. Certain expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund.  
 
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
63. Provisions for  Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited , etc.  
64. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and supply  of 
water.  
65. Provisions as to Uttar Pradesh State Financial Corporation.  
66. Provisions as to certain companies.  
67. General provision as to statutory Corporations.  
68. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits.  
69. Special provisions  relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases.  
70. Special provision as to income -tax. 
71. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions.  
PART VIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
72. Provisions relating to All -India Services.  4 
 SECTIONS  
73. Provisions relatin g to other services.  
74. Other provisions  relating to services.  
75. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post.  
76. Advisory Committees.  
77. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
78. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission.  
 
PART IX  
MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF WATER REOURCES  
79. Water Resources Development and its Management.  
80. Constitution and functions of the Ganga Management Board.  
81. Staff of the Management Board.  
82. Jurisdiction of the Board.  
83. Power of Board to make regulations.  
84. Allocation of the wate r resources of the R iver Yamuna.  
 
PART X  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
85. Amendment of section 15 of Act 37 of 1956.  
86. Territorial extent of laws.  
87. Power to adapt laws.  
88. Power to construe laws.  
89. Power to name authorities, etc., for exercising statutory functions.  
90. Legal proceedings.  
91. Transfer of pending proceedings.  
92. Right to pleaders to practise in certain cases.  
93. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsistent with other laws.  
94. Power to remove difficulties.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE.  
THE SECOND SCHEDULE.  
THE THIRD SC HEDULE.  
THE FOURTH SCHEDULE.  
THE FIFTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SIXTH SCHEDULE.  
THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE.  
THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE.  
THE NINTH SCHEDULE.  
THE TENTH SCHEDULE.  
 5 
 THE UTTAR PRADESH REORGANISATION ACT, 2000  
ACT NO. 29 OF 2000  
[25th August , 2000 .] 
An Act to provide for the reorganisation of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh and for matters 
connected therewith . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -first Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
PART  1 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ”1 means the day which the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint;  
(b) “article” means an article of the Constitution;  
(c) “assembly constituency ”, “council constituency ” and “parliamentary constituency ” have the 
same meanings as in the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950) ; 
(d) “Election Commission ” means the Election Commission appointed by the President under 
article 324;  
(e) “existing State of Uttar Pradesh ” means the State of Uttar Pradesh as existing immediately 
before the appointed day;  
(f) “law” includes any enactment, ordinance, regulation, o rder, bye -law, rule, scheme, notification 
or other instrument having, immediately before the appointed day, the force of law in the whole or in 
any part of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh;  
(g) “notified order ” means an order published in the Official G azette;  
(h) “population ratio ”, in relation to the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, means the ratio 
of 1321:70;  
(i) “sitting member”, in relation to either House of Parliament or of the Legislature of the existing 
State of Uttar Pradesh, means a person who immediately before the appointed day, is a member of 
that House;  
(j) “successor State ”, in relation to the existing State of Uttar Pradesh, means the State of Uttar 
Pradesh or Uttaranchal;  
(k) “transferred territory ” means the territory which on  the appointed day is transferred from the 
existing State of Uttar Pradesh to the State of Uttaranchal;  
(l) “treasury” includes a sub -treasury; and  
(m) any reference to a district, tehsil or other territorial division of the existing State of Uttar 
Pradesh  shall be construed as a reference to the area comprised within that territorial division on the 
appointed day.  
  
                                                           
1. 9th November, 2000, vide notification No. S.O. 950(E), dated 20 th October, 2000, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3(ii).  6 
 PART II  
REORGANISATION OF THE STATE OF UTTAR  PRADESH  
 3. Formation of Uttaranchal State .—On and from the appointed day, there shall be formed a new 
State to be known as the State of Uttaranchal comprising the following territories of the existing S tate of 
Uttar Pradesh, namely: — 
Pauri Garhwal, Tehri Garhwal, Uttar Kashi, Chamoli, Dehradun, Nainital, Almora, Pithoragarh, 
Udham Singh Nagar, Bagesh war, Champawat, Rudraprayag and Hardwar districts,   
and thereupon the said territories shall cease to form part of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh.  
4. State of Uttar Pradesh and territorial divisions thereof .—On and from the appointed day, the 
State of  Uttar Pradesh shall comprise the territories of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh other than those 
specified in section 3.  
5. Amendment of the First Schedule to the Constitution .—On and from the appointed day, in the 
First Schedule to the Constitution, under the  heading “I. THE STATES ”,— 
(a) in the paragraph relating to the territories of the State of Uttar Pradesh, after the words, 
brackets and figures “clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh 
(Alte ration of Boundaries) Act, 1968 (24 of 1968) , the followi ng shall be inserted, namely: — 
“and the territories specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 2000 ”; 
(b) after entry 26, the fo llowing entry s hall be inserted, namely: — 
“27. Uttaranchal: The territories specified in section 3 of the Uttar Pradesh Reorganisation Act, 
2000.”. 
6. Saving powers of State Governments .—Nothing in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall be 
deemed to affect the power of the Government of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal to alter, after the appointed 
day, the name, area or boundaries of any district or other territorial division in the State.  
PART III  
REPRESENTATION IN THE LEGISLATURES  
The Council of States  
 7. Amendment of the Fourth Schedule to the Constitution .—On and from the appointed day, in 
the Fourth Schedule to t he Constitution, in the Table, — 
(a) entries 17 to 28 shall be renumbered as entries 18 to 29 respectively;  
(b) in entry 16, for the figures “34”, the figures “31” shall be substituted;  
(c) after entry 16, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: — 
“17.Uttaranchal ....................................................................3 ”. 
8. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) On and from the appointed day, thirty -four sitting members 
of the Council of States representing the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall be deemed to have been 
elected to fill the seats allotted to the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal , as specified in the First 
Schedule to this Act.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  
The House of the People  
9. Representation in the House of the People .—On and from the appointed day, there shall be 
allocated 80 seats to the successor State of Uttar Pradesh, and 5 to the successor State of Uttaranchal, in 7 
 the House of the People, and the First Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 
1950) shall be deemed to be amended accordingly.  
10. Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies .—On and from the appointed 
day, the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Assembly Constituencies Order, 1976, shall stand amended as 
directed in the Second Schedule to this Act.  
11. Provision as to sitting members .—(1) Every sitting member of the House of the People 
representing a constituency which, on the appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 10, stands 
allotted, with or without altera tion of boundaries, to the successor State of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal, 
shall be deemed to have been elected to the House of the People by that constituency as so allotted.  
(2) The term of office of such sitting members shall remain unaltered.  
The Legi slative Assembly  
12. Provisions as to Legislative Assemblies .—(1) The number of seats as on the appointed day in 
the Legislative Assemblies of the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal shall be four hundred and three 
and seventy respectively.  
(2) In the Second Schedule to the Representation of the People Act, 1 950 (43 of 1950) , under heading 
“I. States”— 
(a) entries 25 and 26 shall be renumbered as entries 26 and 27 respectively;  
(b) after entry 24, the following en try shall be inserted, namely: — 
1 5 
“25. Uttaranchal.......................….........  70”; 
(c) in entry 26 as so renumbered, for the figures “425”, the figures “403” shall be substituted.  
13. Allocation of sitting members .—(1) Every sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the 
existing State of Uttar Pradesh elected to fill a seat in that Assembly from a constituency which on the 
appointed day by virtue of the provisions of section 10 stands allotted, with or without alteration of 
boundaries, to the State of Uttaranchal shall, on and fro m that day, cease to be a member of the 
Legislative Assembly of Uttar Pradesh and shall be deemed to have been elected to fill a seat in the 
provisional Legislative Assembly of Uttaranchal from that constituency as so allotted.  
(2) All other sitting member s of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall 
continue to be members of the Legislative Assembly of that State and any such sitting member 
representing a constituency the extent or the name and extent of which are altered by vi rtue of the 
provisions of section 10 shall be deemed to have been elected to the Legislative Assembly of Uttar 
Pradesh by that constituency as so altered.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Legislative 
Assemblies of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal shall be deemed to be duly constituted on the appointed day.  
(4) The sitting member of the Legislative Assembly of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh nominated 
to that Assembly under article 333 to represent the  Anglo -Indian community shall be deemed to have 
been nominated to represent the said community in the Legislative Assembly of Uttar Pradesh under that 
article.  
14. Composition of provisional Legislative Assembly of Uttaranchal .—(1) On and from the 
appointe d day and until the Legislative Assembly of the successor State of Uttaranchal has been duly 
constituted and summoned to meet for the first session under the provisions of the Constitution, a 
provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttaranchal, co nsisting of the twenty -two sitting 
members of the Legislative Assembly and nine members of the Legislative Council of the existing State 8 
 of Uttar Pradesh representing the Assembly constituencies or Council constituencies of the territories 
transferred by v irtue of the provisions of section 3 shall be constituted.  
(2) The provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttaranchal shall exercise all the powers and 
perform all the duties conferred by the provisions of the Constitution on the Legislative Assembly of that 
State.  
(3) The term of office of the members of the provisional Legislative Assembly of the State of 
Uttaranchal shall, unless the said Legislative Assembly is sooner dissolved, expire immediately before the 
first meeting of the Legislativ e Assembly of the State of Uttaranchal.  
15. Duration of Legislative Assemblies .—The period of five years referred to in clause ( 1) of  
article 172 shall, in the case of the Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttar Pradesh, be deemed to have 
commenced on the date on which it actually commenced in the case of the Legislative Assembly of the 
existing State of Uttar Pradesh.  
16. Speaker and Deputy Speaker .—(1) The persons who immediately before the appointed day are 
the Speaker and Deputy Speaker of the Legis lative Assembly of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall 
continue to be the Speaker and Deputy Speaker respectively of that Assembly on and from that day.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the provisional Legislative Assembly of the succes sor 
State of Uttaranchal shall choose two members of that Assembly to be respectively Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker thereof and until they are so chosen, the duties of the office of Speaker shall be performed by 
such member of the Assembly as the Governor may  appoint for the purpose.  
17. Rules of procedure .—The rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
Assembly of Uttar Pradesh as in force immediately before the appointed day shall, until rules are made 
under clause ( 1) of article 208, be the rules of procedure and conduct of business of the Legislative 
Assembly of Uttaranchal, subject to such modifications and adaptations as may be made therein by the 
Speaker thereof.  
The Legislative Council of Uttar Pradesh  
1[18. Legislative Council of Ut tar Pradesh .—On and from the appointed day, there shall be one 
hundred seats in the Legislative Council of Uttar Pradesh, and in the Third Schedule to the Representation 
of the People Act, 1950  (43 of 1950), for the existing entry 8, the following entry  shall be substituted, 
namely: — 
“8. Uttar Pradesh............... ........ 100  36     8       8   38     10”.] 
19. Amendment of the Delimitation of Council Constituencies .—On and from the appointed day, 
the Delimitation of the Council Constituencies (Uttar P radesh) Order, 1951 shall stand amended as 
directed in the Third Schedule.  
20. Provision as to certain sitting members .—(1) On and from the appointed day, the sitting 
members of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh specified in the Fourth Schedule 
to this Act shall cease to be members of that Council and shall be deemed to be the members of the 
provisional Legislative Assembly.  
(2) On and from the appointed day, all sitting members of the Legislative Council of the existing 
State  of Uttar Pradesh other than those referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall continue to be members of that 
Council.  
(3) The term of office of the members referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall remain unaltered.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2004, s. 2, for section 18 (w.e.f. 9 -11-2000).  9 
 21. Deputy Chairman .—The person who immediately bef ore the appointed day is the Deputy 
Chairman of the Legislative Council of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall continue to be the Deputy 
Chairman, on and from that day of that Council.  
Delimitation of constituencies  
22. Delimitation of constituencies .—(1) For the purpose of giving effect to the provisions of  
section 12, the Election Commission shall determine in t he manner hereinafter provided — 
(a) the number of seats to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the 
Legislative  Assemblies of the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, respectively, having regard to 
the relevant provisions of the Constitution;  
(b) the assembly constituencies into which each State referred to in clause ( a) shall be divided, 
the extent of each of such constitue ncies and in which of them seat s shall be reserved for the 
Scheduled Castes or for the Scheduled Tribes; and  
(c) the adjustments in the boundaries and description of the extent of the parliamentary 
constituencies in each State referred to in clause ( a) that may be necessary or expedient.  
(2) In determining the matters referred to in clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1), the Election 
Commission shall have regard to the  following provisions , namely: — 
(a) all the constituencies shall be single -member constituencies;  
(b) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas, and in 
delimiting them, regard shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communication and conveniences to the public; and  
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Tribes 
shall, as far as practicable, be located in areas where the proportion of their population to t he total 
population is the largest.  
(3) The Election Commission shall, for the purpose of assisting it in the performance of its functions 
under sub -section ( 1), associate with itself as associate members, five persons as the Central Government 
may by orde r specify, being persons who are the members of the Legislative Assembly of the State or of 
the House of the People representing the State:  
Provided that none of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any deci sion of the 
Election Commi ssion.  
(4) If, owing to death or resignation, the office of an associate member falls vacant, it shall be filled 
as far as practicable, in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 3). 
(5) The Election Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for t he delimitation of constituencies together with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof in the Official Gazette and 
in such other manner as the Commission may consider fit, together with a notice inviting o bjections 
and suggestions in relation to the proposals and specifying a date on or after which the proposals will 
be further considered by it;  
(b) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified; and  
(c) after considering all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the 
date so specified, determine by one or more orders the delimitation of constituencies and cause such 
order or orders to be published in the Official Gazette;  and upon such publication, the order or orders 
shall have the full force of law and shall not be called in question in any court.  10 
 (6) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order relating to assembly constituencies 
shall be laid before the Legislative Assembly of the concerned State.  
23. Power of Election Commission to maintain Delimitation Orders up -to-date.—(1) The 
Election  Commission may, from time to time by notific ation in the Official Gazett e,— 
(a) correct any printing mistakes in any order made under section 22 or any error arising therein 
from inadvertent slip or omission; and  
(b) where the boundaries or name of any te rritorial division mentioned in any such order or orders 
is or are altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for bringing such 
order up -to-date.  
(2) Every notification under this section relating to an assembly constituency  shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is issued, before the concerned Legislative Assembly.  
Scheduled castes and Scheduled Tribes  
24. Amendment of the Scheduled Castes Order .—On and from the appointed day, the Constitution 
(Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Fifth Schedule to this Act.  
25. Amendment of the Scheduled Tribes Order .—On and from the appointed day, the Constitution 
(Scheduled Tribes)  Order, 1950, shall stand amended as directed in the Sixth Schedule to this Act.  
PART IV  
HIGH COURT  
26. High Court of Uttaranchal .—(1) As from the appointed day,  there shall be a separate High  
Court for the State of Uttaranchal (hereinafter referred to as “the High Court of Uttaranchal ”) and the 
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad shall become the High Court for the State of Uttar Pradesh 
(hereinafter referred to as the High Court at Allahabad).  
(2) The principal seat of the High Court of Uttaranchal shal l be at such place as the President may, by 
notified order, appoint.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Judges and division courts of the High 
Court of Uttaranchal may sit at such other place or places in the State of Uttarancha l other than its 
principal seat as the Chief Justice may, with the approval of the Governor of Uttaranchal, appoint.  
27. Judges of Uttaranchal High Court .—(1) Such of the Judges of the High Court at Allahabad 
holding office immediately before the appointed  day as may be determined by the President shall on that 
day cease to be Judges of the High Court at Allahabad and become , Judges of the High Court of 
Uttaranchal.  
(2) The persons who by virtue of sub -section ( 1) become Judges of the High Court of Uttaranchal 
shall, except in the case where any such person is appointed to be the Chief Justice of that High Court, 
rank in that Court according to the priority of their respective appointments as Judges of the High Court at 
Allahabad.  
28. Jurisdiction of  Uttaranchal High Court .—The High Court of Uttaranchal shall have, in respect 
of any part of the territories included in the State of Uttaranchal, all such jurisdiction, powers and 
authority as, under the law in force immediately before the appointed day, are exercisable in respect of 
that part of the said territories by the High Court at Allahabad.  
29. Special provision relating to Bar Council and advocates .—(1) On and from the appointed day, 
in the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961) , in section 3, in sub -section ( 1), in clause ( a), for the words “and 
Uttar Pradesh ”, the words “Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal ” shall be substituted.  
(2) Any person who immediately before the appointed day is an advocate on the roll  of the Bar 
Council of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh may give his option in writing, within one year from the 11 
 appointed day to the Bar Council of such existing State, to transfer his name on the roll of the Bar Council 
of Uttaranchal and notwithstand ing anything contained in the Advocates Act, 1961  (25 of 1961)  and the 
rules made thereunder, on such option so given his name shall be deemed to have been transferred on the 
roll of the Bar Council of Uttaranchal with effect from the date of the option so  given f or the purposes of 
the said Act, and the rules made thereunder.  
(3) The persons other than the advocates who are entitled immediately before the appointed day, to 
practise in the High Court at Allahabad or any subordinate court thereof shall, on an d after the appointed 
day, be recognised as such persons entitled also to practise in the High Court of Uttaranchal or any 
subordinate court thereof, as the case may be.  
(4) The right of audience in the High Court of Uttaranchal shall be regulated in accor dance with the 
like principles as immediately before the appointed day are in force with respect to the right of audience 
in the High Court at Allahabad.  
30. Practice and procedure in Uttaranchal High Court .—Subject to the provisions of this Part, the 
law in force immediately before the appointed day with respect to practice and procedure in the High 
Court at Allahabad shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of 
Uttaranchal, and accordingly, the High Court of Uttaranchal shall have all such powers to make rules and 
orders with respect to practice and procedure as are immediately before the appointed day exercisable by 
the High Court at Allahabad:  
Provided that any rules or orders which are in force immediately before the appointed day with 
respect to practice and procedure in the High Court at Allahabad shall, until varied or revoked by rules or 
orders made by the High Court of Uttaranchal, apply with the necessary modifications in relation to 
practice and procedure in the  High Court of Uttaranchal as if made by that Court.  
31. Custody of seal of Uttaranchal High Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court at Allahabad shall, with the 
necessary modif ications, apply with respect to the custody of the seal of the High Court of Uttaranchal.  
32. Form of writs and other processes .—The law in force immediately before the appointed day 
with respect to the form of writs and other processes used, issued or awa rded by the High Court at 
Allahabad shall, with the necessary modifications, apply with respect to the form of writs and other 
processes used, issued or awarded by the High Court of Uttaranchal.  
33. Powers of Judges .—The law in force immediately before the  appointed day relating to the 
powers of the Chief Justice, single Judges and division courts of the High Court at Allahabad and with 
respect to all matters ancillary to the exercise of those powers shall, with the necessary modifications, 
apply in relatio n to the High Court of Uttaranchal.  
34. Procedure as to appeals to Supreme Court .—The law in force immediately before the 
appointed day relating to appeals to the Supreme Court from the High Court at Allahabad and the Judges 
and division courts thereof shall, with the necessary modifications, apply in relation to the High Court of 
Uttaranchal.  
35. Transfer of proceedings from Allahabad High Court to Uttaranchal High Court .—(1) 
Except  as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Allahabad shall, as from the appointed day, have no 
jurisdiction in respect of the transferred territory.  
(2) Such proceedings pending in the High Court at Allahabad immediately before the appointed day 
as are ce rtified, whether before or after that day, by the Chief Justice of that High Court, having regard to 
the place of accrual of the cause of action and other circumstances, to be proceedings which ought to be 
heard and decided by the High Court of Uttaranchal  shall, as soon as may be after such certification, be 
transferred to the High Court of Uttaranchal.  12 
 (3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) of this section or in section 28, but 
save as hereinafter provided, the High Court at Al lahabad shall have, and the High Court of Uttaranchal 
shall not have, jurisdiction to entertain, hear or dispose of appeals, applications for leave to the Supreme 
Court, applications for review and other proceedings where any such proceedings seek any reli ef in 
respect of any order passed by the High Court at Allahabad before the appointed day:  
Provided that if after any such proceedings have been entertained by the High Court at Allahabad, it 
appears to the Chief Justice of that High Court that they ought to be transferred to the High Court of 
Uttaranchal, he shall order that they shall be so transferred, and such proceedings shall thereupon be 
transferred accordingly.  
(4) Any order made by the High Court at Allahabad — 
(a) before the appointed day, in any proceedings transferred to the High Court of Uttaranchal by 
virtue of sub -section ( 2), or 
(b) in any proceedings with respect to which the High Court at Allahabad retains jurisdiction by 
virtue of sub -section ( 3), 
shall for all purposes have effect, not on ly as an order of the High Court at Allahabad, but also as an order 
made by the High Court of Uttaranchal.  
36. Right to appear or to act in proceedings transferred to Uttaranchal High Court .—Any 
person who, immediately before the appointed day, is an advoc ate entitled to practise or any other persons 
entitled t o practise in the High Court at Allahabad and was authorised to appear in any proceedings 
transferred from that High Court to the High Court of Uttaranchal under section 35, shall have the right to 
appear in the High Court  of Uttaranchal in relation to those proceedings.  
37. Interpretation .—For the purposes of section 35 — 
(a) proceedings shall be deemed to be pending in a court until that court has disposed of all issues 
between the parties, including any issues with respect to the taxation of the costs of the proceedings 
and shall include appeals, applications for leave to appeal to the Supreme Court, applications for 
review, petitions for revision and petitions for writs; and  
(b) references to a High Court shall be construed as including references to a Judge or division 
court thereof, and references to an order made by a court or a Judge shall be construed as including 
references to a sentence, judgment or decree passed or made by that court or Judge.  
38. Savings .—Nothing in this Part shall affect the application to the High Court of Uttaranchal of any 
provisions of the Constitution, and this Part shall have effect subject to any provision that may be made 
on or after the appointed day with respect to that High Court by any Legislature or other authority having 
power to make such provision.  
PART V  
AUTHORISATION OF EX PENDITURE AND DISTRIBUTION OF REVENUES  
39. Authorisation of expenditure of Uttaranchal State .—The Governor of Uttar Pradesh may, at 
any tim e before the appointed day, authorise such expenditure from the Consolidated Fund of the State of 
Uttaranchal as he deems necessary for any period not more than six months beginning with the appointed 
day pending the sanction of such expenditure by the Leg islative Assembly of the State of Uttaranchal:  
Provided that the Governor of Uttaranchal may, after the appointed day, authorise such further 
expenditure as he deems necessary from the Consolidated Fund of the State of Uttaranchal for any period 
not extend ing beyond the said period of six months.   
40. Reports relating to accounts of Uttar Pradesh State .—(1) The reports of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India referred to in clause ( 2) of article 151 relating to the accounts of the existing 13 
 State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of any period prior to the appointed day  shall be  submitted to the 
Governor of each of the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal who  shall cause them to be laid 
before the Legislature of that State.  
(2) The President m ay by  order— 
(a) declare any expenditure incurred out of the Consolidated Fund of Uttar Pradesh on any 
service in respect of any period prior to the appointed day during the financial year or in respect of 
any earlier financial year in excess of the amount  granted for that service and for that year as 
disclosed in the reports referred to in  sub-section (1) to have been duly authorised; and  
(b) provide for any action to be taken on any matter arising out of the said reports.  
41. Distribution of revenue .—The President  shall, by  order, determine the  share of the States of 
Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal in its total amount payable to the existing State of Uttar Pradesh on the 
recommendation of the Finance Commission constituted under article 280 in such manner a s he thinks fit.  
PART VI  
APPORTIONMENT OF ASSETS AND LIABILITIES  
42. Application of Part .—(1) The provisions of this Part shall apply in relation to the apportionment 
of the assets and liabilities of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh immediately before the appointed day.  
(2) The successor States shall be entitled to receive benefits arising out of the decisions taken by the 
predecessor State and the successor States shall be liable to bear the financial liabilities arising out of the 
decisions taken by t he existing State of Uttar Pradesh.  
(3) The apportionment of assets and liabilities would be subject to such financial adjustment as may 
be necessary to secure just, reasonable and equitable apportionment of the assets and liabilities amongst 
the successor  States.  
(4) Any dispute regarding the amount of financial assets and liabilities shall be settled through mutual 
agreement, failing which by order by the Central Government on the advice of the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
43. Land and goods .—(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Part, all land and all stores, articles 
and other goods belonging to the existing Stat e of Uttar Pradesh shall, — 
(a) if within the transferred territory, pass to the State of Uttaranchal; or  
(b) in any other cas e, remain the property of the State of Uttar Pradesh:  
Provided that where the Central Government is of opinion that any goods or class of goods should be 
distributed among the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, otherwise than according to the situation 
of the goods, the Central Government may issue such directions as it thinks fit for a just and equitable 
distribution of the goods and the goods shall pass to the successor States accordingly:  
Provided further that in case of any dispute relating  to the distribution of any goods or class of goods 
under this sub -section, the Central Government shall endeavour to settle such dispute through mutual 
agreement arrived at between the Governments of the successor States for that purpose, failing which th e 
Central Government may, on request by any of the Governments of the successor States, after consulting 
both the Governments of the successor States, issue such direction as it may deem fit for the distribution 
of such goods or class of goods, as the case  may be, under this sub -section.  
(2) Stores held for specific purposes, such as use or utilisation in particular institutions, workshops or 
undertakings or on particular works under construction, shall pass to the successor States in whose 
territories such  institutions, workshops, undertakings or works are located.  14 
 (3) Stores relating to the Secretariat and offices of Heads of Departments having jurisdiction over the 
whole of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall be divided between the successor States in accordance 
with such directions as the Central Government may, after consultation with the Government of each 
successor States, think fit to issue for a just and equita ble distribution of such stores.  
(4) Any other unissued stores of any class in the ex isting State of Uttar Pradesh shall be divided 
between the successor States in proportion to the total stores of that class purchased in the period of three 
years prior to the appointed day, for the territories of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh includ ed 
respectively in each of the successor States:  
Provided that where such proportion cannot be ascertained in respect of any class of stores or where 
the value of any class of such stores does not exceed rupees ten thousand, that class of stores shall be 
divided between the successor States according to the population ratio.  
(5) In this section, the expression “land” includes immovable property o f every kind and any rights in 
or over such property, and the expression “goods” does not include coins, bank not es and currency notes.  
44. Treasury and bank balances .—The total of the cash balances in all treasuries of the State of 
Uttar Pradesh and the credit balances of the State with the Reserve Bank of India, the State Bank of India 
or any other bank immediately  before the appointed day shall be divided between the States of Uttar 
Pradesh and Uttaranchal according to the population ratio:  
Provided that for the purposes of such division, there shall be no transfer of cash balances from any 
treasury to any other tr easury and the apportionment shall be effected by adjusting the credit balances of 
the two States in the books of the Reserve Bank of India on the appointed day:  
Provided further that if the State of Uttaranchal has no account on the appointed day with the  Reserve 
Bank of India, the adjustment shall be made in such manner as the Central Government may, by order, 
direct.  
45. Arrears of taxes .—The right to recover arrears of the tax or duty on property, including arrears 
of land revenue, shall belong to the successor State in which the property is situated, and the right to 
recover arrears of any other tax or duty shall belong to the successor State in whose territories the place of 
assessment of that tax or duty is included on the appointed day.  
46. Right to  recover loans and advances .—(1) The right of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh to 
recover any loans or advances made before the appointed day to any local body, society, agriculturist or 
other person in an area within that State shall belong to the succ essor State in which that area is included 
on that day.  
(2) The right of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh to recover any loans or advances made before the 
appointed day to any person or institution outside that State shall belong to the State of Uttar P radesh:  
Provided that any sum recovered in respect of any such loan or advance shall be divided between the 
States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal acc ording to the population ratio.  
47. Investments and credits in certain funds .—(1) The securities held in respect of the investments 
made from Cash Balances Investment Account or from any Fund in the Public Account of the existing 
State of Uttar Pradesh as specified in the Seventh Schedule shall be apportioned in the ratio of population 
of the successor States : 
Provided that the securities held in investments made from the Calamity Relief Fund of the existing 
State of Uttar Pradesh shall be divided in the ratio of the area of the territories occupied by the successor 
States:  
Provided further that the balance in  the Reserve Funds in the Public Account of Uttar Pradesh created 
wholly out of appropriations from the Consolidated Fund of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh, to the 15 
 extent the balances have not been invested outside Government account, shall not be car ried forward to 
similar Reserve Funds in the Public Account of the successor States.  
(2) The investments of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh immediately before the appointed day in 
any special fund, the objects of which are confined to a local area, sha ll belong to the State in which that  
area is included on the appointed day.  
(3) The investments of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh immediately before the appointed day in 
any private, commercial or industrial undertaking, in so far as such investments have not been made or 
are deemed not to have been made from the Cash Balances Investment Account, shall pass to the State in 
which the principal seat of business of the undertaking is located.  
(4) Where any body corporate constituted under a Central Act, S tate Act or Provincial Act for the 
existing State of Uttar Pradesh or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, become an 
inter-State body corporate, the investments in, or loans or advances to, any such body corporate by the 
existing S tate of Uttar Pradesh made before the appointed day shall, save as otherwise expressly provided 
by or under this Act, be divided between the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal in the same 
proportion in which the assets of the body corporate are divide d under the provisions of this Part.  
48. Assets and liabilities of State undertakings .—(1) The assets and liabilities relating to any 
commercial or industrial undertaking of the State of Uttar Pradesh shall pass to the State in which the 
undertaking is loc ated.  
(2) Where a depreciation reserve fund is maintained by the State of Uttar Pradesh for any such 
commercial or industrial undertaking, the securities held in respect of investments made  from that fund 
shall pass to the State in which the undertaking is  located.  
49. Public Debt .—(1) All liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account of the existing 
State of Uttar Pradesh outstanding immediately before the appointed day shall be apportioned in the ratio 
of population of the successor States unle ss a different mode of apportionment is provided under the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) The individual items of liabilities to be allocated to the successor States and the amount of 
contribution required to be made by one successor State to another shall be  such as may be ordered by the 
Central Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India:  
Provided that till such orders are issued, the liabilities on account of Public Debt and Public Account 
of the existing State of Uttar Prad esh shall continue to be the liabilities of the successor State of Uttar 
Pradesh.  
(3) The liability on account of loan  raised from any source and re -lent by the existing State of Uttar 
Pradesh to such entities as may be specified by the Central Government and whose area of operation is 
confined to either of the successor States shall devolve on the respective States as specified in  
sub-section ( 4). 
(4) The public debt of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh attributable to loan taken from any source 
for the  express purpose of re -lending the same to a specific institution and outstanding immediately 
before the appointed day shall, — 
(a) if re -lent to any local body, body corporate or other institution in any local area, be the debt of 
the State in which the lo cal area is included on the appointed day; or  
(b) if re -lent to the Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited, the Uttar Pradesh Jal Vidyut Nigam 
Limited, the Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Limited, the Uttar Pradesh State Road 
Transport Corporatio n, or the Uttar Pradesh Housing Board or any other institution which becomes an 
inter-State institution on the appointed day, be divided between the States of Uttar Pradesh and 16 
 Uttaranchal in the same proportion in which the assets of such body corporate o r institution are 
divided under the provisions of Part VII.  
(5) Where a sinking fund or a depreciation fund is maintained by the existing State of Uttar Pradesh 
for repayment of any loan raised by it, the securities held in respect of investments made from  that fund 
shall be divided between the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal in the same proportion in 
which the total public debt is divided between the two States under this section.  
(6) In this section, the expression “Government security ” means a security created and issued by a 
State Government for the purpose of raising a public loan and having any of the forms specified in, or 
prescribed under, clause ( 2) of section 2 of the Public Debt Act, 1944  (18 of 1944) . 
50. Floating Debt .—The liability of the State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of any floating loan to 
provide short -term finance to any commercial undertaking shall be the liability of the State in whose 
territories the undertaking is located.  
51. Refund of taxes collected in exces s.—The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh to 
refund any tax or duty on property, including land revenue, collected in excess shall be the liability of the 
successor State in whose territories the property is situated, and the liability of the  existing State of Uttar 
Pradesh to refund any other tax or duty collected in excess shall be the liability of the successor State in 
whose territories the place of assessment of that tax or duty is included.  
52. Deposits, etc .—(1) The liability of the exi sting State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of any civil 
deposit or local fund deposit shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area 
the deposit has been made.  
(2) The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of any charitable or other endowment 
shall, as from the appointed day, be the liability of the State in whose area the institution entitled to the 
benefit of the endowment is located or of the State to which the objects of the endowment, under the 
terms th ereof, are confined.  
53. Provident fund .—The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of the provident 
fund account of a Government servant in service on the appointed day shall, as from that day, be the 
liability of the State to which t hat Government servant is permanently allotted.  
54. Pensions .—The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of pensions shall pass to, 
or be apportioned between, the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal in accordance with the  
provisions contained in the Eighth Schedule to this Act.  
55. Contracts .—(1) Where, before the appointed day, the existing State of Uttar Pradesh has made 
any contract in the exercise of its executive power for any purposes of the State, that contract shall be 
deemed to have been made in the e xercise of the executive power — 
(a) if the purposes of the contract are, on and from the appointed day, exclusive purposes of either 
of the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal; and  
(b) in any other ca se, of the State of Uttar Pradesh,  
and all rights and liabilities which have accrued, or may accrue under any such contract shall, to the 
extent to which they would have been rights or liabilities of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh, be rights 
or liabil ities of the State of Uttaranchal or the State of Uttar Pradesh, as the case may be:  
Provided that in any such case as is referred to in clause ( b), the initial allocation of rights and 
liabilities made by this sub -section shall be subject to such financia l adjustment as may be agreed upon 
between the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal or in default of such agreement, as the 
Central Government may, by order, direct.  17 
 (2) For the purposes of this section, there shall be deemed to be included in  the liabilities which have 
accrued or m ay accrue under any contract — 
(a) any liability to satisfy an order or award made by any court or other tribunal in proceedings 
relating to the contract; and  
(b) any liability in respect of expenses incurred in or in  connection with any such proceedings.  
(3) This section shall have effect subject to the other provisions of this Part relating to the 
apportionment of liabilities in respect of loans, guarantees and other financial obligation; and bank 
balances and securi ties shall, notwithstanding that they partake of th e nature of contractual rights, be dealt 
with under those provisions.  
56. Liability in respect of actionable wrong .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the 
existing State of Uttar Pradesh is subject to any liability in respect of any actionable wrong other than 
breach of c ontract, that liability shall, — 
(a) if the cause of action arose wholly within the territories which, as from that day, are the 
territories of either of the successor States of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal, be a liability of that 
successor State; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Uttar Pradesh, but subject to such 
financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the States of Uttar Pradesh a nd Uttaranchal or, 
in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.  
57. Liability as guarantor .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of 
Uttar Pradesh is liable as guarantor in respect of any liability of a registered co -operative society or other 
person, that liability of the existing  State of Uttar Pradesh shall, — 
(a) if the area of operations of such society or persons is limited to the territories which, as from 
that day, are the territorie s of either of the States of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal, be a liability of that 
successor State; and  
(b) in any other case, be initially a liability of the State of Uttar Pradesh, subject to such financial 
adjustment as may be agreed upon between the Sta tes of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal or, in default 
of such agreements, as the Central Government may, by order, direct.  
58. Items in suspense .—If any item in suspense is ultimately found to affect an asset or liability of 
the nature referred to in any of the foregoing provisions of this Part, it shall be dealt with in accordance 
with that provision.  
59. Residuary provision .—The benefit or burden of any asset or liability of the existing State of 
Uttar Pradesh not dealt with in the foregoing provisions of this Part shall pass to the State of Uttar 
Pradesh in the first instance, subject to such financial adjustment as may be agreed upon between the 
States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal or, in default of such agreement, as the Central Government may, 
by ord er, direct.  
60. Apportionment of assets or liabilities by agreement .—Where the successor States of Uttar 
Pradesh and Uttaranchal agree that the benefit or burden of any particular asset or liability should be 
apportioned between them in a manner other than  that provided for in the foregoing provisions of this 
Part, notwithstanding anything contained therein, the benefit or burden of that asset or liability shall be 
apportioned in the manner agreed upon.  
61. Power of Central Government to order allocation or  adjustment in certain cases .—Where, 
by virtue of any of the provisions of this Part, any of the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and 
Uttaranchal becomes entitled to any property or obtains any benefits or becomes subject to any liability, 
and the Central  Government is of opinion, on a reference made within a period of three years from the 
appointed day by either of the States, that it is just and equitable that property or those benefits should be 18 
 transferred to, or shared with, the other successor State,  or that a contribution towards that liability should 
be made by the other successor State, the said property or benefits shall be allocated in such manner 
between the two States, or the other State shall make to the State subject to the liability such con tribution 
in respect thereof, as the Central Government may, after consultation with the two State Governments, by 
order, determine.  
62. Certain expenditure to be charged on Consolidated Fund .—All sums payable either by the 
State of Uttar Pradesh or by the State of Uttaranchal to the other States or by the Central Government to 
either of those States, by virtue of the provisions of this Act, shall be charged on the Consolidated Fund of 
the State  by which such sums are payable or, as the case may be, the Consolidated Fund of India.  
PART VII  
PROVISIONS AS TO CERTAIN CORPORATIONS  
63. Provisions for  Power Corporation Limited, etc .—(1) The following bodies corporate 
constituted for the existing S tate of Uttar Pradesh, namely: — 
(a) the Uttar Pradesh Power Corporation Limited, the Uttar Pradesh Jal Vidyut Nigam Limited 
and the Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidyut Utpadan Nigam Limited;  
(b) the Uttar Pradesh Electricity Regulatory Commission; and  
(c) the  State Warehousing Corporation established under the Warehousing Corporations Act, 
1962  (58 of 1962) , 
shall, on and from the appointed day, continue to function in those areas in respect of which they were 
functioning immediately before that day, subject t o the provisions of this section and to such directions as 
may, from time to time, be issued by the Central Government.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the Power 
Corporation, Commission or Warehousing  Corporation shall include a direction that the Act under which 
the Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation was constituted shall, in its application 
to that Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation, have effect subject to such 
exceptions and modifications as the Central Government thinks fit.  
(3) The Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
shall cease to function as from, and shall be deemed to be dissolved on such date as the  Central 
Government may, by order, appoint; and upon such dissolution, its assets, rights and liabilities shall be 
apportioned between the successor States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal in such manner as may be 
agreed upon between them within one year o f the dissolution of the Power Corporation, Commission or 
Warehousing Corporation, as the case may be, or if no agreement is reached, in such manner as the 
Central Government may, by order, determine:  
Provided that any liabilities of any of the said Power Corporations referred to in clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) relating to the unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the Power Corporation by any public 
sector coal company shall be provisionally apportioned between the corresponding Power Corporations 
constituted respectively in the successor States of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh or after the date 
appointed for the dissolution of the Power Corporation under this sub -section in such manner as may be 
agreed upon between the Governments of the succ essor States within one month of such dissolution or if 
no agreement is reached, in such manner as the Central Government may by order determine subject to 
reconciliation and finalisation of the liabilities which shall be completed within three months from  the 
date of such dissolution by the mutual agreement between the successor States or failing such agreement 
by the direction of the Central Government:  
Provided further that an interest at the rate of two per cent. higher than the cash credit interest sha ll be 
paid on outstanding unpaid dues of the coal supplied to the Electricity Corporation by the public sector 19 
 coal company till the liquidation of such dues by the concerned State Power Corporation constituted in 
the successor States on or after the date appointed for the dissolution of the Power Corporation under this 
sub-section.  
(4) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of the State of Uttar Pradesh or, as the case may be, the Government of t he State of 
Uttaranchal from constituting, at any time on or after the appointed day, a State Power Corporation, an 
Electricity Regulatory Commission or a State Warehousing Corporation for the State under the provisions 
of this Act relating to such Power C orporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation; and if such a 
Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation is so constituted in either of the States 
before the dissolution of the Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corporation r eferred to in 
sub-section ( 1),— 
(a) provision may be made by order of the Central Government enabling the new Power 
Corporation, new Commission or the new Warehousing Corporation to take over from the existing 
Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing Corpo ration all or any of its undertakings, assets, 
rights and liabilities in that State, and  
(b) upon the dissolution of the existing Power Corporation, Commissi on or Warehousing 
Corporation, — 
(i) any assets, rights and liabilities which would otherwise have p assed to that State by or 
under the provisions of sub -section ( 3) shall pass to the new Board, new Commission or the new 
Warehousing Corporation instead of to that State;  
(ii) any employee who would otherwise have been transferred to or re -employed by that  State 
under sub -section ( 3), read with clause ( i) of sub -section ( 5), shall be transferred to or  
re-employed by the new Power Corporation, new Commission or the new Warehousing 
Corporation instead of to or by that State.  
(5) An agreement entered into bet ween the successor States under sub -section ( 3) and an order made 
by the Central Government under that sub -section or under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 4) may provide for 
the transfer or re -employment of any employee of the Power Corporation, Commission or Warehousing 
Corporation r eferred to in sub -section ( 1),— 
(i) to or by the successor States, in the case of an agreement under sub -section ( 2) or an order 
made under that sub -section;  
(ii) to or by the new Power Corporation, new Commission or the new Warehousing Corporation 
constituted under sub -section ( 4), in the case of an order made under clause ( a) of that sub -section,  
and, subject to the provisions of section 68, also for the terms and c onditions of service applicable to such 
employees after such transfer or re -employment.  
64. Continuance of arrangements in regard to generation and supply of electric power and 
supply of water .—If it appears to the Central Government that the arrangement in regard to the 
generation or supply of electric power or the supply of water for any area or in regard to the execution of 
any project for such generation or supply has been or is likely to be modified to the disadvantage of that 
area by reason of the fa ct that it is, by virtue of the provisions of Part II, outside the State in which the 
power stations and other installations for the generation and supply of such power, or the catchment area, 
reservoirs and other works for the supply of water, as the case  may be, are located, the Central 
Government may, after consultation with the Government of each successor States wherever necessary, 
give such directions as it deems proper to the State Government or other authority concerned for the 
maintenance, so far a s practicable, of the previous arrangement.  
65. Provisions as to Uttar Prade sh State Financial Corporation .—(1) The Uttar Pradesh State 
Financial Corporation established under the State Financial Corporations Act, 1951 (63 of 1951) shall, on 20 
 and from the a ppointed day, continue to function in thos e areas in respect of which it was functioning 
immediately before that day, subject to the provisions of this section and to such directions as may, from 
time to time, be is sued by the Central Government.  
(2) Any d irections issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of the 
Corporation may include a direction that the said Act, in its application to the Corporation, shall have 
effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as ma y be specified in the direction.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Board of Directors 
of the Corporation may, with the previous approval of the Central Government and shall, if so required by 
the Central Govern ment, con vene at any time afte r the appointed day a meeting for the consideration of a 
scheme for the reconstitution or reorganisation or dissolution, as the case may be, of the Corporation, 
including proposals regarding the formation of new Corporations, and the transfer thereto of the assets, 
rights and liabilities of the existing Corporation, and if such a scheme is approved at the general meeting 
by a resolution passed by a majority of the shareholders present and voting, the scheme shall be submitted 
to the Central Governm ent fo r its sanction.  
(4) If the scheme is sanctioned by the Central Government either without modifications or with 
modifications which are approved at a general meeting, the Central Government shall certify the scheme, 
and upon such certification, the sch eme shall, notwiths tanding  anything to the contrary contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, be binding on the Corporations affected by the scheme as well as the 
shareholders and creditors thereof.  
(5) If the scheme is not so approved or sanctioned, the Central Government may refer the scheme to 
such Judge of the High Court of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal as may be nominated in this behalf by the 
Chief Justice thereof, and the decision of the Judge  in regard to the sche me shall be final and shall be 
binding on the Corporations affected by the scheme as well as the shar eholders and creditors thereof.  
(6) Nothing in the preceding provisions of this section shall be construed as preventing the 
Government of the States of Ut tar Pradesh and Uttaranchal from constituting, at any time on or after the 
appointed day, a State Fi nancial Corporation for that Sta te under the State Financial Corporations Act, 
1951 (63 of 1951).  
66. Provisions as to certain companies .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing 
provisions of this Part, each of the companies specified in the Ninth Schedule to this Act shall, on and 
from the appointed day and until otherwise provided for in any law, or in any agreement among the 
successor States, or in any direction issued by the Central Government, continue to function in the areas 
in which it was functioning immediately before that day; and the Central Government may from time to 
time issue such directions in relation to such fun ctioning as it may deem fit, notwithstanding anything to 
the contrary conta ined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) , or in any other law.  
(2) Any directions issued under sub -section ( 1) in respect of a company referred to in that sub -section, 
may includ e directions — 
(a) regarding the division of the interests and shares of existing State of Uttar Pradesh in the 
Company among the successor States;  
(b) requiring the reconstitution of the Board of Directors of the Company so as to give adequate 
representati on to all the successor States.  
67. General provision as to statutory Corporations .—(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided by 
the foregoing provisions of this Part, where any body  corporate constituted under a Central Act, State Act 
or Provincial Act for the existing State of Uttar Pradesh or any part thereof has, by virtue of the provisions 
of Part II, become an inter -State body corporate, then, the body corporate shall, on and fr om the appointed 
day, continue to function and operate in those areas in respect of which it was functioning and operating 21 
 immediately before that day, subject to such directions as may from time to time be issued by the Central 
Government, until other pro vision is made by law in respect of the said body corporate.  
(2) Any directions issued by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) in respect of any such 
body corporate shall include a direction that any law by which the said body corporate is governed  shall, 
in its application to that body corporate, have effect subject to such exceptions and modifications as may 
be specified in the direction.  
68. Temporary provisions as to continuance of certain existing road transport permits .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 89 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988) , a permit 
granted by the State Transport Authority of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh or any Regional Transport 
Authority in that State shall, if such permi t was, immediately before the appointed day, valid and effective 
in any area in the transferred territory, be deemed to continue to be valid and effective in that area after 
that day subject to the provisions of that Act as for the time being in force in t hat area; and it shall not be 
necessary for any such permit to be countersigned by the State Transport Authority of Uttaranchal or any 
Regional Transport Authority therein for the purpose of validating it for use in such area:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the successor State Government or 
Governments concerned add to amend or vary the conditions attached to the permit by the Authority by 
which the permit was granted.  
(2) No tolls, entrance fees or other charges of a l ike nature shall be levied after the appointed day in 
respect of any transport vehicle for its operations in any of the successor States under any such permit, if 
such vehicle was, immediately before that day, exempt from the payment of any such toll, entr ance fees 
or other charges for its operations in the transferred territory:  
Provided that the Central Government may, after consultation with the State Government or 
Governments concerned, authorise the levy of any such toll, entrance fees or other charges , as the case 
may be:  
Provided further that the provisions of this sub -section shall not be applicable where any such tolls, 
entrance fees or other charges of a like nature is leviable for the use of any road or bridge which is 
constructed or developed for  commercial purpose by the State Government, an undertaking of the State 
Government, a joint undertaking in which the State Government is a shareholder or a private sector.  
69. Special provisions relating to retrenchment compensation in certain cases .—Wher e on 
account of the reorganisation of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh under this Act, any body corporate 
constituted under a Central Act, State Act or Provincial Act, any co -operative society registered under any 
law relating to co -operative societies or any commercial or industrial undertaking of that State is 
reconstituted or reorganised in any manner whatsoever or is amalgamated with any other body corporate, 
co-operative society or undertaking, or is dissolved, and in consequence of such reconstitut ion, 
reorganisation, amalgamation or dissolution, any workman employed by such body corporate or in any 
such co -operative society or undertaking, is transferred to, or re -employed by, any other body corporate, 
or in any other co -operative society or undert aking, then, notwithstanding anything contained in  
section 25F or section 25FF or section 25FFF of th e Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) , such 
transfer or re -employment shall not entitle him to any compensation under that section:  
Provided that — 
(a) the terms and conditions of service applicable to the workman after such transfer or  
re-employment are not less favourable to the workman than those applicable to him immediately 
before the transfer or re -employment;  
(b) the employer in relation to th e body corporate, the co -operative society or the undertaking 
where the workman transferred or re -employed is, by agreement or otherwise, legally liable to pay to 
the workman, in the event of his retrenchment, compensation under section 25F or section 25FF  or 22 
 section 25FFF of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  on the basis that his service has been 
continuous and has not been interrupted by the transfer or re -employment.  
70. Special provision as to income -tax.—Where the assets, rights and liabil ities of any body 
corporate carrying on business are, under the provisions of this Part, transferred to any other bodies 
corporate which after the transfer carry on the same business, the losses or profits or gains sustained by 
the body corporate first -mentioned which, but for such transfer, would have been allowed to be carried 
forward and set off in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 
1961) , shall be apportioned amongst the transferee bodies corporate in accorda nce with the rules to be 
made by the Central Government in this behalf and, upon such apportionment, the share of loss allotted to 
each transferee body corporate shall be dealt with in accordance with the provisions of Chapter VI of the 
said Act, as if the  transferee body corporate had itself sustained such loss in a business carried on by it in 
the years in which these losses were sustained.  
71. Continuance of facilities in certain State institutions .—(1) The Government of State of Uttar 
Pradesh or Uttaranchal, as the case may be, shall, in respect of the institutions specified in the Tenth 
Schedule to this Act, located in that State, continue to provide facilities to the people of the other State 
which s hall not, in any respect, be less favourable to such people than what were being provided to them 
before the appointed day, for such period and upon such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon 
between the two State Governments before the 1st day of Dec ember, 2001 or if no agreement is reached 
by the said date as may be fixed by order of the Central Government,  
(2) The Central Government may, at any time before the 1st day of December, 2001, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, specify in the Tenth S chedule referred to in sub -section ( 1) any other institution 
existing on the appointed day in the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal and on the issue of such 
notification, such Schedule shall be deemed to be amended by the inclusion of the said instit ution therein.  
PART VIII  
PROVISIONS AS TO SERVICES  
72. Provisions relating to All -India Services .—(1) In this section, the expression “State cadre ”— 
(a) in relation to the Indian Administrative Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian 
Administrative Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954;  
(b) in relation to the Indian Police Service, has the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Police 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1954; and  
(c) in relation to the Indian Forest Service, has the meaning assigned to it in t he Indian Forest 
Service (Cadre) Rules, 1966.  
(2) In place of the cadres of the Indian Administrative Service, Indian Police Service and Indian 
Forest Service for the existing State of Uttar Pradesh, there shall, on and from the appointed day, be two 
separ ate cadres, one for the State of Uttar Pradesh and the other for the State of Uttaranchal in respect of 
each of these services.  
(3) The initial strength and composition of the State cadres referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be such 
as the Central Governm ent may, by order, determine before the appointed day.  
(4) The members of each of the said services borne on the Uttar Pradesh cadre thereof immediately 
before the appointed day shall be allocated to the State cadres of the same service constituted under  
sub-section ( 2) in such manner and with effect from such date or dates as the Central Government may, 
by order, specify.  
(5) Nothing in this section shall be deemed to affect the operation, on or after the appointed day, of 
the All -India Services Act, 1951  (61 of 1951) , or the rules made thereunder.  23 
 73. Provisions relating to other services .—(1) Every person who immediately before the appointed 
day is serving in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall, on and from that 
day p rovisionally continue to serve in connection with the affairs of the State of Uttar Pradesh unless he is 
required, by general or special order of the Central Government to serve provisionally in connection with 
the affairs of the State of Uttaranchal :  
Provided that every direction under this sub -section issued after the expiry of a period of one year 
from the appointed day shall be issued with the consultation of the Governments of the successor States.  
(2) As soon as may be after the appointed day, the Ce ntral Government shall, by general or special 
order, determine the successor State to which every person referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be finally 
allotted for service and the date with effect from which such allotment shall take effect or be deemed to 
have taken effect.  
(3) Every person who is finally allotted under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) to a successor State 
shall, if he is not already serving therein be made available for serving in the successor State from such 
date as may be agreed upo n between the Governments concerned or in default of such agreement, as may 
be determined by the Central Government.  
74. Other provisions relating to services .—(1) Nothing in this section or in section 73 shall be 
deemed to affect  on or after the appointed day, the operation of the provisions of Chapter I of Part XIV of 
the Constitution in relation to determination of the conditions of service of persons serving in connection 
with the affairs of the Union or any State:  
Provided tha t the conditions of service applicable immediately before the appointed day in the case of 
any person deemed to have been allocated to the State of Uttar Pradesh or to the State of Uttaranchal 
under section 73 shall not be varied to his disadvantage except  with the previous approval of the Central 
Government.  
(2) All services prior to the appoi nted day rendered by a person, — 
(a) if he is deemed to have been allocated to any State under section 73, shall be deemed to have 
been rendered in connection with the  affairs of that State;  
(b) if he is deemed to have been allocated to the Union in connection with the administration of 
the Uttaranchal, shall be deemed to have been rendered in connection with the affairs of the Union,  
for the purposes of the rules regulating his conditions of service.  
(3) The provisions of section 73, shall not apply in relation to members of any All -India Service.  
75. Provisions as to continuance of officers in same post .—(1) Every person who, immediately  
before the appointed day, is holding or discharging the duties of any post or office in connection with the 
affairs of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in any area which on that day falls within any of the 
successor States shall continue to hold the sa me post or office in that successor State, and shall be 
deemed, on and from that day, to have been duly appointed to the post or office by the Government of, or 
any other appropriate authority in that successor State:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to prevent a competent authority, on and from 
the appointed day, from passing in relation to such person any order affecting the continuance in such 
post or office.  
76. Advisory Committees .—The Central Government may, by order, establish one or more Advisory 
Committees for the purpos e of assisting it in regard to — 
(a) the discharge of any of its functions under this Part; and  
(b) the ensuring of fair and equitable treatment to all persons affected by the provisions of this 
Part and the pro per consideration of any representations made by such persons.  24 
 77. Power of Central Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give such 
directions to the State Government of Uttar Pradesh and the State Government of Uttaranchal as may 
appea r to it to be necessary for the purpose of giving effect to the foregoing provisions of this Part and the 
State Government shall comply with such directions.  
78. Provisions as to State Public Service Commission .—(1) The Public Service Commission for 
the ex isting State of Uttar Pradesh shall, on and from the appointed day, be the Public Service 
Commission for the State of Uttar Pradesh.  
(2) The persons holding office immediately before the appointed day as the Chairman or other 
member of the Public Service C ommission for the existing State of Uttar Pradesh shall, as from the 
appointed day, be the Chairman or, as the case may be, the other member of the Public Service 
Commission for the State of Uttar Pradesh.  
(3) Every person who becomes the Chairman or other  member of the Public Service Commission for 
the State of Uttar Pradesh on the appointed da y under sub -section ( 2), shall — 
(a) be entitled to receive from the Government of the State of Uttar Pradesh conditions of service 
not less favourable than those to which he was entitled under the provisions applicable to him;  
(b) subject to the proviso to clause ( 2) of article 316, hold offic e or continue to hold office until 
the expiration of his term of office as determined under the provisions applicable to him immediately 
before the appointed day.  
(4) The report of the Uttar Pradesh Public Service Commission as to the work done by the 
Comm ission in respect of any period prior to the appointed day shall be presented under clause ( 2) of 
article 323 to the Governors of the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal, and the Governor of the State 
of Uttar Pradesh shall, on receipt of such report, cause a copy thereof together with a memorandum 
explaining as far as possible, as respects the cases, if any, where the advice of the Commission was not 
accepted, the reasons for such non -acceptance to be laid before the Legislature of the State of Uttar 
Pradesh and it shall not be necessary to cause such report or any such memorandum to be laid before the 
Legislative Assembly of the State of Uttaranchal.  
PART IX  
MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF WATER RESOURCES  
79. Water Resources Development and its Management .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in this Act but subject to the provisions  of section 80, all rights and liabilities of the existing State of Uttar 
Pradesh in respect of  water re source projects in relation to — 
(i) Ganga and its tributaries traversing the successor States excluding the Upper Yamuna River up 
to Okhla; and  
(ii) Upper Yumuna River and its tributaries up to Okhla,  
shall, on the appointed day, be the rights and liabilities of the successor States in suc h proportion as may 
be fixed, and subject to such adjustments as may be made, by agreement entered into by the said States 
after consultation with the Central Government, or, if no such agreement is entered into within two years 
of the appointed day, then,  the Central Government may, by order, determine within one year having 
regard to the purposes of the project:  
Provided that the order so made by the Central Government may be varied by any subsequent 
agreement entered into by the successor States after co nsultation with the Central Government.  
(2) An agreement or order referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, where an extension or further 
development of any of the projects referred to in that sub -section after the appointed day is undertaken, be 
the rights an d liabilities of the successor States in relation to such extension or further development.  25 
 (3) The rights and liabilities referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall include — 
(a) the right to receive and utilise the water available for distribution as a  result of the projects; 
and 
(b) the right to receive and utilise the power generated as a result of the projects,  
but shall not include the rights and liabilities under any contract entered into before the appointed day by 
the Government of the existing S tate of Uttar Pradesh with any person or authority other than 
Government.  
80. Constitution and functions of the Ganga Management Board .—(1) The Central Government 
shall constitute a Board to be called the Ganga Management Board (hereinafter referred to as the Board) 
for administration, construction, maintenance and operation of projects referred to in sub -section ( 1) of 
section 79 for any or for a combination of t he following purposes, namely: — 
(i) irrigation;  
(ii) rural and urban water supply;  
(iii) hydro power generation;  
(iv) navigation;  
(v) industries; and  
(vi) for any other purpose which the Central Government may, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, specify.  
(2) The Board shall consist of — 
(a) a whole -time Chairman to be appointed by the Central Government in consultation with the 
successor States;  
(b) two full time members, one from each of the successor States, to be nominated by the 
respective State Government;  
(c) four  part-time members, two from each of the successor States, to be nominated by the 
respective State Government;  
(d) two representatives of the Central Government to be nominated by that Government.  
(3) The functi ons of the Board shall include — 
(a) the regul ation of supply of water from the projects referred to in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) 
of section 79 to the suc cessor States having regard to — 
(i) any agreement entered into or arrangement made covering the Government of existing 
State of Uttar Pradesh an d any other State or Union territory, and  
(ii) the agreement or the order referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 79;  
(b) the regulation of supply of power generated at the projects referred to in clause ( i) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 79, to any Electricity Board or other authority in -charge of the distribu tion 
of power having regard to — 
(i) any agreement entered into, or arrangement made covering the Government of the existing 
State of Uttar Pradesh and any other State or Union territory, and  
(ii) the agreement or the order referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 79;  26 
 (c) the construction of such of the remaining on -going or new works connected with the 
development of the water resources projects relating to the rivers or their tributaries as the  Central 
Government may specify by notification in the Official Gazette;  
(d) such other functions as the Central Government may, after consultation with the successor 
States entrust to it.  
81. Staff of the Management Board .—(1) The Board may employ such st aff, as it may consider 
necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this Act. Such staff shall at the first instance, be 
appointed on deputation from the successor State failing which through any other method:  
Provided that every person wh o, immediately before the constitution of the said Board, was engaged 
in the construction, maintenance or operation of the works relating to the projects referred to in clause ( i) 
of sub -section ( 1) of section 79 shall continue to be so employed under the Board in connection with the 
said works on the same terms and conditions of service as were applicable to him before such constitution 
until the Central Government, by order, directs otherwise:  
Provided further that the said Board may, in consultation with  the Government of the successor State 
or the Electricity Board concerned and with the prior approval of the Central Government, retain any such 
person for service under  that State Government or Board.  
(2) The Government of the successor States shall at all times provide the necessary funds to the Board 
to meet all expenses (including the salaries and allowances of the staff) required for the discharge of its 
functions and such amounts shall be apportioned between the States concerned in such proportion a s the 
Central Government may, having regard to the benefits to each of the said States specify.  
(3) The Board shall be under the control of the Central Government and shall comply with such 
directions, as may, from time to time, be given to it by that Gove rnment.  
(4) The Board may delegate such of its powers, functions and duties as it may deem fit to the 
Chairman of the said Board or to any officer subordinate to the Board.  
(5) The Central Government may, for the purpose of enabling the Board to function e fficiently, issue 
such directions to the State Governments concerned, or any other authority, and the State Governments, 
or the other authority shall comply with such directions.  
82. Jurisdiction of the Board .—(1) The Board shall, ordinarily exercise juris diction in regard to any 
of the p rojects referred to in clause ( i) of sub -section ( 1) of section 79 over headworks (barrages, dams, 
reservoirs, regulating structures), part of canal network and transmission lines necessary to deliver water 
or power to the States concerned.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether the Board has jurisdiction under sub -section ( 1) over any 
project referred thereto, the same shall be referred to the Central Government for decision thereon.  
83. Power of Board to make regulations .—The Board may make regulations consistent with the 
Act and the rules m ade thereunder, to provide for — 
(a) regulating the time and place of meetings of the Board and the procedure to be followed for 
the transaction of business at such meetings;  
(b) delega tion of powers and duties of the Chairman or any officer of the Board;  
(c) the appointment and regulation of the conditions of service of the officers and other staff of 
the Board;  
(d) any other matter for which regulations are considered necessary by the Board.  
84. Allocation  of the water resources of the R iver Yamuna .—(1) The utilisable water resources of 
the Yamuna River up to Okhla, as allocated, before the appointed day, to the existing State of Uttar 27 
 Pradesh under the Memorandum of Undertakings, dated  the 12th May, 1994 shall be further allocated 
between the successor States by mutual agreement within a period of two years, failing which, the Central 
Government shall, by order, determine the allocation of such water resource between the successor State s 
within a further period of one year.  
(2) The State of Uttaranchal shall, on the appointed day, be inducted as a member of the Upper 
Yamuna Board constituted for the implementation of the Memorandum of Undertaking referred to in  
sub-section ( 1). 
PART X  
LEGAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS  
85. Amendment of section 15 of Act 37 of 1956 .—On and from the appointed d ay, in section 15 of 
the States Reorganisation Act, 1956, in clause ( b), for the words “Uttar Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh ”, 
the words “Uttar Pradesh,  Uttaranchal and Madhya Pradesh ” shall be substituted.  
86. Territorial extent of laws .—The provisions of Part II shall not be deemed to have affected any 
change in the territories to which the Uttar Pradesh Imposition of Ceiling of Land Holding Act, 1961  
(U.P. Act 1 of 1961)  and any other law in force immediately before the appointed day, extends or applies, 
and territorial references in any such law to the State of Uttar Pradesh shall, until otherwise provided by a 
competent Legislature or other competent  authority be construed as meaning the territories within the 
existing State of Uttar Pradesh before the appointed day.  
87. Power to adapt laws .—For the purpose of facilitating the application in relation to the State of 
Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal of any  law made before the appointed day, the appropriate Government may, 
before the expiration of two years from that day, by order, make such adaptations and modifications of 
the law, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as may be necessary or expedient, and  thereupon every 
such law shall have effect subject to the adaptations and modifications so made until altered, repealed or 
amended by a competent Legislature or other competent authority.  
Explanation .—In this section, the expression “appropriate Government ” means as respects any law 
relating to a matter enumerated in the Union List, the Central Government, and as respects any other law 
in its application to a State, the State Government.  
88. Power to construe laws .—Notwithstanding that no provisio n or insufficient provision has been 
made under section 87 for the adaptation of a law made before the appointed day, any court, tribunal or 
authority, required or empowered to enforce such law may, for the purpose of facilitating its application 
in relati on to the State of Uttar Pradesh or Uttaranchal, construe the law in such manner, without affecting 
the substance, as may be necessary or proper in regard to the matter before the court, tribunal or authority.  
89. Power to name authorities, etc., for exerc ising statutory functions .—The Government of the 
State of Uttaranchal, as respects the transferred territory may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify the authority, officer or person who, on or after the appointed day, shall be competent to ex ercise 
such functions exercisable under any law in force on that day as may be mentioned in that notification and 
such law shall have effect accordingly.  
90. Legal proceedings .—Where, immediately before the appointed day, the existing State of Uttar 
Pradesh is a party to any legal proceedings with respect to any property, rights or liabilities subject to 
apportionment between the States of Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal under this Act, the State of Uttar 
Pradesh or Uttaranchal which succeeds to, or acq uires a share in, that property or those rights or liabilities 
by virtue of any provision of this Act shall be deemed to be substituted for the exi sting State of Uttar 
Pradesh or added as a party to those proceedings, and the procee dings may continue accor dingly.  
91. Transfer of pending proceedings .—(1) Every proceedi ng pending immediately before the  
appointed day before a court (other than High Court), tribunal, authority or officer in any area which on 
that day falls within the State of Uttar Pradesh shall, if it is a proceeding relating exclusively to the 28 
 territory, which as from that day are the t erritories of Uttaranchal State, stand transferred to the 
corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer of that State.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any proceeding should stand transferred under sub -section ( 1) 
it shall be referred to the High Court at Allahabad and the decision of that High Court shall be final.  
(3) In this section — 
(a) “proceeding ” includes any suit, case or appeal; and  
(b) “corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer ” in the State of Uttaranchal means — 
(i) the  court, tribunal, authority or officer in which, or before whom, the proceeding would 
have laid if it had been instit uted after the appointed day; or 
(ii) in case of doubt, such court, tribunal, authority, or officer in that State, as may be 
determined aft er the appointed day by the Government of that State or the Central Government, 
as the case may be, or before the appointed day by the Government of the existing State of Uttar 
Pradesh to be the corresponding court, tribunal, authority or officer.  
92. Right of pleaders to practise in certain cases .—Any person who, immediately before the 
appointed day, is enrolled as a pleader entitled to practise in any subordinate courts in the existing State of 
Uttar Pradesh shall, for a period of one year from that d ay, continue to be entitled to practise in those 
courts, notwithstanding that the whole or any part of the territories within the jurisdiction of those courts 
has been transferred to the State of Uttaranchal.  
93. Effect of provisions of the Act inconsisten t with other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall 
have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.  
94. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the P resident may, by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions which appears to 
him to be necessary or expedient for the purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of three years fr om the 
appointed day.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament.  
  29 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
(See section 8)  
(i) Of the eleven sitting members whose term of office will expire in 1[25th November, 2002 ], namely,  
Shri Narendra Mohan,  Shri Raj Nath Singh,  Shri Chaudhary Chunni Lal,  Shri Devi Prasad Singh,   
Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani,  Shri Amar Singh,  Shri Mohammad Azam Khan,  Shri R.N. Arya,  Shri Gandhi 
Azad,  Shri 1[Akhilesh Das ] and Shri 1[Balwant Singh Ramu walia ], Shri Manohar Kant Dhyani  shall be 
deemed to have been elected to fill one seat out of the three seats allocated in the Council of States to the 
State of Uttaranchal and the  other  ten sitting members  shall be deemed to have been elected to fill ten of 
the seats allotted to the State of Uttar Pradesh.  
(ii) Of the twelve sitting members whose term of office will expire in 1[4th July, 2004, namely,   
Shri Arun  Shourie,  Shri 1[Triloki Nath], Shri B.P. Singhal,  Shri Dharam Pal Yadav,  Shri Deena Nath 
Mishra,  Shri Ram Gopal Yadav,  Shri Kanshi Ram,  Shri Sangh Priya Gautam,  Shri Munavvar Hasan,  Shri 
1[Khan G ufaran Zahidi ], Shri Syed Akhter Hasan Rizvi,  Shri Rama  Shanker Kaushik, such one as the 
Chairman of the Council of States may determine by  drawing lot  shall be deemed  to have been elected to 
fill one of the seats allotted to the State of Uttaranchal and the  other  eleven sitting members  shall be 
deemed to have been elected to fill eleven of the seats allotted to the State of Uttar Pradesh.  
(iii) Of the eleven sitting Me mbers representing the State of Uttar Pradesh whose term of office will 
expire on 2nd April, 2006, such one as the Chairman of the Council of States may determine by  drawing 
lot shall be deemed to have been elected to fill one of the seats allotted to the State of Uttaranchal.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 674(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  30 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
(See section 10)  
 
AMENDMENTS TO THE DELIMITATION OF PARLIAMENTARY AND ASSEMBLY  CONSTITUENCIES  
ORDER , 1976  
In the Delimitation of Parliamentary and Asse mbly Constituency Order, 1976, — 
1. In Schedule XXII, — 
(i) in PART A —Parliamentary Constituencies, — 
(a) serial numbers 1, 2, 3, 4 and 85 and entries relating thereto shall be omitted;  
(b) in serial number 12 at the end, the following figures and w ord shall be inserted, namely: — 
“56—Baheri”; 
(c) in serial number 82 a t the end, the following figures and w ord shall be inserted, namely: — 
“416—Deoband”; 
(d) in serial number 84 at the end, the following figures, brackets and lett ers shall be inserted, 
namely: — 
“415—Nagal (SC) ”; 
(ii) in PART B --Assembly Constituencies, serial numbers 1 to 16 (both inclusive) and 420 to 425 
(both inclusive) and the entries relating thereto shall be omitted.  
2. After Schedule XXII, the follow ing shall be inserted, namely: — 
“SCHEDULE XXIIA  
UTTARANCHAL  
PART A.—Parliamentary Constituencies  
 
Serial No.,  Name and extent in terms of assembly Constituencies  
1. Tehri  Garhwal. —1-Uttar Kashi (SC), 2 -Tehri, 3 -Deoprayag, 4 -Mussoorie and 5 -Chakrata (ST).  
2. Garhwal. —6-Lansdowne, 7 -Pauri, 8 -Karanprayag, 9 -Badri -Kedar and 10 -Dehra Dun.  
3. Almora. —11-Didihat, 12 -Pithoragarh, 13 -Almora, 14 -Bageshwar (SC) and 15 -Ranikhet.  
4. Naini Tal. —16-Naini Tal, 17 -Khatima (SC), 18 -Haldwani and 19 -Kashipur.  
5. Hardwar (SC). —20-Roorkee, 21 -Lhaksar  and 22 -Hardwar. ”. 
PART B.—Assembly Constituency  
 
Serial No. ,  Name and extent of Constituency  
The det ailed particulars regarding the name and extent of the Constituencies in each of the 
districts in the State of Uttaranchal shall be as delimi ted by the Election Commission. ”. 
  31 
 THE THIRD SCHEDULE  
(See section 19)  
MODIFICATION IN THE DELIMITATION OF COUNCIL  CONSTITUENCIES   
(UTTAR  PRADESH ) ORDER, 1951  
For the table appended to the Delimitation of Council Constituenci es (Uttar Pradesh) Order, 
1951, the following table shall be substituted, namely: — 
“TABLE 
 Name of Constituency  Extent of Constituency  Number of 
Seats  
 1 2 3 
  Graduates Constituencies   
1.  Bareilly -Moradaba d Division 
Graduates  Bareilly, Pilibhit, Shahjahanpur, 1[Budaun ], 
Rampur, Moradabad, Jyotibaphule Nagar and 
Bijnor  districts.  1 
2.  Lucknow Division Graduates  Lucknow, Hardoi, Kheri, Sitapur, Barabanki, 
Rae Bareli and Pratapgarh districts.  1 
3.  Gorakhpur -Faizaba d Division 
Graduates  Bahraich, Shravasti, Gonda, Balrampur, Basti, 
Siddharthnagar, Santkabir  Nagar, Gorakhpur, 
Maharajganj, Deoria, Kushinagar, Azamgarh, 
Mau, Sultanpur, Faizabad and Ambedkarnagar 
districts.  1 
4.  Varanasi Division Graduates  Ballia, 1[Ghazipur ], Jaunpur, Varanasi, 
Chandauli, Sant Ravidas Nagar, Mirzapur and 
Sonbhadra  districts.  1 
5.  Allahabad -Jhansi Division 
Graduates  Allahabad, Kausha mbi, Fatehpur, Banda, 
Chitrako t, Hamirpur, Mahoba, Jalaun, Jhansi 
and Lalitpur districts.  1 
6.  Kanpur Graduates  Kanpur Nagar and Kanpur Dehat and Unnao 
Districts.  1 
7.  Agra Division Graduates  Agra, Firozabad, Mathura, Aligarh, Hathras, 
Etah, Mainpuri, Etawah, Kannauj, Auraiya and 
Farrukhabad districts.  1 
8. 
 Meerut Division Graduates  Bulandshahar, Ghaziabad, Gautambuddhnagar, 
Meerut 1[Baghpat], Muzaffarnagar  and 
Saharanpur districts.  1 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 674(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  32 
  
 1 2 3 
  Teachers’ Constituencies   
1. Bareilly -Mordabad Division 
Teachers  Bareilly, Pilibhit, Shahjahanpur, 1[Budaun ], 
Rampur, Mordabad, Jyotibaphule Nagar, and 
Bijnor districts.  1 
2. Lucknow Division Teachers  Lucknow, Hardoi, Kheri, Sitapur, Barabanki, 
Rae Bareli and Pratapgarh districts.  1 
3. Gorakhpur -Faizabad Division 
Teachers  Bahraich, Shravasti, Gonda, Balrampur, Basti, 
Siddarthnagar, Santkabir Nagar, Gorakhpur, 
Maharajganj, Deoria, Kushinagar, Azamgarh , 
Mau, Sultanpur, Faizabad and Ambedkarnagar 
districts.  1 
4. Varanasi Division Teachers  Ballia, 1[Ghazipur ], Jaunpur, Varanasi, 
Chandauli, Sant Ravidas  Nagar, Mirzapur and 
Sonbhadra d istricts.  1 
5. Allahabad -Jhansi Division Teachers  
 Allahabad, Kaushambi , Fathepur, Banda, 
Chitrakoot, Hamirpur, Mahoba, Jalaun , Jhansi 
and Lalitpur districts.  1 
6. Kanpur Teachers  Kanpur Na gar and Kanpur Dehat and Unnao 
districts.  1 
7. Agra Division Teachers  Agra, Firozabad, Mathura, Aligarh, Hathras, 
Etah, Mainpuri, Etawah , Kannauj, Auraiya and 
Farrukhabad districts.  1 
8. Meerut Division Teachers  Bulandshahar, Ghaziabad, Gautambudd hnagar, 
1[Baghpat], Meerut, Muzaffarnagar and 
Saharanpur districts.  1 
 
Local Authorities' Constituencies  
1.  Mordabad -Bijnor Local 
Authorities  Mordabad, Jyotibaphule Nagar, and Bijnor districts.  1 
2.  Rampur -Bareilly Local 
Authorities  Rampur and Bareilly districts.  1 
3.  1[Budaun ] Local 
Authorities  1[Budaun ] district.  1 
4.  Pilibhit  Shahjahanpur 
Local Authorities  Pilibhit and Shahjahanpur districts.  1 
5.  Hardoi Local Authorities  Hardoi district.  1 
6.  Kheri Local Authorities  Kheri district.  1 
7.  Sitapur Local Authorities  Sitapur district.  1 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No.G.S.R. 674(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  33 
  
 1 2 3 
 8. Lucknow -Unnao Local 
Authorities  Lucknow and Unnao districts.  1  
9.  Rae Bareli Local 
Authorities  Rae Bareli district.  1  
10.  Pratapgarh Local 
Authorities  Pratapgarh district.  1  
11.  Sultanpur Local 
Authorities  Sultanpur district  1  
12.  Barabanki Local 
Authorities  Barabanki district.  1  
13.  Bahraich  Local Authorities  Bahraich and Shravasti districts.  1  
14.  Gonda Local Authorities  1[Gonda and Balrampur district s].  1  
15.  Faizabad Local authorities  Faizabad and Ambe dkarnagar districts.  1  
16.  Basti -Siddharth Nagar 
Local Authorities  Basti , San tkabir Nagar and Siddharthnagar  
districts.  1  
17.  Gorakhpur -Mahrajg anj 
Local Authorities   Gorakhpur and Mahrajganj districts.  1  
18.  Deoria Local Authorities  Deoria and Kushinagar districts.  1  
19.  Azamgarh -Mau Local 
Authorities  Azamgarh  and Mau districts.  1  
20.  Ballia Local Authorities  Ballia district.  1  
21.  Ghazipur Local Authorities  Ghazipur district.  1  
22.  Jaunpur Local Authorities  Jaunpur district.  1  
23.  Varanasi Local Authorities  Varanasi, Chandauli and Sant Ravidasnagar districts.  1  
24.  Mirzapur -Sonbhadra Local 
Authorities  Mirzapur and Sonbhadra districts.  1  
25.  Allahabad Local 
Authorities  Allahabad and Kaushambi districts.  1  
26.  Banda -Hamirpur Local 
Authorities  Banda, Chitrakoot, Hamirpur and Mahoba districts.  1  
27.  Jhansi -Jalaun -Lulitpur 
Local Authorities  Jalaun, Jhansi and Lalitpur districts.  1  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 674(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  34 
  1 2 3 
28.  Kanpur -Fatehpur Local 
Authorities  Kanpur Nagar and Kanpur Dehat and  
Fatehpur districts.  1  
29.  Etawah -Farrukhabad  Local 
Authorities  Etawah, Farrukhabad, Kannauj and Auraiya districts.  1  
30.  Agra -Firozabad Local 
Authorities  Agra and Firozabad districts.  1  
31.  Mathura -Etah-Mainpuri 
Local Authorities  Mathura, Etah and Mainpuri districts.  2  
32.  Aligarh Local Authorities  Aligarh and Hathras districts.  1  
33.  Bulandshahar Local 
Authorities  Bulandshahar and Gautambuddhnagar districts.  1  
34.  Meerut -Ghaziabad Local 
Authorities  Meerut, Bagpat and Ghaziabad districts.  1  
35.  Muzaffarnagar -Saharanpur 
Local Authorities  Muzaffarnagar and Saharanpur districts.  1”.  
  35 
 THE FOURTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 20)  
List of members of the Legislative Council of Uttar Pradesh who  shall cease to be such members on 
the appointed day and deemed to be the members of the Pro visional Legislative Assembly: — 
1. Shri Nitya Nand Swami.  
2. Dr. (Smt.) Indira Hridayesh.  
3. Shri Narayan Singh Rana.  
4. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat.  
1[5. Shri Prakash Pant ]. 
2*     *     *     *    *  
7. Smt. Nirupama Gaur.  
1[8. Shri Bhagat Singh  Koshy ari]. 
1[9. Shri Islam Singh ].  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No.G.S.R. 674(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  
2. Entry 6 omitted by notification No.G.S.R. 840(E) (w.e.f. 27 -10- 2000).  36 
 THE FIFTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 24)  
AMENDMENT OF THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  CASTES ) ORDER , 1950  
In the Constitution (Scheduled Castes) Order, 1950 ,— 
(a) in paragr aph 2, for the figures “XXIII” , the figures “XXIV” shall be substituted;  
(b) in the Schedule, after Part XXIII, the follow ing shall be inserted, namely: — 
“PART XXIV —Uttaranchal  
1. Agariya  
2. Badhik  
3. Badi  
4. Baheliya  
5. Baiga  
6. Baiswar  
7. Bajaniya  
8. Bajgi  
1[9. Bal ahar] 
10. Balai  
11. Balmiki  
12. Bangali  
13. Banmanus  
14. Bansphor  
15. Barwar  
16. Basor  
17. Bawariya  
18. Beldar  
19. Beriya  
20. Bhantu  
21. Bhuiya  
22. Bhuyiar  
23. Boria  
24. Chamar, Dhusia, Jhusia, Jatava  
25. Chero  
26. Dabgar  
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 674(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  37 
 27. Dha ngar 
28. Dhanuk  
29. Dharkar  
30. Dhobi  
31. Dom  
32. Domar  
33. Dusadh  
1[34. G harami] 
1[35. G hasiya] 
36. Gond  
1[37. G ual] 
38. Habura  
39. Hari  
40. Hela  
41. Kalabaz  
42. Kanjar  
43. Kapariya  
44. Karwal  
1[45. Kha iraha] 
1[46. Kharwar (excluding Benbansi )] 
47. Khatik  
1[48. Kh orot] 
49. Kol  
50. Kori  
51. Korwa  
52. Lalbegi  
53. Majhwar  
54. Mazhabi  
55. Musahar  
56. Nat  
57. Pankha  
58. Parahiya  
59. Pasi, Tarmali  
60. Patari  
1[61. Saharya ] 
                                                           
1. Subs. by notification No. G.S.R. 674(E) (w.e.f. 19 -8-2003).  38 
 62. Sanaurhiya  
63. Sansiya  
64. Shilpkar  
65. Turaiha. ”.  39 
 THE SIXTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 25)  
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION  (SCHEDULED  TRIBES ) ORDER , 1950  
In the Constitution (S cheduled Tribes) Order, 1950, — 
(1) in paragraph 2, for the figures “XX”, the figures “XXI” shall be substituted;  
(2) in the Schedule, after Part XX, the followi ng Part shall be inserted, namely: — 
“PART XXI. —Uttaranchal  
1. Bhotia.  
2. Buksa.  
3. Jannsari.  
4. Raji.  
5. Tharu.”.  
  40 
 THE SEVENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 47)  
LIST OF FUNDS  
1. Depreciation Reserve Fund --Irrigation.  
2. Depreciation Reserve Fund --Government Press.  
3. Depreciation Reserve Fund --Precision Instrument Factory.  
4. Rural Development Fund.  
5. Famine Relief Fund.  
6. Sugar Research and Labour Housing Management Fund.  
7. Zamindari Abolition Fund.  
8. U. P. Road Fund.  
9. Hospital Fund.  
10. Teachers Gratu ity Fund.  
11. State Bridge Fund.  
12. General Insurance Fund.  
13. Nazul Fund.  
14. State Co -operative Development Fund.  
15. Agriculture Credit Relief and Security Fund.  
16. Farmer Relief Fund.  
17. Depreciation Reserve Fund -Power.  
18. Contingency Reserve Fund -Power.  
19. Sugar Factory Rehabilitation, Modernisation and Establishment Fund.  
20. Cane Research and Development Fund.  
21. Consolidated Reduction on Debt Fund for State Development Loan and Zamindari Abolition and 
Compensation Bond.  
22. Police House B uilding Fund.  
23. Fourth Class House Building Fund.  
24. Government Servant Housing Fund.  
25. Balanced Area Development Fund.  
26. U.P. Youth Welfare Fund.  
27. U.P. Student Welfare Fund.  
28. Language Fund.  
29. Police Welfare Fund.  
30. Acharya Narendra Deo F und. 
31. Ca lamity Relief Fund.   41 
 32. Purvanchal Development Fund.  
33. Bundelkhand Development Fund.  
34. Loan Assistance Fund for payment of Cane Prices.  
35. Relief for Productivity Research and Modernisation of Sick Industrial Units.  
36. Secretariat Fund.  
37. Vidhayak Nidhi.  
  42 
 THE EIGHTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 54)  
APPORTIONMENT OF LIAB ILITY IN RESPECT OF PENSIONS  
1. Subject to the adjustments mentioned in paragraph 3, each of the successor States  shall, in respect 
of pensions granted before the appointed da y by the existing State of Uttar Pradesh, pay the pensions  
drawn in its treasuries.  
2. Subject to the said adjustments, the liability in respect of pensions of officers serving in connection 
with the affairs of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh who retir e or proceed on leave preparatory to 
retirement before the appointed day, but whose claims for pensions are outstanding immediately before 
that day,  shall be the liability of the State of Uttar Pradesh.  
3. There  shall be computed, in respect of the period commencing on the appointed day and ending on 
such date after the appointed day, as may be fixed by the Central Government and in respect of each  
subsequent financial year, the total payments made in all the successor States in respect of pensions 
referred  to in paragraphs 1 and 2. The total representing the liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh 
in respect of pensions  shall be apportioned between the successor States in the population ratio and any 
successor State paying the State paying more tha n its due  share shall be reimbursed the excess amount by 
the successor State or State paying less.  
4. The liability of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh in respect of pensions granted before the 
appointed day and  drawn in any area outside the territories  of the existing State  shall be the liability of the 
State of Uttar Pradesh  subject to adjustments to be made in accordance with paragraph 3 as if such 
pensions had been  drawn in any treasury in the State of Uttar Pradesh under paragraph 1.  
5. (1) The liab ility in respect of the pension of any officer serving immediately before the appointed 
day in connection with the affairs of the existing State of Uttar Pradesh and retiring on or after that day,  
shall be that of the successor State granting him the pensi on; but the portion of the pension attributable to 
the service of any such officer before the appointed day in connection with the affairs of the existing State 
of Uttar Pradesh  shall be allocated between the successor States in the population ratio, and t he 
Government granting the pension  shall be entitled to receive from each of the  other  successor States its  
share of this liability.  
(2) If any such officer was serving after the appointed day in connection with the affairs of more than 
one successor State  other  than the one granting the pension  shall reimburse to the Government by which 
the pension is granted an amount which bears to the portion of the pension attributable to his service after 
the appointed day the same ratio as the period of his qualifyin g service after the appointed day under the 
reimbursing State bears to the total qualifying service of such officer after the appointed day reckoned for 
the purposes of pension.  
6. Any reference in this Schedule to a pension  shall be construed as including  a reference to the 
commuted value of the pension.  
  43 
 THE NINTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 66) 
LIST OF GOVERNMENT  COMPANIES  
S. 
No.  Name of Government Company  Address  
1.  Uttar Pradesh Bhumi Sudhar Nigam Ltd.  Bhumitra Bhawan, 19 -B,Vibhuti Khand , Gomati 
Nagar, Lucknow.  
2.  Uttar Pradesh Agro Industrial  Corporation  
Ltd.  22, Vidhan Sabha Marg, Lucknow.  
3.  Uttar Pradesh Alpasankhyak  Vittiya Nigam 
Ltd.  7th Floor, Jawahar Bhawan,  Lucknow.  
4.  Uttar Pradesh Electronic  Corporation Ltd.  Nav Chetna Kendra, Ashok Marg,  Lucknow.  
5.  Uttar Pradesh Jal Vidyut Nigam  Ltd.  12th Floor, Vikas Deep, Station  Road, Lucknow.  
6.  Uttar Pradesh Rajya Vidyut  Utpadan  
Nigam Ltd.  4-B, Gokhle Marg, Lucknow.  
7.  Uttar Pradesh Leather  Development and 
Marketing Corporation Ltd.  16/58 - A, Sadar Bhati Road, Agra.  
8.  Uttar Pradesh Export Corporation  Ltd.  2, Rana Pratap Marg, Lucknow.  
9.  Uttar Pradesh State Food and  Essential 
Commodities  Corporation Ltd.  17, Gokhle Marg, Lucknow.  
10.  Uttar Pradesh Small Industries  Corporation 
Ltd.  110, Industrial Estate, Fazalganj,  Kanpur.  
11.  Uttar Pradesh State Handloom  Corporation 
Ltd. Hathkargha Bhawan, G.T. Road,  Kanpur.  
12.  Uttar Pradesh Police Awas Nigam  Ltd.  A-81, Vijay Khand -II, Gomati  Nagar, Lucknow.  
13.  Provincial Industrial Investment  
Corporation of Uttar Pradesh  
(PICUP) Ltd.  PICUP Bhawan, Gomati Nagar,  Lucknow.  
14.  The Indian Turpentine and Rosin  Company 
Ltd.  Culucttarbuckganj, Bareilly.  
15.  Uttar Pradesh State Cement  Corporation Ltd.  Churk, Sonbhadra.  
16.  Uttar Pradesh State Mineral  Development 
Corporation Ltd.  Kapurthal Complex, Aliganj,  Lucknow.  
17.  Uttar Pradesh State Taxtile  Corporation Ltd.  Vastra Bhawan, Sharda Nagar,  Kanpur.  
18.  Uttar Pradesh State Industrial  Development 
Corporation Ltd.  A- 1/4, Lakhanpur, P.O. Box No.1150, Kanpur.  44 
  
S. 
No.  
Name of Government Company   
Address  
19.  Uttar Pradesh Project and Tubewells 
Corporation Ltd.  Left Bank, Gomati Bairaj, Gomati  Nagar, 
Lucknow.  
20.  Uttar Pradesh Mahila Kalyan  Nigam Ltd.  B-2/5, Vikas Khand, Gomati  Nagar, Lucknow.  
21.  Uttar Pradesh Matsya Vikas  Nigam Ltd.  4/13-14, Vivek Khand, Gomati  Nagar, 
Lucknow.  
22.  Uttar Pradesh Panchayati Raj Vitta Nigam  
Ltd.  C-232, Niralanagar, Lucknow .  
23.  Uttar Pradesh Pashudhan Udyog  Nigam Ltd.  Central Dairy Farm, Aligarh.  
24.  Uttar Pradesh Pichhara Varg Vitta   
Evam Vikas Nigam Ltd.  PCF Building, 4th Floor, Station Road, 
Lucknow.  
25.  Uttar Pradesh Poultry and Livestock   
Specialities Ltd.  Campus Animal Husbandry, Badshahbagh, 
Lucknow.  
26.  Uttar Pradesh Development  Systems 
Corporation Ltd.  9, Sarojini Naidu Marg, Lucknow.  
27.  Uttar Pradesh State Bridge Corporation Ltd.  16, Madan Mohan Malviya Marg, Lucknow.  
28.  Uttar Pradesh Rajkiya Nirman Nigam Ltd.  Vishveshwaraiya Bhawan, Gomati Nagar, 
Lucknow.  
29.  Uttar Pradesh Anusuchit  Jati/Janjati Vikas 
Nigam Ltd.  B-912, Sector C. Mahanagar,  Lucknow.  
30.  Uttar Pradesh Samaj Kalyan  Nirman Nigam 
Ltd.  Lekhraj Market, Indira Nagar,  Lucknow.  
31.  Uttar Pradesh Bhootpurva Sainik  Kalyan 
Nigam Ltd.  54-X, Jopli ng Road, Lucknow.  
32.  Uttar Pradesh (Madhya) Ganna  Beej Vikas 
Nigam Ltd.  New Berry Road, Near Deputy  Cane 
Commissioner's Office,  Lucknow.  
33.  Uttar Pradesh (Paschim) Gann a Beej Vikas 
Nigam Ltd.  Circular Road, Near Ganna Kisan  Sansthan, 
Muzaffarnagar.  
34.  Uttar Pradesh (Poorva) Ganna  Beej Vikas 
Nigam Ltd.  HIG-VI, Acharya Ram Chandra  Shukla Nagar, 
Deoria.  
35.  Uttar Pradesh (Rohilkhand Terai)  Ganna Beej 
Vikas  Nigam Ltd.  26-27, B.D.A. Colony, Shahamatganj,  Barielly.  
36.  Uttar Pradesh State Sugar  Corporation Ltd.  Vipin Khand, Near Taj Hotel,  Gomati Nagar, 
Lucknow.  
37.  Uttar Pradesh Tourism  Corporation Ltd.  Chitrahar -3, Nawal Kishore Road,  Lucknow.  
 45 
 S. 
No Name of Government Company  Address  
38.  Garhwal Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd.  74, Rajpur Road, Dehradun.  
39.  Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam  Ltd.  Oak Park House, Malli Tal,  Nainital.  
40.  Uttar Pradesh Hill Electronics   
Corporation Ltd.  B-2/140,  Vishal Khand Gomati  
Nagar, Lucknow.  
41.  Uttar Pradesh Waqf Vikas Nigam  Ltd.  First Floor, 118, Jawahar Bhawan,  Lucknow.  
42.  Uttar Pradesh Seed and Tarai  Development 
Corporation Ltd.  Haldi, Pantnagar, Udhamsinghnagar.  
43.  Kumaon Anusuchit Janjati Vikas  Nigam Ltd.  Raj Mahal Hotel Campus, Malli Tal,  Nainital.  
44.  Garhwal Anusuchit Janjati Vikas  Nigam Ltd.  74, Rajpur Road, Dehradun.  
  46 
 THE TENTH SCHEDULE  
(See section 71)  
CONTINUANCE OF FACILI TIES IN CERTAIN STATE  INSTITUTIONS  
List of Training Institutions/Centres  
1. Uttar Pradesh Academy of Administration, Nainital  
2. Uttar Pradesh State Observatory, Nainital  
3. Institute of Management Development Uttar Pradesh, Lucknow  
4. Judicial Training and Research Institute, Lucknow  
5. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar  Police Academy, Moradabad  
6. Police Training College -II, Moradabad  
7. Police Training College -Ill, Gorakhpur  
8. Armed Training Centre, Sitapur  
9. Police Training College, Moradabad  
10. Police Training College, Gorakhpur  
11. Recruit Training Centre, Chunar , Mirzapur  
12. Police Training College, Unnao  
13. Sampurnanand Prison Training Institute, Lucknow  
14. Secretariat Training and Management Institute, Lucknow  
15. Raja Todarmal Survey and Land Records Institute, Hardoi  
16. Land Consolidation Training College, Ayodhya, Faizabad  
17. State Engineers' Training Institute, Kalagarh  
18. U. P. Water and Land Management Institute, Lucknow  
19. Institute of Financial Management Training and Research, Lucknow  
20. Cooperative and Pan chayat Audit Training Centre, Ayodhya, Faizabad  
21. Local Funds Accounts and Audit Training Institute, Allahabad  
22. Trade Tax Officers' Training Institute, Lucknow  
23. State Electricity Board Training Institute, Dehradun  
24. U.P. State Electricity Board S taff College, Dehradun  
25. Thermal Power Training Institute, UPSEB, Obra, Sonbhadra  
26. Central Civil Defence Training Institute, Lucknow  
27. Deen Dayal Upadhyay State Institute of Rural Development, Bakshi Ka Talab, Lucknow  
28. Minor Irrigation Management  and Water Management Training Institute, Bakshi Ka Talab, 
Lucknow  
29. Smt, Indira Gandhi Cooperative Institute, Lucknow  
30. Cooperative Training College, Dehradun  47 
 31. Agriculture Cooperative Staff Training Institute, Lucknow  
32. Institute of Cooperative, Corporate Management Research and Training, Indira Nagar, Lucknow  
33. U. P. Cane Development Institute, Lucknow  
34. Uttar Pradesh State Transport Corporation Training Institute, Kanpur  
35. Uttar Pradesh State Education Research and Training Board, Allahaba d 
36. Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Research and Training Institute, Lucknow  
37. Hotel Management and Catering Institute, Dehradun  
38. Research, Development and Training Institute, Kanpur  
39. Uttar Pradesh Excise Training Institute, Rae Bareili  
40. Central Workers Education Board, Kanpur  
41. State Institut e of Health and Family Welfare, Indira Nagar, Lucknow  
42. Office of the Inspector of Officers, U.P. Allahabad  
43. State Planning Institute, Training Division, Kalakankar House, Old Hyderabad,  Luckn ow 
44. Institute of Entrepreneurship Development, Lucknow  
45. Hotel Management and Catering Institute, Almora  
46. Moti Lal Nehru Regional Engineering College, Allahabad  
47. State Architecture College, Lucknow  
48. Central Textile Institute, Kanpur  
49. Institute of Engineering and Rural Technology, Allahabad  
50. Northern Regional Institute of Printing Technology, Allahabad  
51. Khadi and Gramodyog Board, 8, Tilak Marg, Lucknow  
52. Dr. Ambedkar Institute of Technology for Handicapped, Kanpur  
53. Government  Leather Institute, Agra  
54. Government Leather Institute, Kanpur  
55. Joint Entrance Examination Council, Lucknow  
1[56. King George Medical Colleges, Lucknow.  
57. Ganesh Shankar Vidyarthi Medical College, Kanpur.  
58. Motilal  Nehru Medical College, Allahabad.  
59. Rani Laxmibai Medical College, Jhansi.  
60. Baba Raghav Das Medical College, Gorakpur.  
61. Sarojini Naidu Medical College, Agra.  
62. Lala Lajpat Rai Memorial Medical College, Meerut.  
63. Ayurvedic College, Lucknow.  
                                                           
1. Added by notification No. S.o. 153(E) dated 20 -2-2001 (w.e.f. 20 -2-2001).  48 
 64. Rishikul Ayurvedic College, Haridwar.  
65. Lalithari Ayurvedic College, Pilibhit.  
66. Gurukul Kangadi Ayurvedic College, Haridwar.  
67. Bundelkhand Ayurvedic College, Jhansi.  
68. Ayurvedic College, Atarra, Banda.  
69. Sahu Ramnarayan Murti Manohar Ayurvedic  College, Bareilly.  
70. Swami Kalyandev Ayurvedic College, Rampur, Muzaffarnagar.  
71. Lal Bahadur Shastri Ayurvedic College, Handia, Allahabad.  
72. Rajkiya Ayurvedic College, Varanasi.  
73. Unani Medical College, Allahabad.  
74. Takmil Uttib College, Lucknow . 
75. National Homeopathic College, Lucknow.  
76. Lal Bahadur Shastri Homeopathic College, Allahabad.  
77. Kanpur Homeopathic College, Kanpur.  
78. Dr. V.  K. Homeopathic College, Faizabad.  
79. Mohan Homeopathic College, Lucknow.  
80. Shri Durgaji Homeopathic C ollege, Chandeshwar, Azamgarh.  
81. T.D. Homeopathic College, Jaunpur.  
      82. Ghazipur Homeopathic College, Ghazipur.  
83. Rajkiya Homeopathic Medical College, Nagina, Bijnor.  
84. Rajkiya K.G.K Homeopathic Medical College, Moradabad.  
85. Uttar Pradesh State Seed Certification Agency, Lucknow.  
86. State Institute of management of Agr iculture, Rehmankhera, Lucknow.]  
1[87. Lekhpal Prashikshan Sansthan, Sheesh Mahal, Lucknow.]  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
1. Added by notification No. S.O. 1186(E), dated 29 -11-2001 (w.e.f. 29 -11-2001).   
