--------------------------The Advocates Fund Act, 2001--------------------------
1 
 THE ADVOCATES ’ WELFARE FUND ACT, 2001  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF  ADVOCATES’  WELFARE  FUND  
3. Advocates’ Welfare Fund.  
 
CHAPTER III  
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUSTEE COMMITTEE  
4. Establishment of Trustee Committee.  
5. Disqualifications and removal of Chairperson of Member of Trustee Committee.  
6. Resignation by nominated Chairperson and Members of Trustee Committee and fi lling up of 
casual vacancy.  
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Trustee Committee.  
8. Meetings of Trustee Committee.  
9. Travelling daily allowances to nominated Chairperson and Members of Trustee Committee.  
10. Vesting and application of Fund.  
11. Functions of Trustee Committee.  
12. Borrowi ng and investment.  
13. Accounts and audit.  
14. Powers and duties of Secretary.  
15. Payment of certain monies to Fund by State Bar Council.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
RECOGNITION OF ANY ASSOCIATION OF ADVOCATES  
16. Recognition by a State Bar Council  of any association of advocates.  
17. Dutie s of State Bar Associations and State Advocates’ Associations.  
 
CHAPTER V  
MEMBERSHIP AND PAYMENT OUT OF ADVOCATES’ WELFARE FUND 
18. Membership in Fund.  
19. Ex gratia grant to a member of Fund.  
20. Review.  
21. Payment of amount on cessation of practice.  
22. Restriction on alienation, attachment, etc., of interest of member in Fund.  
23. Exemption from income -tax. 
24. Group Life Insurance for members of Fund and other benefits.  
25. Appeal against decision or order of Trustee Committee.  
 2 
 CHAPTER VI  
PRINTING, DISTRIBUTION AND CANCELLATION OF STAMPS  
SECTIONS  
26. Printing and distribution of Advocates’  Welfare Fund Stamps by State Bar Council . 
27. Vakalatnama to bear stamps.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Certain persons not to be eligible for benefits.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts.  
31. Power to summon witnesses and take evidence.  
32. Power to amend Schedules I and II.  
33. Power of appropriate Government to issue directions.  
34. Power of appropriate Government to supersede Trustee Committee.  
35. Power of Central Government t o make rules.  
36. Power of State Government to make rules.  
37. Rules and notifications to be laid before Parliament or State Legislature.  
38. Saving.  
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.   3 
 THE ADVOCATES ’ WELFARE FUND ACT, 2001  
ACT NO. 45 OF 2001  
[14th, September, 2001.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of a welfare fund for the benefit of advocates and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short t itle, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Adv ocates’ Welfare 
Fund Act, 2001.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint; 
and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and for different States, and any 
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed in rela tion to any 
State as a reference to the coming into force o f that provision in that State.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “advocate” means an advocate whose name has been entered in the State roll prepared and 
maintained by a State Bar Council under section 17 of the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961) and who 
is a member of a State Bar Association or State Advocat es’ Asso ciation;  
(b) “appropriate Government” means, — 
(i) in the case of advocates admitted on the roll of a Bar Council of  a State, the State 
Government;  
(ii) in the case of advocates admitted on the roll of a Bar Council of a Union ter ritory, the 
Central Government;  
(c) “cessation of practice” means removal of the name of an advocate from the State roll under 
section 26A of the Ad vocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961);  
(d) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Trustee Commit tee referred to in clause ( a) of 
sub-section ( 3) of section 4;  
(e) “chartered accountant” means a chartered accountant as defined in clause ( b) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) and who has 
obtained a certificate of practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(f) “dependants” means the spouse, parents or minor ch ildren of a member o f the Fund;  
(g) “Fund” means the Advocates’ Welfare Fund constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section  3; 
(h) “insurer” shall have the meaning assigned  to it in clause ( 9) of section 2 of the I nsurance Act, 
1938 (4 of 1938);  
(i) “member of the Fund” means an advocate admitted to the benefits of the Fund and who 
continues to be a member thereof un der th e provisions of this Act;  
(j) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette of the appropriate 
Government and the expression “notified” shall be construed accordingly;  
(k) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules ma de under this Act;  
(l) “Schedule ” means a Schedule to this Act;  
(m) “scheduled bank” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( e) of section 2 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
                                                           
1. 1st  November, 2001  (whole of India except certain States) , vide notification No. S.O. 946(E), dated 26th September, 2001, see 
Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 4 
 (n) “stamp” means the Advocates’ Welfare Fund Stamp printed an d distributed under                
section 26;  
(o) “State” means a State specified in the First Schedule to the Constitution and s hall include a 
Union territory;  
(p) “State Advocates’ Association” means an association of advocates in a State recognised by 
the Bar Council of that State under section 16;  
(q) “State Bar Association” means an association of  advocates recognised by the Bar Council of 
that State under section 16;  
(r) “State Bar Council” means a Bar Council referred to in section 3 of the Ad vocates Act, 1961 
(25 of 1961);  
(s) “suspension of practice” means voluntary suspension of practice as an advocate or suspension 
of an advocate by a St ate Bar Council for misconduct;  
(t) “Trustee Committee” means the Advocates’ Welfare Fund Trustee Committee established 
under sub -section ( 1) of section  4; 
(u) “Vakalatnama” includes memorandum of appearance or any other document by which an 
advocate is empowered to appear or plead before any court, tribunal or other authority;  
(v) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the A dvocates Act, 
1961 (25 of 1961)  shall have the meanings respectivel y assigned to them in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
CONSTITUTION OF ADVOCATES’ WELFARE FUND 
3. Advocates’ Welfare Fund .—(1) The appropriate Government shall constitute a fund to be called 
the “Advocates’ Welfare Fund”.  
(2) There  shall be credited to the Fund — 
(a) all amounts p aid by a Stat e Bar Council under section 15;  
(b) any other contribution made by a State Bar Counci l; 
(c) any voluntary donation or contribution made to the Fund by the Bar Council of India, any 
State Bar Association, any State Advocates’ Association or other association or institution, or any 
advocat e or other person;  
(d) any grant which may be made by the Central Government or a State Government to the Fund 
after due app ropriation made in this behalf;  
(e) any sums borrowed under section 12;  
(f) all sums collected under section 18;  
(g) all sums received from the Life Insurance Corporation of India or any other insurer on the 
death of any member of the Fund un der any Group Insurance Policy;  
(h) any profit or dividend or refund received from the Life Insurance Corporation of India or any 
other insurer in respect of policies of Group Insura nce of the members of the Fund;  
(i) any interest or dividend or other return on any investment ma de out of any part of the Fund;  
(j) all sums collected by way of s ale of stamps under section 26.  
(3) The sums specified in sub -section ( 2) shall be paid to, or collected by, such agencies, at such 
intervals and in suc h manner, as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRUSTEE COMMITTEE  
4. Establishment of Trustee Committee .—(1) With  effect from such date as the appropriate 
Government may, by notification, appoint in this behalf, there shall be established a Trustee Committee to 
be called the “Advocates’ W elfare Fund Trustee Committee”.  5 
 (2) The Trustee Committee shall be a body corporate having perpetual succession and a common seal 
with power to acquire, hold and dispose of property and shall, by the said name, sue and be sued.  
(3) The Trustee Committee shall consist of — 
 
(a) the Advocate -General of a State  -      Chairperson, ex officio : 
Provided that where there is no Advocate -General of a State, the appropriate Government shall 
nominate a seni or advocate to be a chairperson;  
 
(b)  the Secretary to the appropriate Government in 
its Law Department or Ministry  -     Member, ex officio ; 
(c)  the Secretary to the appropriate Government in 
its Home Department or Ministry  -     Member, ex officio ; 
(d)   the Chairman of the State Bar Council  -     Member, ex officio ; 
(e) the Government Pleader or the Public 
Prosecutor, as may be nominated by the 
appropriate Government  -     Member;  
(f)   two advocates to be nominated by the State Bar 
Council  -     Member;  
(g)  the Secretary of the State Bar Council  - Secretary, ex officio . 
(4) The Chairperson nominated under the proviso to clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3) shall hold office for 
a period not exceeding three years from the date on which he enters upon his office.  
(5) Every Member of the Trustee Committee nominated under clause ( e) or clause ( f) of                     
sub-section ( 3) shall hold office for a period not exceeding three yea rs from the date on w hich he enters 
upon his office.  
5. Disqualifications and removal of Chairperson or Member of Trustee Committee .—(1) The 
appropriat e Government shall remove from office the Chairperson or any Member  of the Trustee 
Committee, who — 
(a) is, or at any time has bee n, adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has become physically or mentally incapable of acting as the Chairperson or a Memb er of the 
Trustee Committee; or  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the appropriate Governmen t, 
involves moral turpitude; or  
(d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
the Chairperson or a Memb er of the Trustee Committee; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuation in office detrime ntal to the public 
interest; or  
(f) is, or at any time has been, absent witho ut leave of the Trustee Committee for more than three 
consecutive meetings of the Trustee Committee:  
Provided that the Trustee Committee may, on sufficient ground, condone the absence  of such 
Chairperson or Member.  
(2) No such Chairperson or Member of the Trustee Committee shall be removed under clause ( d) or 
clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) unless he has been given a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
6. Resignation by nominated Chairperson and Members of Trustee Committee and filling up of 
casual vacancy .—(1) The Chairperson referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 4 or a Member nominated 
under clau se (e) of sub -section ( 3) of that section may resign his office by giving three months’ notice in 
writing to the appropriate Government and on such resignation being accepted by the appropriate 
Government such Chairperson or Member shall vacate his office.  6 
 (2) A Member nominated under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 3) of section 4 may resign his office by 
giving three months’ notice in writing to the State Bar Council and on such resignation being accepted by 
the State Bar Council such Member shall vacate his office.  
(3) A casual vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or a Member referred to in sub -section ( 1) who 
has resigned may be filled up, as soon as may be, by the appropriate Government and the Chairperson or 
a Member so nominated shall hold office only so lo ng as the Chairperson or the Member in whose place 
he is nominated would have been entitled to hold offic e if the vacancy did not occur.  
(4) A casual vacancy in the office of a Member referred to in sub -section ( 2) who has resigned may 
be filled up, as soon as may be, by the State Bar Council and a Member so nominated shall hold office 
only so long as the Member in whose place he is nominated would have been entitled to hold offic e if the 
vacancy did not occur.  
7. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Trustee Committee .—No act or proceeding of 
the Trustee Committee shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitutio n of, the Trustee Committee; or  
(b) any defect or irregularity in the nomination of a person acting as the Chairperson or a Memb er 
of the Tr ustee Committee; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Trustee Committee not af fecting the merits of the case.  
8. Meetings of Trustee Commit tee.—(1) The Trustee Committee shall meet at least once in every 
three calendar months and at least four such meetings shall be held in every year to transact business 
under this Act  and the rules made th ereunder.  
(2) Three Members of the Trustee Committee shall form the quorum for a me eting of the Trustee 
Committee.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Trustee Co mmittee or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting 
of the Trustee Committee, any other Member chosen by the Members of the Trustee Committee present 
from amongst themselves at the meetin g shall preside at the meeting.  
(4) All questions which come up in a meeting of the Trustee Committee shall be decided by a 
majority vote of the Members of the Trustee Committee present and voting, and, in the event of an 
equality of votes, the Chairperson, or  in his absence, the Member of the Trustee Committee presiding, 
shall  have a second or casting vote.  
9. Travelling and daily allowances to nominated Chairperson and Members of Trustee 
Committee .—The Chair person referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 4 and Members of the Trustee 
Committee referred to in clauses ( e) and ( f) of sub -section ( 3) of that section shall be entitled to be paid 
such travelling and daily allowances as are admissible to the members  of the State Bar Council.  
10. Vesting and application of Fund .—The Fund shall vest in, and be held and applied by, the 
Trustee Committee subject to the provisions, and  for the purposes, of this Act.  
11. Functions of Trustee Committee .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law 
for the time being in force, the Trustee Commi ttee shall ad minister the Fund.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the Trustee 
Committee shall — 
(a) hold the am ounts and assets bel onging to the Fund in trust;  
(b) receive applications for admission or re -admission as members to the Fund, and dispose of 
such applications within ninety days fr om the date of receipt  thereof;  
(c) receive applications from the members of the Fund, their nominees or legal heirs, as the case 
may be, for payment out of the Fund, conduct such enquiry as it deems necessary and dispose of the 
applications within five months fr om the date of receipt thereof;  
(d) record in the minutes book of the Trustee Committee, its  decisions on the applications;  
(e) pay to the members of the Fund or their nominees or legal heirs, as the case may be, the 
amounts at the  rates specified in Schedule I;  7 
 (f) send such pe riodical and annual reports as may be prescribed, to the appropriate Govern ment 
and the State Bar Council;  
(g) communicate to the applicants, by registered post with acknowledgment due or through 
electro nic mode, the decisions of the Trustee Committee in respect of applications for admission or 
re-admission as members to the Fund or cla ims to the benefit of the Fund;  
(h) do such other acts as are, or may  be, required to be done under this Act and the rules  made 
thereunder.  
12. Borrowing and investment .—(1) The Trustee Committee may, with the prior appro val of the 
appropriate Government and the State Bar Council, borrow, from time to time, any sum required for 
carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Trustee Committee shall deposit all monies and receipts forming part of the Fund in any 
scheduled bank or invest the same in debt instruments of any corporation owned or controlled by the 
appropriate Government or in loans floated by the appropriate Government or in any other manner as the 
State Bar Co uncil may, from time to time, direct with the prior approval  of the appropriate Government.  
(3) All amounts due and payable under this Act and all expenditure relating to the management and 
administration  of the Fund  shall be paid out of the Fund.  
13. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Trustee Committee shall maintain proper accounts and other 
relevant records  and prepare an annual statement of accounts and annual report in such form and in su ch 
manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) The accounts of the Trustee Committee shall be audited annually by a chartered acc ountant 
appo inted by the State Bar Council.  
(3) The accounts of the Trustee Committee as audited by the chartered accountant together with his 
audit report shall be forwarded to the State Bar Council by that Committee and the State Bar Council may 
issue such directions, as it deems fit, to the Truste e Committee in respect thereof.  
(4) The Trustee Committee shall comply with the directions issued by the State Bar Council under 
sub-section ( 3). 
(5) The Trustee Committee shall pay from the Fund the charges for the audit as may be fixed by the 
State Bar Council.  
14. Powers and duties of Secretary .—The Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall — 
(a) be the chief executive authority of the Trustee Committee and responsible for carrying out its 
decisions;  
(b) represent the Trustee Committee in all suits a nd proceedings for and  against the Trustee 
Committee;  
(c) authenticate by his signature all decisions and instruments of the Trustee Committe e; 
(d) operate bank account of the Trustee Committe e jointly with the Chairperson;  
(e) convene meetings of the Trustee Committee and prepare minutes o f such meetings;  
(f) attend meetings of the Trustee Committee with all the nec essary records and information;  
(g) maintain  such forms, registers and other records as may be prescribed from time to time and 
do all correspondence rel ating to the Trustee Committee;  
(h) prepare an annual statement of business transacted by the Trustee Committee during a  
financial year;  
(i) do such other acts as are or may be directed by the Trustee Commi ttee and the State Bar 
Council.  
15. Payment of certain monies to Fund by State Bar Council .—The State Bar Council shall pay to 
the Fund annually an amount equal to twenty per cent. of the enrolment fee received by it under clause ( f) 
of section 24 of the Ad vocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961).  
 8 
 CHAPT ER IV  
RECOGNITION OF ANY ASSOCIATION OF ADVOCATES  
16. Recognition by a State Bar Council of any association of advocates .—(1) Any association of 
advoca tes known by any name which is registered as an association before the date of commencement of 
this Act may, before the date to be notified by a State Bar Council in this behalf, apply for recognition to 
the State Bar Council in such form as may be prescri bed. 
(2) Any association of advocates known by any name which is registered as an association on or after 
the date of commencement of this Act may, within three months from the date of its registration a s an 
association, apply for recognition to the State Bar Council in such for m as may be prescribed.  
(3) Every application for recognition under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) shall be accompanied 
by,— 
(a) a copy of the rules or bye -laws of the association;  
(b) names and addresses of off ice bearers of the association;  
(c) a list of members of the association containing the name, address, age, enrolment number and 
date of enrolment with the State Bar Council and the ordinary pl ace of practice of each member.  
(4) The State Bar Council may, after such enquiry as it deems necessary, recognise the association 
and issue a certificate of recognition in such form as may be prescribed.  
(5) The decision of the State Bar Council on any matter regarding recognition of an association under 
sub-section ( 4) shall be final.  
Explanation .—In this section, “registered” means registered or deemed to be registered under the 
Societies Regist ration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860), or any other l aw for the time being in force.  
17. Duties of State Bar Associations and State Advocates’ Associations .—(1) Every State Bar 
Association and State Advocates’ Association shall, on or before the 15th day of April of every year, 
furnish to the State Bar Council a list of its members as on the 31st day of March of that year.  
(2) Every State Bar Association and State Advocates’ Association shall inform the State Bar Council 
of— 
(a) any change in the membership including admissions and re -admissions wit hin thirty days of 
such change;  
(b) the death or other cessation of practice or voluntary suspension of practice of any of its 
members within thirty days from the date of occurrence thereof;  
(c) such other matters as may be required by the State Bar Counc il from time to time.  
CHAPTER V  
MEMBERSHIP AND PAYMENT OUT OF ADVOCATES’ WELFARE  FUND 
18. Membership in Fund .—(1) Every advocate practising, before the commencement of this Act, in 
any court, tribunal or other authority in a State and being a member of a State Bar Association or a State 
Advocates’ Association in t hat State, shall apply, within six months of the commencement of this Act, to 
the Trustee Committee for admission as a member of the Fund, in such form a s may be prescribed.  
(2) Every person, — 
(a) admitted as an advocate on the roll of a State Bar Council, afte r the commencement of this 
Act; 
(b) practising  in any court, tribunal or other authority in a State and being a member of a State 
Bar Association or a State Advoca tes’ Association in that State,  
shall apply, within six months of his enrolment as an advocate, to the Trustee Committee, for admission 
as a member of the Fund in such form as may be prescribed.  
  9 
 (3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the Trustee Committee shall 
make such enquiry as it deems fit and eithe r admit the applicant to the Fund or, for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, reject the application:  
Provided that no order rejecting an application shall be passed unless the applicant has been given  an 
opportunity of being heard.  
(4) Every applicant shall pay an application fee of two hundred rupees along with the application to 
the ac count of the Trustee Committee.  
(5) Every advocate, being a member of the Fund, shall pay an annual subscription of fifty rupees to 
the Fund on or before the 31st day of March of every year:  
Provided that every advocate, who makes an application under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), 
shall pay his first annual subscrip tion within three months of his becoming a member of the Fund:  
Provided further that a senior advocate shall pay an annual subsc ription of one thousand rupees.  
(6) Any member of the Fund, who fails to pa y the annual subscription for any year before the            
31st day of March of that year, shall be liable to be removed f rom the membership in the Fund.  
(7) A member of the Fund removed from the member ship in the Fund under sub -section ( 6) may be 
re-admitted to the Fund, on payment of arrears along with re -admission fee of ten rupees, within six 
months  from the date of such removal.  
(8) Every member of the Fund shall, at the time of admission to the membership in the Fund, make 
nomination conferring on one or more of his dependants the right to receive, in the event of his death, any 
amount payable t o the member under this Act.  
(9) If a member of the Fund nominates more than one person under sub -section ( 8), he shall specify in 
the nomination, the amount or share p ayable to each of the nominees.  
(10) A member of the Fund may, at any time, cancel a nomination by sending a notice in wr iting to 
the Trustee Committee.  
(11) Every member of the Fund, who cancels his nomination under sub -section ( 10), shall make a 
fresh nomination along with r egistration fee of five rupees.  
(12) Every member of the Fund, whose name has been removed from the State roll under section 26 A 
of the Advocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961), or who voluntarily suspends practice, shall, within fifteen days 
of such removal or suspension, intimate such removal or suspension to the Trustee Committee and if any 
member of the Fund fails to do so without sufficient reason, the Trustee Committee may reduce, in 
accordance with such principles as may be prescribed, the amount payable  to that member under this Act.  
19. Ex gratia  grant to a member of Fund .—The Trustee Committee on an application made to it by 
a member of the Fund, and after being satisfied about the genuineness of the claim, may allow ex gratia  
grant to such member from the Fund — 
(a) in the case of his hospitalisation or involvi ng major surgical operation; or  
(b) if he is suffering from tuberculosis, leprosy, paralysis, cancer, unsoundness of mind or from 
such other  serious disease or disability.  
20. Review .—The Trustee Committee may, on its own motion or on an app lication received from any 
person interested, within ninety days of the passing of any order by it under the provisions of this Act, 
review such order, if it was passed under any mistake, whether of fact or of law or in ignorance of any 
material fact:  
Prov ided that the Trustee Committee shall not pass any order under this section adversely affecting 
any person unless such person has been given  an opportunity of being heard.  
21. Payment of amount on cessat ion of practice .—(1) Every advocate who has been a member of 
the Fund for a period of not less than five years shall, on his cessation of practice, be paid an amount at 
the rate specified in Schedule I:  
Provided that where the Trustee Committee is satisfied that a member of the Fund ceases to practice 
within a period of five years from the date of his admission as a member of such Fund as a result of any 10 
 permanent disability, the Trustee Committee may pay  such member an amount at th e rate specified in 
Schedule I.  
(2) Where a member of the Fund dies before receiving the amount payable under sub -section ( 1), his 
nominee or legal heir, as the case may be, s hall be paid the amount payable to t he deceased member of the 
Fund.  
22. Restriction on alienation, attachment, etc., of interest of member in Fund .—(1) The interest 
of any member in the Fund, or the right of a member of the Fund or his nominee or legal heir to receive 
any amount from the Fund, shall not be assigned, alienated, or charged and shall not be liable to 
attachment under any decree or order of any cour t, tribunal or other authority.  
(2) No creditor shall be entitled to proceed against the Fund or the interest therein of any member of 
the Fund or his nominee or legal heir.  
Explanation .—For the p urposes of this section, “creditor” includes the State or an official assignee or 
official receiver appointed under the law relating to insolvency for the time being in force.  
23. Exemption from income -tax.—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income -tax Act, 1961 
(43 of 1961) or any other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax on income, profits or gains, 
the income accrued to the Fund constituted under sub -section (1) of section 3 s hall be exempt from 
income -tax. 
24. Group Life Insurance for members of Fund and other benefits .—The Trustee Committee 
may, for the welfa re of the members  of the Fund, — 
(a) obtain, from the Life Insurance Corporation of India or any other insurer, policies of Group 
Insurance on the life  of the members of the Fund; or  
(b) provide, in such manner as may be prescribed, for medical and educational facilities for the 
members of th e Fund and their dependants; or  
(c) provide monies to the members of the  Fund for purchase of books; or  
(d) provide monies to construct or maintain common facilities for the members of the Fund:  
Provided that the Trustee Committee shall spend ten per cent. of the total annua l subscription 
received under sub -section ( 5) of section 18 on the construction or maintenance of common facilities 
for the members of the Fund practising in the su bordinate courts; or  
(e) provide funds for any other purpose which the Tr ustee Committee may specify; or  
(f) provide for such other benefits as may be prescribed.  
25. Appeal against decision or order of Trustee Committee .—(1) An appeal against any decision 
or order of the Trustee Committee shal l lie to the State Bar Council.  
(2) The appeal shall be in the prescribed fo rm and shall be accompanied by — 
(a) a copy of the deci sion or order appealed against;  
(b) a receipt evidencing  payment of twenty -five rupees to the credit of the State Bar Council in 
any of th e branches of a scheduled bank.  
(3) The appeal shall be filed within thirty days from the date of receipt of the deci sion or order 
appealed against.  
(4) The decision of the State Bar Council on such appeal shall be final.  
CHAPTER VI  
PRINTING, DISTRIBUTION AND CANCELLATION OF STAMPS  
26. Printing and distribution of Advocates’ Welfare Fund Stamps by State Bar Council .—      
(1) The appropriate Government shall, on a request made by the State Bar Council in this behalf, cause to 
be printed and distributed Advocates’ Welfare Fund Stamps of the value of five rupees or such other 
value, which may be prescribed, inscribing therein “A dvocates’ Welfare Fund Stamp”, in such design as 
may be prescribed.  11 
 (2) Every stamp referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be of the size 2.54 c.m. by 5.08 c.m. and sold to 
the advocates.  
(3) The custody of the stamps shall  be with the State Bar Council.  
(4) The State Bar Council shall control the distribution and sale of the stamps through the State Bar  
Associations and the State Advocate s’ Associations.  
(5) The State Bar Council, the State Bar Associations and the State Advocates’ Associations shall 
keep proper accounts of the stamps in such form a nd m anner as may be prescribed.  
(6) The State Bar Associations and State Advocates’ Associations shall purchase the stamps from the 
State Bar Council after paying the value thereof as reduced by ten per cent . of such value towards 
incidental  expenses.  
27. Vakalatnama to bear stamps .—(1) Every advocate s hall affix stamp of a value of — 
(a) five rupees on every Vakalatnama filed by him in a District Court or a court subord inate to the 
District Court;  
(b) ten rupees on every Vakalatnama  filed by him in a tribunal or other authority or a High Court 
or the Supreme Court:  
Provided that the appropriate Government may prescribe the value of the stamps not exceeding 
twenty -five rupees to be affixed under this sub -section:  
Provided further that the appropriate Government may prescribe different value of the stamps to be 
affixed on every Vakalatnama to be filed in a District Court, or a court subordinate to the District Court or 
a tribunal or other authority or a H igh Court o r the Supreme Court.  
(2) The value of the stamp shall neither be the cost in a case nor be collected in any event from the 
client.  
(3) Any contraventio n of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) by any advocate shall 
disentitle him either in whole or in part to the benefits of the Fund and the Trustee Committee shall report 
such contravention to the State Bar Council for appropriate action.  
(4) Every stamp affixed on every Vakalatnama filed before a District Court or a court subordinate to 
the District Court or a tribunal or other authority or a High Court or the Supreme Court shall be can celled 
in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
28. Certain persons not to be eligible for benefits .—No senior advocate , or a person in receipt of 
pension from the Central Government or a State Government, shall be entitled to ex gratia  grant under 
section 19 or payment of amount on his cessation of practice under section 21 or any benefit under       
clause  (a) or clause ( b) or clause ( c) of section 24.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the app ropriate Government or the Trustee Committee or the Chairperson or a Member or the 
Secretary of the Trustee Committee or the State Bar Council or any person for anything which is in good 
faith done or intended to be done under this Ac t or the rules made th ereunder.  
30. Bar of jurisdiction of civil courts .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to settle, decide or deal 
with any question or to determine any matter which is by or under this Act required to be settled, decided 
or dealt with or to be determined by the Trustee Comm ittee or the State Bar Council.  
31. Power to summon witnesses and take evidence .—The Trustee Committee and the State Bar 
Council s hall, for the purpose of any enquiry under this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court while trying a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following 
matters, namely: — 
(a) enforcing the attendance of any p erson or examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
(d) issuing commissions fo r the examination of witnesses;  12 
 (e) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
32. Power to amend Schedules I and II .—(1) The appropriate Government may, on the 
recommendation of the Trustee Committee, by notification, and having d ue regard to the availability of 
the amount in the Fund, amend the  rates specified in Schedule I.  
(2) The Central Government may, as and when considered necessary, by n otification, amend 
Schedule II.  
33. Power of appropriate Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the generality 
of the foregoing provisions of this Act, the Trustee Comm ittee shall, in exercise of the powers or the 
performance of its functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, other 
than those relating to professional and administrative matters, as the appropriate Government may give in 
writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Trustee Committee shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its 
views before any direction i s given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the appropriate Government, whether a question is one of  policy or not, shall be 
final.  
34. Power of appropriate Government to supersede Trustee Committee .—(1) If at any time the 
appropriat e Government is of the opinion — 
(a) that, on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Trustee Committee, it is unable to 
discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed on it by or under  the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Trustee Committee has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction given 
by the appropriate Government under this Act or in the discharge of the functions or performance of 
the duties imposed on it by or under the provision s of this Act;  or 
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary i n the public interest so to do,  
the appropriate Government may, by notification and for reasons to be specified therein, supersede the 
Trustee Committee for such period, not exceeding six months, as may be specified in the notification and 
appoint, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High Court having jurisdiction, a Judge of the High 
Court to be the Controller of the Trustee Committee:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the appropriate Government shall give a 
reasonable opportunity to the Trustee Committee to make representations against the proposed 
supersession and shall consider the representations, if  any, of the Trustee Committee.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) supe rseding the Trustee 
Committee, — 
(a) the Chairpers on, Members and the Secretary of the Trustee Committee shall, as from the date 
of supersession , vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of  this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Trustee Committee shall, until the Trustee Committee 
is reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by the Controlle r of the Trustee 
Committee; and  
(c) all properties and Fund owned or controlled by the Trustee Committee shall, until the Trustee 
Committee is reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), vest  in the appropriate Government.  
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified in the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1), the appropriate Government shall reconstitute the Trustee Committee by a fresh 
appointment of its Chairperson, Members and Secre tary of such Committee and in such case a person 
who had vacated his office under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified for 
reappointment.  
(4) The appropriate Government sh all cause a copy of the notification issued under sub -section ( 1) 
and a full report of any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be 
laid before each House of Parliament or before each House of the State Legislature , where it consists of 
two Houses or where such Legislature consists of one House, before that House, as th e case may be, at the 
earliest.  13 
 35. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government, being the 
appropriate Government, may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In parti cular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the periodical and annual reports to be sent under clause  (f) of section 11;  
(b) the form and the manner in which the annual statement of accounts and annual report shall be 
prepared under sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(c) the forms, registers and other records to be maintained under clause ( g) of section 14;  
(d) the form in which an association of advocates may apply for recognition to the State Bar 
Council under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  
(e) the form in which a certificate of recognition shall be issued by the State Bar Council under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 16;  
(f) the form in which an advocate shall apply for admission as a member of the Fund under        
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  
(g) the principles in accordance with which the amount payable to a member of the Fund be 
reduced under sub -section ( 12) of section 18;  
(h) the manner of providing medical and educational facilities for the mem bers of the Fund and 
their dependants under clause ( b) of section 24;  
(i) the other benefits to be provided under clause ( f) of section 24;  
(j) the form of appeal under sub -section ( 2) of section 25;  
(k) the value and design of stamps to be printed and distributed under sub -section ( 1) of         
section 26;  
(l) the form and the manner in which accounts of the stamps shall be kept under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 26;  
(m) the value of stamps not exceeding twenty -five rupees as may be prescribed under th e first 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(n) the value of stamps to be affixed on every Vakalatnama under the second proviso to              
sub-section ( 1) of section 27;  
(o) the manner of cancellation of stamps under sub -section ( 4) of section 27;  
(p) any other matter which i s to be, or may be, prescribed.  
36. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government, being the appropriate 
Government, may, by notification, make rules for carrying o ut the provisions of this Act and not 
inconsistent with the rules, if any, made by the Central Government.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the periodical and annual reports to be sent under clause ( f) of section 11;  
(b) the form  and the manner in which the annual statement of accounts and annual report shall be 
prepared under sub -section ( l) of section 13;  
(c) the forms, registers and other records to be maintained under clause  (g) of section 14;  
(d) the form in which an association of advocates may apply for recognition to the State Bar 
Council under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 16;  
(e) the form in which a certificate of recognition shall be issued by the State Bar Council under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 16;  
(f) the form in which an advocate shall apply for admission as a member of the Fund under         
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 18;  14 
 (g) the principles in accordance with which the amount payable to a member of the Fund be 
reduced under sub -section ( 12) of section 18;  
(h) the manner of providing medical and educational facilities for the members of the Fund and 
their dependants under clause ( b) of section 24;  
(i) the other benefits to be provided under clause ( f) of section 24;  
(j) the form of appeal under sub -section ( 2) of section 25;  
(k) the value and design of stamps to be printed and distributed under sub -section ( 1) of          
section 26;  
(l) the form and the manner in which accounts o f the stamps shall be kept under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 26;  
(m) the value of stamps not exceeding twenty -five rupees as may be prescribed under the first 
proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(n) the value of stamps to be affixed on every Vakalatnama under the second proviso to              
sub-section ( 1) of section 27;  
(o) the manner of cancellation of stamps under sub -section ( 4) of section 27;  
(p) any other matter which  is to be or may be prescribed.  
37. Rules and notifica tions to be laid before Parliament or State Legislature .—(1) Every rule 
made under this Act by the Central Government and every notification issued under section 32, shall be 
laid, as soon as may be afte r it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following th e session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or both 
Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule or notification.  
(2) Every rule made under this Act by a State Government and every notification issued under section 
32 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of State Legislature where it 
consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists o f one House, before that House.  
38. Saving .—The provisions of this Act shall not apply to the States in which the enactments 
specified in Schedule II are applicable.  
  15 
 SCHEDULE I  
[See section s 21(1) and 32( 1)] 
Number of years as member of the Fund   Rate at which amount 
payable  
(1)  (2) 
30 … Rs. 30,000  
29 … Rs. 29,000  
28 … Rs. 28,000  
27 … Rs. 27,000  
26 … Rs. 26,000  
25 … Rs. 25,000  
24 … Rs. 24,000  
23 … Rs. 23,000  
22 … Rs. 22,000  
21 … Rs. 21,000  
20 … Rs. 20,000  
19 … Rs. 19,000  
18 … Rs. 18,000  
17 … Rs. 17,000  
16 … Rs. 16,000  
15 … Rs. 15,000  
14 … Rs. 14,000  
13 … Rs. 13,000  
12 … Rs. 12,000  
11 … Rs. 11,000  
10 … Rs. 10,000  
9 … Rs. 9,000  
8 … Rs. 8,000  
7 … Rs. 7,000  
6 … Rs. 6,000  
5 … Rs. 5,000  
4 … Rs. 4,000  
3 … Rs. 3,000  
2 … Rs. 2,000  
1 … Rs. 1,000  
  16 
 SCHEDULE II  
[See section s 32(2) and 38]  
1. The Uttar Pradesh Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act, 1974 (6 of 1974).  
2. The Bihar State Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act, 1983 (16 of 1983).  
3. The Madhya Pradesh Adhivakata Kalyan Nidhi Adhiniyam, 1982 (9 of 1982).  
4. The Andhra Pradesh Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act, 1987 (33 of 1987).  
5. The Orissa Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act, 1987 (18 of 1987).  
6. The Rajast han Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act, 1987 (15 of 1987).  
7. The Tamil Nadu Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act, 1987 (49 of 1987).  
8. The Gujarat Advocates ’ Welfare Fund Act, 1991 (14 of 1991).  
9. The Goa Advocates ’ Welfare Fund Act, 1995 (2 of 1997).  
10. The Assam Advocates ’ Welfa re Fund Act, 1998 (XVIII of 1999).  
11. The Maharashtra Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act, 1981 (LXI of 1981).  
12. The Himachal Pradesh Advocates ’ Fund Act, 1996 (14 of 1996).  
13. The Kerala Advocates’ Welfare Fund Act, 1980 (21 of 1980).  
14. The Karnataka Advocates’ Welfare Fun d Act, 1983 (2 of 1985).  
15. The West Bengal Advocates ’ Welfare Fund Act, 1991 (XIII of 1991).  
16. The Jammu and Kashmir Advocates ’ Welfare Fund Act, 1997 (XXVI of 1997).  
 
__________  
--------------------------The Energy Conservation Act, 2001--------------------------
1 
 THE ENERGY CONSERVATION ACT, 2001  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
BUREAU OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Bureau of Energy Efficiency.  
4. Management of Bureau.  
5. Meetings of Governing Council.  
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Bureau, Governing Council or Committee.  
7. Removal of member from office.  
8. Constitution of Advisory Committees and other committees.  
9. Direc tor General of Bureau.  
10. Officers and employees of Bureau.  
11. Authentication of orders and decisions of Bureau.  
 
CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF ENERGY MANAGEMENT CENTRE TO  BUREAU  
12. Transfer of assets, liabilities and employees of Energy Management Centre.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF BUREAU  
13. Powers and functions of Bureau.  
 
CHAPTER V  
POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO FACILITATE AND ENFORCE EFFICIENT USE OF ENERGY AND ITS 
CONSERVATION  
14. Power of Central Government to enforce efficient use  of energy and its conservation.  
14A. Power of Central Government to issue energy savings certificate.  
14B.  Power of Central Government to specify value of energy.  
 
CHAPTER  VI 
POWER OF STATE GOVERNMENT TO FACILITATE AND ENFORCE EFFICIENT USE OF ENERGY AND ITS 
CONSERVATION  
15. Power of State Government to enforce certain provisions for efficient use of energy and its 
conservation.  
16. Establishment of Fund by State Government.  
17. Power of inspection.  
18. Power of Central Government or State Government to issue directions.  2 
 CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT OF BUREAU  
SECTIONS  
19. Grants and loans by Central Government.  
20. Establishment of Fund by Central Government.  
21. Borrowing powers of Bureau.  
22. Budget.  
23. Annual report.  
24. Annual report to be laid before Parliament.  
25. Accounts and audit.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION  
26. Penalty.  
27. Power to adjudicate.  
28. Factors to be taken into account by adjudicating officer.  
29. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL FOR ENERGY CONSERVATION  
30. Appellate Tribunal.  
31. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.  
31A. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal.  
32. to 43. [Omitted. ] 
44. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner or accredited auditor and of Government 
to appoint presenting officers.  
45. Appeal to Supreme Court.  
 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Bureau.  
47. Power of Central Government to supersede Bureau.  
48. Default by companies.  
49. Exemption from tax on income.  
50. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
51. Delegation.  
52. Power to obtain informatio n. 
53. Power to exempt.  
54. Chairperson, Members, officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal, Members of State 
Commission, Director -General, Secretary, members, officers and employees of the Bureau to be 
public servants.  
55. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
56. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
57. Power of State Government to make rules.  
58. Power of Bureau to make regulations.  
59. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament and State Legislature.  
60. Application of other laws not barred.  
61. Provisions of Act not to apply in certain cases.  
62. Power to remove difficulty.  
THE SCHEDULE.   3 
 THE ENERGY CONSERVATION ACT, 2001  
ACT NO. 52 OF 2001  
[29th September , 2001 .] 
An Act to provide for efficient use of energy and its conservation and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto . 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -second Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Energy Conservation 
Act, 2001.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions o f this Act and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “accredited  energy auditor ” means 2[an energy auditor accredited in accordance with the 
provisions of] clause ( p) of sub -section ( 2) of section 13;  
(b) “Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate T ribunal for Energy Conservation 3[referred to in 
section 30];  
4[(c) “building” means any structure or erection or part of structure or erection after the rules 
relating to energy conservation building codes have been notified under clause ( p) of section 14 and 
clause ( a) of section 15 and includes any existing structure or erec tion or part of structure or erection, 
which is having a connected load of 100 Kilowatt (kW) or contract demand of 120 Kilo -volt Ampere 
(kVA) and above and is used or intended to be used for commercial purposes;]  
(d) “Bureau ” means the Bureau of Energy Eff iciency established under sub -section ( 1) of               
section 3;  
(e) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Governing Council;  
(f) “designated agency ” means any agency designated under clause ( d) of section 15;  
(g) “designated consumer ” means any consumer specified under clause ( e) of section 14;  
(h) “energy ” means any form of energy derived from fossil fuels, nuclear substances or materials, 
hydro -electricity and includes electrical energy or electricity generated from renewable sources  of 
energy or bio -mass connected to the grid;  
(i) “energy audit ” means the verification, monitoring and analysis of use of energy including 
submission of   technical report containing recommendations for improving energy efficiency with 
cost benefit analysi s and an action plan to reduce energy consumption;  
(j) “energy conservation building codes ” means the norms and standards of energy consumption 
expres sed in terms of per square metre of the area wherein energy is used and includes the location of 
the build ing; 
(k) “energy consumption standards ” means the norms for process and energy consumption 
standards specified under clause ( a) of section 14;  
                                                           
1. 28th June, 2012 (sections 31, 33, 44, 45), vide notification No. S. O. 1433(E), dated 28th June, 2012, see Gazette of India, 
Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2010 s. 2, for “an auditor possessing qualifications specified under” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
3. Subs. by s. 2 , ibid., for “established under section 30” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
4. Subs. by s. 2 , ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  4 
 (l) “Energy Management Cent re” means the Energy Management Cent re set up under the 
Resolution of the Government of India in the erstwhile Ministry of Energy, Department of Power No. 
7(2)/87 - EP(Vol. IV), dated the 5th July, 1989 and registered under the Societies Registration Act , 
1860 (21 of 1860);  
(m) “energy manager ” means any individual possessing the qualificat ions prescribed under    
clause ( m) of section 14;  
1[(ma) “energy savings certificate ” means any energy savings certificate issued to the designated 
consumers under sub -section ( 1) of section 14A;  
(maa) “equipment or appliance ” means any equipment or appli ance which consumes, generates, 
transmits or supplies energy and includes any device that consumes any form of energy and produces 
a desired work;]  
(n) “Governing Council ” means the Governing Council referred to in section 4;  
(o) “member ” means the member of the Governing Counc il and includes the Chairperson ; 
(p) “notification ” means a notification in the Gazette of India or, as the case may be, the Official 
Gazette of a State;  
(q) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(r) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Bureau under this Act;  
(s) “Schedule ” means the Schedule to this Act;  
(t) “State Commission ” means the State Electricity Regulatory Commission established under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 17 of the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act , 1998 (14 of 1998);  
(u) words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Electricity 
Act, 1910 (9 of 1910) or the Electricity (Supply) Act , 1948 (5 4 of 1948) or the Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions Act , 1998 (14 of 1998) shall have the meanings respectively assigned to them in those 
Acts.  
CHAPTER II  
BUREAU OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY  
3. Establishment and incorporation of Bureau of Energy Efficiency .—(1) With effect from such 
date as the Central Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes 
of this Act, a Bureau to be called the Bureau of Energy Efficiency.  
(2) The Bureau shall be a body corporate by the name afores aid having perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract, and shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Bureau shall be at Delhi.  
(4) The Bureau may establish offices at other places in India.  
4. Management of Bureau .—(1) The general superintendence, direction and management of the 
affairs of the Bureau shall vest in the Governing Council which shall con sist of not less than twenty, but 
not exceeding twenty -six, members to be appointed by the Central Government.  
(2) The Governing Council shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) the Minister in charge of the Ministry or Department 
of the Central Government dealing with the Power   ex officio  Chairperson;  
(b) the Secretary to the Government of India, in charge of 
the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
dealing with the Power   ex officio  member;  
(c) the Secretary to the Government of India, in charge of 
the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
dealing with the Petroleum and Natural Gas   ex officio  member;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 28 of 2010, s. 2 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  5 
 (d) the Secretary to the Government of India, in charge of 
the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
dealing with the Coal   ex officio  member;  
(e) the Secretary to the Government of India, in charge of 
the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
dealing with the Non -conventional Energy Sources   ex officio  member;  
(f) the Secretary to  the Government of India, in charge of 
the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
dealing with the Atomic Energy   ex officio  member;  
(g) the Secretary to the Government of India, in charge of 
the Ministry or Department of the Central Government 
dealing with the Consumer Affairs   ex officio  member;  
(h) Chairman of the Central Electricity Authority 
established under the Electricity (Supply) Act , 1948 
(54 of 1948)   ex officio  member;  
(i) Director -General of the Central Power Research 
Institute registered under the Karnataka Societies Act , 
1960  (Karnataka Act  17 of 1960)   ex officio  member;  
(j) Executive Director of the Petroleum Conservation 
Research Association, a society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act , 1860 (XXI of 1860)   ex officio  member;  
(k) Chairman -cum-Managing Director of the Central Mine 
Planning and Design Institute Limited, a company 
incorporated under the Companies Act , 1956                       
(1 of 1956)   ex officio  member;  
(l) Director -General of the Bureau of  Indian Standards 
established under the Bureau of Indian Standards Act , 
1986 (63 of 1986)   ex officio  member;  
(m) Director -General of the National Test House, 
Department of Supply, Ministry of Commerce and 
Industry, Kolkata   ex officio  member;  
(n) Managi ng Director of the Indian Renewable Energy 
Development Agency Limited, a company 
incorporated under the Companies Act , 1956                        
(1 of 1956)   ex officio  member;  
(o) one member each from the five power regions 
representing the States of the region to be appointed 
by the Central Government   member;  
(p) such number of persons, not exceeding four as may be 
prescribed, to be appointed by the Central Government 
as members from amongst persons who are in the 
opinion of the Central Government c apable of 
representing industry, equipment and appliance 
manufacturers, architects and consumers   member;  
(q) such number of persons, not exceeding two as may be 
nominated by the Governing Council as members   member;  
(r) Director -General of Bureau   ex officio  member -
secretary.  
(3) The Governing Council may exercise all powers and do all acts and things which may be 
exercised or done by the Bureau.  6 
 (4) Every member referred to in clauses ( o), (p) and ( q) of sub -section ( 2) shall hold office for a term 
of three years from the date on which he enters upon his office.  
(5) The fee and allowances to be paid to the members referred to in clauses ( o), (p) and ( q) of                   
sub-section ( 2) and the manner of filling up of vacancies and the procedure t o be followed in the 
discharge of their functions shall be such as may be prescribed.  
5. Meetings of Governing Council .—(1) The Governing Council shall meet at such times and 
places, and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of  business at its meetings 
(including quorum at such meetings) as may be provided by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson or, if for any reason, he is unable to attend a meeting of the Governing Council, 
any other member chosen by the members present from among st themselves a t the meeting shall preside 
at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Governing Council shall be decided by a 
majority vote of the members present and voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the Chai rperson 
or in his absence, the person presiding, shall have a second or casting vote.  
6. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Bureau, Governing Council or Committee .—
No act or proceeding of the Bureau or the Governing Council or any Committee shall be invalid merely 
by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Bureau or the Governing Council or 
the Committee; or  
(b) any  defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Director -General or Secretary of the 
Bureau or a member of the Governing Council or the Committee; or  
(c) any  irregularity in the procedure of the Bureau or the Governing Council or the Committee not 
affecting the merits of the case.  
7. Removal of member from office .—The Central Government shall remove a member referred to 
in clauses ( o), (p) and ( q) of sub -section (2) of section 4 from office if he — 
(a) is, or at any time has been, adjudicated as insolvent;  
(b) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent court;  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, 
involves a moral turpitude;  
(d) has, in the opinion of the Central Government, so abused his position as to render his 
continuation in office detrimental to the public interest:  
Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless he has been give n a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.  
8. Constitution of Advisory Committees and other committees .—(1) Subject to any regulations 
made in this behalf, the Bureau shall, within six months from the date of commencement of this Act, 
constit ute Advisory Committees for the efficient discharge of its functions.  
(2) Each Advisory Committee shall consist of a Chairperson and such other members as may be 
determined by regulations.  
(3) Without prejudice to the powers contained in sub -section ( 1), the Bureau may constitute, such 
number of technical committees of experts for the formulation of energy consumption standards or norms 
in respect of equipment or processes, as it considers necessary.  
9. Director -General of Bureau .—(1) The Central Government  shall, by notification, appoint a 
Director -General from amongst persons of ability and standing, having adequate knowledge and 
experience in dealing with the matters relating to energy production, supply and energy management, 
standardisation and efficien t use of energy and its conservation.  
(2) The Central Government shall, by notification, appoint any person not below the rank of Deputy 
Secretary to the Government of India as Secretary of the Bureau.  7 
 (3) The Director -General shall hold office for a term of 1[five years] from the date on which he enters 
upon his office or until he attains the age of sixty years, whichever is earlier.  
(4) The salary and allowances payable to the Director -General and other terms and conditions of his 
service and other terms and conditions of service of the Secretary of the Bureau shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
(5) Subject to general superintendence, direction and management of the affairs by the Governing 
Council, the D irector -General of the Bureau shall be the Chief Executive Authority of the Bureau.  
(6) The Director -General of the Bureau shall exercise and discharge such powers and duties of the 
Bureau as may be determined by regulations.  
10. Officers and employees of Bureau .—(1) 2[The Bureau]  may appoint such other officers and 
employees in the Bureau as it considers necessary for the efficient discharge of its functions under this 
Act. 
(2) The terms and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Bureau appointed 
under sub -section ( 1) shall be such as may be prescribed.  
11. Authentication of orders and decisions of Bureau .—All orders and decisions of the Bureau 
shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director -General or any other officer of the Bureau 
authorised by the Director -General in this behalf.  
CHAPTER III  
TRANSFER OF ASSETS, LIABILITIES, ETC., OF ENERGY MANAGEMENT CENTRE TO BUREAU  
12. Transfer of assets, liabilities and employees of Energy Management Cent re.—(1) On and 
from the date of establishment of the Bureau — 
(a) any reference to the Energy Management Cent re in any law other than this Act or in any 
contract or other instrument shall be deemed as a reference to the Bureau;  
(b) all properties and as sets, movable and immovable of, or belonging to, the Energy 
Management Cent re shall vest in the Bureau ; 
(c) all the rights and liabilities of the Energy Management Cent re shall be transferred to, and be 
the rights and liabilities of , the Bureau;  
(d) without prejudice to the provisions of clause ( c), all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, 
all contracts entered into and all matters and things engaged to be done by, with or for the Energy 
Management Cent re immediately before that date, for or in connection with the purposes of the s aid 
Cent re shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered into, or engaged to be done by, with or for, the 
Bureau;  
(e) all sums of money due to the Energy Management Cent re immediately before that date shall 
be deemed to be due to the Bureau;  
(f) all suits  and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the Energy Management Cent re immediately before that date may be continued or may be 
instituted by or against the Bureau; and  
(g) every employee holding any office un der the Energy Management Cent re immediately before 
that date shall hold his office in the Bureau by the same tenure and upon the same terms and 
conditions of service as respects remuneration, leave, provident fund, retirement or other terminal 
benefits as he would have held such office if the Bureau had not been established and shall continue 
to do so as an employee of the Bureau or until the expiry of six months from that date if such 
employee opts not to be the employee of the Bureau within such period.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything con tained in the Industrial Disputes Act , 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the absorption of any employee by the Bureau in its regular service 
under this section shall not entitle such employee to any compensation under that Act or other law and no 
such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2010 s. 3, for “ three years ” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
2. Subs. by  s. 4, ibid., for “ The Central Government ” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  8 
 CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF BUREAU  
13. Powers and functions of Bureau .—(1) The Bureau shall, effectively co -ordinate with designated 
consumers, design ated agencies and other agencies, recognise and utilise the existing resources and 
infrastructure, in performing the functions assigned to it by or under this Act.  
(2) The Bureau may perform such functions and exercise such powers as may be assigned to it by or 
under this Act and in particular, such functions and powers inc lude the function and power to — 
(a) recommend to the Central Government the norms for processes and energy consumption 
standards required to be notified under clause ( a) of section 14;  
1[(aa) recommend to the Central Government for issuing of the energy savings certificate under 
section 14A;]  
(b) recommend to the Central Government the particulars required to be displayed on label on 
equipment or on appliances and manner of their display under clause ( d) of section 14;  
(c) recommend to the Central Government for notifying any user or class of users of energy as a 
designated consumer under clause ( e) of section 14;  
(d) take suitable steps to prescribe guidelines for energy conservation buil ding codes under clause 
(p) of section 14;  
(e) take all measures necessary to create awareness and disseminate information for efficient use 
of energy and its conservation;  
(f) arrange and organise training of personnel and specialists in the techniques fo r efficient use of 
energy and its conservation;  
(g) strengthen consultancy services in the field of energy conservation;  
(h) promote research and development in the field of energy conservation;  
(i) develop testing and certification procedure and promote t esting facilities for certification and 
testing for energy consumption of equipment and appliances;  
(j) formulate and facilitate implementation of pilot projects and demonstration projects for 
promotion of efficient use of energy and its conservation;  
(k) promote use of energy efficient processes, equipment, devices and systems;  
(l) promote innovative financing of energy efficiency projects;  
(m) give financial assistance to institutions for promoting efficient use of energy and its 
conservation;  
(n) levy fe e, as may be determined by regulations, for services provided for promoting efficient 
use of energy and its conservation;  
(o) maintain a list of accredited energy auditors as may be specified by regulations;  
2[(p) specify, by regulations, the qualification s, criteria and conditions subject to which a person 
may be accredited as an energy auditor and the procedure for such accreditation;]  
(q) specify, by regulations, the manner and intervals of time in which the energy audit shall be 
conducted;  
(r) specify , by regulations, certification procedures for 3[energy auditors and energy managers] to 
be designated or appointed by designated consumers;  
(s) prepare educational curriculum on efficient use of energy and its conservation for educational 
institutions, bo ards, universities or autonomous bodies and coordinate with them for inclusion of such 
curriculum in their syllabus;  
1[(sa) conduct examination for capacity building and strengthening of services in the field of 
energy conservation including certification of ener gy managers and energy auditors; ] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 28 of 2010, s. 5 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
2. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for clause ( p) (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
3. Subs. by  s. 5, ibid., for “ energy managers ” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  9 
 (t) implement international co -operation programmes relating to efficient use of energy and its 
conservation as may be assigned to it by the Central Government;  
(u) perform such other functions as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER V  
POWER OF CENTRAL GOVERNMENT TO FACILITATE AND ENFORCE EFFICIENT USE OF ENERGY AND ITS 
CONSERVATION  
14. Power of Central Government to enforce efficient use of energy and its conservation .—The 
Central Government may, by notification, in  consultation with the Bureau, — 
(a) specify the norms for processes and energy consumption standards for any equipment, 
appliance which consumes, generates, transmits or supplies energy;  
(b) specify equipment or appliance or class of equipments or applianc es, as the case may be, for 
the purposes of this Act;  
(c) prohibit manufacture or sale or purchase or import of equipment or appliance specified under 
clause ( b), unless such equipment or appliance conforms to energy consumption standards:  
1[Provided that no notification prohibiting manufacture or sale or purchase or import of 
equipment or appliance shall be issued within a period of six months from the date of notification 
issued under clause ( a) of this section:  
Provided further that the Central Governmen t may, having regard to the market share and the 
technological development having impact on equipment or appliance, and for reasons to be recorded 
in writing, extend the said period of six months referred to in the first proviso by a further period not 
exceeding six months;]  
(d) direct display of such particulars on label on equipment or on appliance specified under         
clause ( b) and in such manner as may be specified by regulations;  
(e) specify, having regard to the intensity or quantity of energy cons umed and the amount of 
investment required for switching over to energy efficient equipments and capacity of industry to 
invest in it and availability of the energy efficient machinery and equipment required by the industry, 
2[any user or class of users of  energy in the energy intensive industries and other establishments as 
specified in the Schedule as a designated consumer] for the purposes of this Act;  
(f) alter the list of Energy Intensive Industries specified in the Schedule;  
(g) establish  and prescribe such energy consumption norms and standards for designated 
consumers as it may consider necessary:  
Provided that the Central Government may prescribe different norms and standards for different 
designated consumers having regard to such fact ors as may be prescribed;  
(h) direct, having regard to qua ntity of energy consumed or the norms and standards of energy 
consumption specified under clause ( a), the Energy Intensive Industries specified in the Schedule to 
get energy audit conducted by an ac credited energy auditor in such manner and intervals of time as 
may be specified by regulations;  
(i) direct, if considered necessary for efficient use of energy and its conservation, any designated 
consumer to get energy audit conducted by an accredited en ergy auditor;  
(j) specify the matters to be included for the purposes of inspection under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 17;  
(k) direct any designated consumer to furnish to the designated agency, in such form and manner 
and within such period, as may be presc ribed, the information with regard to the energy consumed 
and action taken on the recommendation of the accredited energy auditor;  
(l) direct any designated consumer to designate or appoint energy manager in charge of activities 
for efficient use of energy  and its conservation and submit a report, in the form and manner as may be 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 28 of 2010, s . 6, for the proviso  (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
2. Subs. by  s. 6, ibid., for “ any user or class of users of en ergy as a designated consumer ” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  10 
 prescribed, on the status of energy consumption at the end of every financial year to the designated 
agency;  
(m) prescribe minimum qualification for 1[energy auditors and energy ma nagers] to be designated 
or appointed under clause ( l); 
(n) direct every designated consumer to comply with energy consumption norms and standards;  
(o) direct any designated consumer, who does not fulfil  the energy consumption norms and 
standards prescribed under clause ( g), to prepare a scheme for efficient use of energy and its 
conservation and implement such scheme keeping in view the economic viability of the investment in 
2[such form, the time within  which and the manner] as may be prescribed;  
(p) prescribe energy conservation building codes for efficient use of energy and its conservation 
in the  building or building complex;  
(q) amend the energy conservation building codes to suit the regional and lo cal climatic 
conditions;  
(r) direct every owner or occupier of the building or building complex, being a designated 
consumer to comply with the provisions of energy conservation building codes for efficient use of 
energy and its conservation;  
(s) direct, a ny designated consumer referred to in clause ( r), if considered necessary, for efficient 
use of energy and its conservation in his building to get energy audit conducted in respect of such 
building by an accredited energy auditor in such manner and interva ls of time as may be specified by 
regulations;  
(t) take all measures necessary to create awareness and disseminate information for efficient use 
of energy and its conservation;  
(u) arrange and organi se training of personnel and specialists in the technique s for efficient use of 
energy and its conservation;  
(v) take steps to encourage preferential treatment for use of energy efficient equipment or 
appliances:  
Provided that the powers under clauses ( p) to ( s) shall be exercised in consultation with the concerned 
State.  
3[14A. Power of Central Government to issue energy savings certificate .—(1) The Central 
Government may issue the energy savings certificate to the designated consumer whose energy 
consumption is less than the prescribed norms and standards  in accordance with the procedure as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) The designated consumer whose energy consumption is more than the prescribed norms and 
standards shall be entitled to purchase the energy savings certificate to comply with the prescribed norms 
and standards.  
14B. Power of Central Government to specify value of energy .—The Central Government may, in 
consultation with the Bureau, prescribe the value of per metric ton of oil equivalent of energy consumed 
for the purposes of this Act.]  
CHAPTER VI  
POWE R OF STATE GOVERNMENT TO FACILITATE AND ENFORCE EFFICIENT USE OF ENERGY AND ITS 
CONSERVATION  
15. Power of State Government to enforce certain provisions for efficient use of energy and its 
conservation .—The State Government may, by notification, i n consultation with the Bureau — 
(a) amend the energy conservation building codes to suit the regional and local climatic 
conditions and may, by rules made by it, specify and notify energy conservation building codes with 
respect to use of energy in the build ings;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 28 of 2010, s. 6, for “energy managers ” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
2. Subs. by  s. 6, ibid.,  for “such form and manner”  (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
3. Ins. by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  11 
 (b) direct every owner or occupier of a building or building complex being a designated consumer 
to comply with the provisions of the energy conservation building codes;  
(c) direct, if considered necessary for efficient use of energy  and its conserva tion, any designated 
consumer referred to in clause ( b) to get energy audit conducted by an accredited energy auditor in 
such manner and at such intervals of time as may be specified by regulations;  
(d) designate  any agency as designated agency to coordinate, regulate and enforce provisions of 
this Act within the State;  
(e) take all measures necessary to create awareness and disseminate information for efficient use 
of energy and its conservation;  
(f) arrange  and organi se training of personnel and specialists in the techniques for efficient use of 
energy and its conservation;  
(g) take steps to encourage preferential treatment for use of energy efficient equipment or 
appliances;  
(h) direct, any designated consu mer to furnish to the designated agency, in such form and manner 
and within such period as may be specified by rules made by it, information with regard to the energy 
consumed by such consumer;  
(i) specify the matters to be included for the purposes of ins pection under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 17.  
16. Establishment of Fund by State Government .—(1) The State Government shall constitute a 
Fund to be called the State Energy Conservation Fund for the purposes of promotion of efficient use of 
energy and its co nservation within the State.  
(2) To the Fund shall be credited all grants and loans that may be m ade by the State Government or, 
Central Government or any other organisation or individual for the purposes of this Act . 
(3) The Fund shall be applied for meet ing the expenses incurred for implementing the provisions of 
this Act.  
(4) The Fund created under sub -section ( 1) shall be administered by such persons or any authority and 
in such manner as may be specified in the rules made by the State Government.  
17. Power of inspection .—(1) The designated agency may appoint, after the expiry of five years 
from the date of commencement of this Act, as many inspecting officers as may be necessary for the 
purpose of ensuring compliance with energy consumption standards specified under clause ( a) of               
section 14 or ensure display of particulars on label on equipment or appliance specified under clause ( b) 
of section 14 or for the purpose of performing such other functions as may be assigned to them.  
(2) Subjec t to any rules made under this Act, an inspecting officer shall have power  to— 
(a) inspect any operation carried on or in connection with the equipment or appliance specified 
under clause ( b) of section 14 or in respect of which energy standards under clau se (a) of section 14 
have been specified;  
(b) enter any place of designated consumer at which the energy is used for any activity and may 
require any proprietor, employee, director, manager or secretary or any other person who may be 
attending in any manne r to or helping in, carrying on any ac tivity with the help of energy — 
(i) to afford him  necessary facility to inspect — 
(A) any equipment or appliance as he may require and which may be available at such 
place ; 
(B) any production process to ascertain the energy consumption norms and standards;  
(ii) to make an inventory of stock of any equipment or appliance checked or verified by him;  
 
 12 
 (iii) to record the statement of any person which may be useful for, or relevant to, for efficient 
use of energy and its conservation under this Act.  
(3) An inspecting officer may enter an y place of designated consumer — 
(a) where any activity with the help of ener gy is carried on; and  
(b) where any equipment or appliance notified under clause ( b) of section 14 has been kept,  
during the hours at which such place is open for production or conduct of business connected therewith.  
(4) An inspecting officer acting under  this section shall, on no account, remove or cause to be 
removed from the place wherein he has entered, any equipment or appliance or books of account or other 
documents.  
18. Power of Central Government or State Government to issue directions .—The Central  
Government or the State Government may, in the exercise of its powers and performance of its functions 
under this Act and for efficient use of energy and its conservation, issue such directions in writing as it 
deems fit for the purposes of this Act to an y person, officer, authority or any designated consumer and 
such person, officer or authority or any designated consumer shall be bound  to comply with such 
directions.  
Explanation .—For the avoidance of doubts, it is hereby declared that the power to issue directions 
under this sectio n includes the power to direct — 
(a) regulation of norms for process and energy consumption standards in any industry or building 
or building complex; or  
(b) regulation of the energy consumption standards for equipment and applia nces.  
CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT OF BUREAU  
19. Grants and loans by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by Parliament by law in this behalf, make to the Bureau or to the State Governments 
grants and loan s of such sums of money as the Central Government may consider necessary.  
20. Establishment of Fund by Central Government .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be 
called as the Central Energy Conservation Fund and t here shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Bureau by the Central Government under section 19;  
(b) all fees received by the Bureau under this Act;  
(c) all sums received by the Bureau from such other sources as may be decided upon by the 
Central Government.  
(2) The Fun d shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salary, allowances and other remuneration of Director -General, Secretary, officers and 
other employees of the Bureau;  
(b) expenses of the Bureau in the discharge of its functions under section 13;  
(c) fee and allowan ces to be paid to the members of the Governing Council under sub -section ( 5) 
of section 4;  
(d) expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.  
21. Borrowing powers of Bureau .—(1) The Bureau may, with the consent of the Central 
Government or in  accordance with the terms of any general or special authority given to it by the Central 
Government, borrow money from any source as it may deem fit for discharging all or any of its functions 
under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may guarantee, in s uch manner as it thinks fit, the repayment of the 
principal and the payment of interest thereon with respect to the loans borrowed by the Bureau under                  
sub-section ( 1). 13 
 22. Budget .—The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year as may 
be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year, showing the estimated receipts and expenditure of the 
Bureau and forward the same to the Central Government.  
23. Annual report .—The Bureau shall prepare, in such form and at such time in each financial year 
as may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its activities during the previous financial 
year, and submit a copy thereof to the Central Government.  
24. Annual report to be laid before Parliament .—The C entral Government shall cause the annual 
report referred to in section 23 to be laid, as soon as may be after it is received, before each House of 
Parliament.  
25. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Bureau shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Bureau shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -Genera l of India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Bureau to the Comptroller and Auditor -General.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Bureau shall have the same rights and privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General generally has in 
connection with the audit of the Gover nment accounts, and in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Bureau.  
(4) The accounts of the Bureau as certified by the Compt roller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Pa rliament.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PENALTIES AND ADJUDICATION  
26. Penalty .—(1) If any person fails to comply with the provisions of clause ( c) or clause ( d) or 
clause ( h) or clause ( i) or clause ( k) or clause ( l) 1*** or clause ( r) or clause ( s) of section 14 or clause ( b) 
or clause ( c) or clause ( h) of section 15, he shall be liable to a penalty which shall not exceed 2[ten lakh 
rupees] for each such failure and, in the case of continuing failure, with an additional penalty which may 
extend to 3[ten thousand rupe es] for every day during which such failure continues:  
Provided that no person shall be liable to pay penalty within five years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
4[(1A) If any person fails to comply with the provisions of clause ( n) of section 14,  he shall be liable 
to a penalty which shall not exceed ten lakh rupees and, in the case of continuing failure, with an 
additional penalty which shall not be less than the price of every metric ton of oil equivalent of energy, 
prescribed under this Act, th at is in excess of the prescribed norms.]  
(2) Any amount payable under this section, if not paid, may be recovered as if it were an arrear of 
land revenue.  
27. Power to adjudicate .—(1) For the purpose of adjudging under section 26, the State Commission 
shall appoint any of its members to be an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry in such manner as 
may be prescribed by the Central Government, after giving any person concerned a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing any p enalty.  
(2) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have power to summon and enforce the 
attendance of any person acquainted with the facts and circumstances of the case to give evidence or 
produce any document which in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to 
                                                           
1. The words, brackets and letter “or clause ( n)” omitted by  Act of 28 of 2010, s. 8 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
2. Subs . by s. 8, ibid., for “ten thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
3. Subs . by s. 8, ibid., for “one thousand rupees” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
4. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  14 
 the subject -matter of the inquiry, and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the person has failed to 
comply with the provisions of any of the clauses of the sections specified in section 26, he ma y impose 
such penalty as he thinks fit in accordance with the provisions of any of those clauses of that section:  
Provided that where a State Commission has not been established in a State, the Government of that 
State shall appoint any of its officer not below the rank equivalent to a Secretary dealing with legal affairs 
in that State to be an adjudicating officer for the purposes of this section and such officer shall cease to be 
an adjudicating officer immediately on the appointment of an adjudicating of ficer by the State 
Commission on its establishment in that State:  
Provided further that where an adjudicating officer appointed by a State Government ceased to be an 
adjudicating officer, he shall transfer to the adjudicating officer appointed by the State  Commission all 
matters being adjudicated by him and thereafter the adjudicating officer appointed by the State 
Commission shall adjudicate the penalties on such matters.  
28. Factors to be taken into account by adjudicating officer .—While adjudicating the quantum of 
penalty under section 26, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the following factors, 
namely: — 
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever quantifiable, made as a 
result of the default;  
(b) the repetitive n ature of the default.  
29. Civil court not to have jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which an adjudicating officer appointed under this Act or the 
Appellate Tribunal is empowere d by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by 
any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power 
conferred by or under this Act.  
CHAPTER IX  
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL FOR ENERGY CONSERVA TION  
1[30. Appellate Tribunal .—The Appellate Tribunal established under section 110 of the Electricity 
Act, 2003  (36 of 2003) shall, without prejudice to the provisions of the Electricity Act, 2003, be the 
Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and hear appeals against the orders of the adjudicating 
officer or the Central Government or the State Government or any other authority under this Act.]  
31. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Any person aggrieved, by an order made by an adjudicating 
office r or the Central Government or the State Government or any other authority under this Act, may 
prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal for Energy Conservation:  
Provided that any person, appealing against the order of the adjudicating officer levying any  penalty, 
shall, while filing the appeal, deposit the amount of such penalty:  
Provided further that where in any particular case, the Appellate Tribunal is of the opinion that the 
deposit of such penalty would cause undue hardship to such person, the Appel late Tribunal may dispense 
with such deposit subject to such conditions as it may deem fit to impose so as to safeguard the realisation 
of penalty.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the date 
on wh ich a copy of the order made by the adjudicating officer or the Central Government or the State 
Government or any other authority is received by the aggrieved person and it shall be in such form, 
verified in such manner and be accompanied by such fee as ma y be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
forty -five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving the parties 
to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting aside the order appealed against.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 28 of 2010, s. 9, for section 30 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  15 
 (4) The Appellate Tribunal shal l send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal and 
to the concerned adjudicating officer or the Central Government or the State Government or any other 
authority.  
(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavo ur shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within one 
hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of the appeal:  
Provided that where an appeal could not be disposed of wi thin the said period of one hundred and 
eighty days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its reasons in writing for not disposing of the appeal 
within the said period.  
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality, propriety or correctness of 
any order made by the adjudicating officer or the Central Government or the State Government or any 
other authority under this Act, as the case may be, in relation to any proceeding, on its own motion or 
otherwise, call for the records of su ch proceedings and make such order in the case as it thinks fit.  
1[31A. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal .—The provisions of sections 120 to 123 (both 
inclusive) of the Electricity Act, 2003  (36 of 2003) shall, mutatis mutandis , apply to the Appellate 
Tribunal in the discharge of its functions under this Act as they apply to it in the discharge of its function 
under the Electricity Act, 2003.]  
32. Composition of Appellate Tribunal.  [Omitted by the Energy Conservation (Amendment ) Act, 2010  
(28 of 2010) , s.11 (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
33. Qualification s for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal . [Omitted by 
s.11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
34. Term of office . [Omitted by s.11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
35. Terms and conditions of service . [Omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
36. Vacancies . [Omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
37. Resignation and removal . [Omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
38. Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances . [Omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f.                              
24-8-2010 )]. 
39. Staff of Appellate Tribunal . [Omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
40. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal . [Omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
41. Distribution of business amongst Benches . [Omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
42. Power of Chairperson to transfer cases . [Omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
43. Decision to be by majority . [Omitted by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 24-8-2010 )]. 
44. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner or accredited auditor and of 
Government to appoint presenting officers .—(1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate 
Tribunal under this Act may either appear in person or take the assistan ce of a legal pract itioner or an 
accredited energy  auditor of his choice to present his case before the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may 
be. 
(2) The Central Government or the State Government may authorise one or more legal practitioners 
or any of its o fficers to act as presenting officers and every person so authorised may present the case 
with respect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.  
45. Appeal to Supreme Court .—Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appell ate 
Tribunal, may,  file an  appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of  communication of   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 28 of 2010, s. 10 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  16 
 the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him, on any one or more of the grounds specified in 
section 100 of the Code of Civil Procedur e, 1908 (5 of 1908):  
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not 
exceeding sixty days.  
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS  
46. Power of Central Government to issue directions to Bureau .—(1) Without prejudice to the 
foregoing provisions of this Act, the Bureau shall, in exercise of its powers or the performance of its 
functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as the Central Government 
may give in writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the Bureau shall, as far as practicable, be given an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under this sub -sectio n. 
(2) The decision of the Central Government, whether a question is one of policy or not, shall be final.  
47. Power of Central Government to supersede Bureau .—(1) If at any time the Ce ntral 
Government is of opinion — 
(a) that on account of grave emergency, the Bureau is unable to discharge the functions and 
duties imposed on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Bureau has persistently made default in complying with any direction issued by the 
Central Gove rnment under this Act or in discharge of the functions and duties imposed on it by or 
under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default, the financial position of the Bureau 
had deteriorated or the administration of the Bureau had deteriorat ed; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public interest so to do,  the Central 
Government may, by notification, supersede the Bureau for such period, not exceeding six months, as 
may be specified in the notification.  
(2) Upon th e publication of a notification under sub -section (1) superseding the Bureau, — 
(a) all the members referred to in clauses ( o), (p) and ( q) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4 shall, as 
from the date of supersession, vacate their offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the Bureau, shall until the Bureau is reconstituted under 
sub-section ( 3), be exercised and discharged by such person or pe rsons as the Central Government 
may direct; and  
(c) all property owned or controlled by the Bureau shall, until the Bureau is reconstituted under 
sub-section ( 3), vest in the Central Government.  
(3) On the ex piration of the period of super session specified  in the notification issued under                     
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may reconstitute the Bureau by a fresh appointment and in such 
case any person or persons who vacated their offices under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 2), shall not be 
deemed disqualified for appointment:  
Provided that the Central Government may, at any time, before the expiration of the period of  
super session, take action under this sub -section.  
(4) The Central Government shall cause a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House of Parliament at the earliest.  
48. Default by companies .—(1) Where a company makes a default in complying with the provisions 
of clause ( c) or clause ( d) or clause ( h) or clause ( i) or clause ( k) or clause ( l) or clause ( n) or clause ( r) or 
clause ( s) of section 14 or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( h) of section 15, every person who at the time 
of such contrav ention was in charge of, and was responsible to the company for the conduct of the 
business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed to have acted in contravention of the 17 
 said provisions and shall be liable to be proceeded against and impose d penalty under section 26 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable for penalty 
provided in this Act if he proves that the contravention of th e aforesaid provisions was commi tted without 
his knowl edge or that he exercised all due diligence to prevent the contravention of the aforesaid 
provision.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any contravention of the provisions 
of clause ( c) or clause ( d) or clause ( h) or clause ( i) or clause ( k) or clause ( l) or clause ( n) or clause ( r) or 
clause ( s) of section 14 or clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( h) of section 15 has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to , any neglect on the part of, any direc tor, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
have contravened the said provisions and shall be liable to be proceeded for imposition of penalty 
accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “company ” means a body corporate and includes a 
firm or other association of individuals.  
49. Exemption from tax on income .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the Income -tax Act , 
1961 (43 of 1961) or any other enactme nt for the t ime being in force relating to t ax on income, profits or 
gains — 
(a) the Bureau;  
(b) the existing Energy Management Cent re from the date of its constitution to the date of 
establishment of the Bureau,  
shall not be liable to pay any income -tax or  any tax in respect of their income, profits or gains derived.  
50. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government or Director -General or Secretary or Sta te Government or any  officer 
of those Governments or State Commission or its members or any member or officer or other employee 
of the Bureau for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or the rules 
or regulations made there under.  
51. Delegation .—The Bureau may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to any member, 
member of the committee, officer of the Bureau or any other person subject to such conditions, if any, as 
may be specified in the order, such of its powers and fun ctions under this Act (except the powers under 
section 58) as it may deem necessary.  
52. Power to obtain information .—Every designated consumer or manufacturer of equipment or 
appliance specified under clause ( b) of section 14 shall supply the Bureau with such information, and with 
such samples of any material or substance used in relation to any equipment or appliance, as the Bureau 
may require.  
53. Power to exempt .—If the Central Government or the Sta te Government is of the opinion that it is 
necessary or  expedient so to do in the public interest, it may, by notification and subject to such 
conditions as may be specified in the notification, exempt any designated consumer or class of designated 
consumers from application of all or any of the provisions of this Act:  
Provided that the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, shall not grant 
exemption to any designated consumer or class of designated consumers for a period exceeding five 
years:  
Provided further that the Central Governmen t or the State Government, as the case may be, shall 
consult the Bureau of Energy Efficiency before granting such exemption.  
54. Chairperson, Members, officers and employees of the Appellate Tribunal, Members of State 
Commission, Director -General, Secretar y, members, officers and employees of the Bureau to be 
public servants .—The 1*** members, Director -General, Secretary, officers and other employees of the 
Bureau shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of thi s 
Act, to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
                                                           
1. Certain words omitted by  Act of 28 of 2010, s. 12 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  18 
 55. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—The Central Government may give 
directions to a State Government or the Bureau as to carrying out into  execution of this Act in the State.  
56. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) such number of persons to be appointed as members by the Central Government under clauses 
(o), (p) and ( q) of sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(b) the fee and allowances to be p aid to the members under sub -section ( 5) of section 4;  
(c) the salary and allowances payable to the Director -General and other terms and conditions of 
his service and other terms a nd conditions of service of the Secretary of the Bureau under                             
sub-section ( 4) of section 9;  
(d) the terms and conditions of service of officers and other employees of the Bureau under              
sub-section ( 2) of section 10;  
(e) performing such other functions by the Bureau, as may be prescribed, under clause ( u) of                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 13;  
(f) the energy consumption norms and standards for designated consumers under clause ( g) of 
section 14;  
(g) prescribing the different norms and standards for different designated consumers under the 
proviso to clause ( g) of section 14;  
(h) the form and manner and the time within which information with regard to energy consumed 
and the action taken on the recommen dations of the accredited energy auditor be furnished under 
clause ( k) of section 14;  
(i) the form and manner in which the status of energy consumption be submitted under clause ( i) 
of section 14;  
(j) the minimum qualifications for 1[energy auditors and en ergy managers] under clause ( m) of 
section 14;  
(k) the form and manner for preparation of scheme and its implementation under clause ( o) of 
section 14;  
(l) the energy conservation building codes under clause ( p) of section 14;  
2[(la) prescribing the proced ure for issuing the energy savings certificate under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 14A;  
(laa) the value of per metric ton of oil equivalent of energy consumed under section 14B;]  
(m) the matters relating to inspection under sub -section ( 2) of section 17;  
(n) the form in which, and the time at which, the Bureau shall prepare its budget under section 22;  
(o) the form in which, and the time at which, the Bureau shall prepare its annual report under 
section 23;  
(p) the form in which the accounts of the Bureau shal l be maintained under section 25;  
(q) the manner of holding inquiry under sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(r) the form and fee for filing appeal under sub -section ( 2) of section 31;  
3*  *   *   *   * 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 28 of 2010, s. 13, for “ energy managers ” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
2. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
3. Cls. ( s), (t) and ( u) omitted by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  19 
 (v) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, or may be made, by rules.  
57. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification, 
make rules for carrying out the provi sions of this Act and not inconsistent with the rules, if any, made by 
the Central Government.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) energy conservation building codes under clause ( a) of section 15;  
(b) the form, the manner and the period within which information with regard to energy 
consumption shall be furnished under clause ( h) of section 15;  
(c) the person or any authority who shal l administer the Fund and the manner in which the Fund 
shall be administered under sub -section ( 4) of section 16;  
(d) the matters to be included for the purposes of inspection under sub -section ( 2) of section 17;  
(e) any other ma tter which is to be, or may  be, prescribed, or in respect of which provision is to 
be made, or may be made, by rules.  
58. Power of Bureau to make regulations .—(1) The Bureau may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government and subject to the condition of previous publicatio n, by notification, make 
regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of th is Act and the rules made there under to carry out the 
purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations m ay 
provide for all or any of t he following matters, namely: — 
(a) the times and places of the meetings of the Governing Council and the procedure to be 
followed at such meetings under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) the members of advisory committees constituted under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(c) the powers and duties that may be exercised and discharged by the Director -General of the 
Bureau under sub -section ( 6) of section 9;  
(d) the levy of fee for services provided for promoting efficient use of energy and its conservation 
under clause ( n) of sub -section ( 2) of section 13;  
(e) the list of accredited energy auditors under clause ( o) of sub -section ( 2) of section 13;  
1[(f) the qualifications, criteria and cond itions subject to which a person may be accredited as an 
energy auditor and the procedure for such accreditation under clause ( p) of sub -section ( 2) of                 
section 13;]  
(g) the manner and the intervals of time in which the energy audit shall be  conducted under clause 
(q) of sub -section ( 2) of section 13;  
(h) certification procedure for 2[energy auditors and energy managers] under clause ( r) of                 
sub-section ( 2) of section 13;  
(i) particulars  required to be displayed on label and the manner of their display under clause ( d) of 
section 14;  
(j) the manner and the intervals of time for conduct of energy audit under clause ( h) or clause ( s) 
of section 14;  
(k) the manner and the intervals of time f or conducting energy audit by an accredited energy 
auditor under clause ( c) of section 15;  
(l) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, specified.  
59. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament and State Legislature .—(1) Every rule 
made  by the Central Government and every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 28 of 2010, s. 14, for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
2. Subs. by  s. 14, ibid., for “ energy managers ” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  20 
 be after it is made, before each House of Parliament while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days 
which may be comprised in one session or in two  or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of 
the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in 
making any modification in the rule or regulation, or both Houses agree that the rule or reg ulation should 
not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity of anything p reviously done under that rule or regulation.  
(2) Every rule made by the State Government shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of the State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such Legislature consists of 
one House, before that House.  
60. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
61. Provisions of Act not to apply in certain cases .—The provisions of this Act shall not apply to 
the Ministry or Department of the Central Government dealing with Defence, Atomic Energy or such 
other similar Ministries or Departments or undertakings or Boar ds or institutions under the control of such 
Ministries or Departments as may be notified by the Central Government.  
62. Power to remove difficulty .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by  order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two  years from the 
date of the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.   21 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 2( s)] 
LIST OF ENERGY INTENSIVE INDUSTRIES AND OTHER ESTABLISHMENTS 1*** 
1. Alumin ium; 
2. Fertilizers;  
3. Iron and Steel;  
4. Cement;  
5. Pulp and paper;  
6. Chlor Alkali;  
7. Sugar;  
8. Textile;  
9. Chemicals;  
10. Railways;  
11. Port Trust;  
12. Transport Sector (industries and services);  
13. Pe trochemical, Gas Crackers, Naphtha Crackers and Petroleum Refineries;  
14. Thermal power stations, hydel power stations, electricity transmission companies and distribution 
companies;  
15. Commercial buildings or establishments.  
 
_____________  
                                                           
1. The words “specified as designated consumers” omitted by  Act of 28 of 2010, s. 15 (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  
--------------------------The Indian Council of World Affairs Act, 2001--------------------------
 
1 
 THE INDIAN COUNCIL OF WORLD AFFAIRS ACT, 2001  
–––––––  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
–––––––  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration of the Indian Council of World Affairs as institution of national importance.  
3. Definitions.  
4. Incorporation of the Council.  
5. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the existing Council to the Council.  
6. Obligation to transfer property or assets.  
7. Composition of the Council.  
8. Term of office and vacancies among members.  
9. Powers and functions of President.  
10. Powers and functions of Vice -Presidents.  
11. Allowances of members.  
12. Meetings of Council.  
13. Objects of Council.  
14. Governing Body and other committees of Council.  
15. Staff of Council.  
16. Functions of Council.  
17. Payment to Council.  
18. Fund of  Council.  
19. Budget of Council.  
20. Accounts and audit.  
21. Annual report.  
22. Authentication of orders and instruments of Council.  
23. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Council.  
23A. Transitory provision.  
24. Reports, returns and inform ation.  
   
2 
 SECTIONS  
25. Power to make rules.  
26. Power to make regulations.  
27. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
28. Power to remove difficulties.  
28A. Power to remove difficulties.  
29. Repeal and saving.    
3 
 THE INDIAN COUNCIL OF WORLD AFFAI RS ACT, 2001  
ACT NO. 29 OF 2001  
[3rd September,  2001.]  
An Act to declare the Indian Council of World Affairs to be an institution of national importance and to 
provide for its incorporation a nd matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -second Year of the  Republic of India as follows: – 
1. Short title and commencement. –(1) This Act may be called the Indian Coun cil of World Affairs 
Act, 2001.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, it shall be deemed to have come into force on the 1st day 
of September, 2000.  
2. Declaration of the Indian Council of World Affairs as institution of national importance. –
Whereas the objects of the Indian Council o f World Affairs, a society registered under the Societies 
Registration Act, 1860 (21 of 1860) are such as to make the institution one of national importance, it is 
hereby declared that the institution, known as the Indian Council of World Affairs, is an in stitution of 
national importance.  
3. Definitions. –In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, – 
(a) “appointed day ” means the da te of commencement of this Act;  
(b) “Chairperson ” means the Cha irperson of the Governing Body;  
(c) “Council ” means the In dian Council of World Affair s incorporated under section 4;  
(d) “Director -General ” means the Director -General of the Council;  
(e) “existing Council ” means the Indian Council of World Affairs, a society registered under the 
Societies Registration Act, 1860  (21 of 1860) and functioning as such immedi ately before the 
appointed day;  
(f) “Fund ” means the Fund of the Cou ncil referred to in section 18;  
(g) “Governing Body ” means the Governing Body of the Council;  
(h) “member ” means a member of the Council and includes th e President and Vice -President;  
(i) “President ” mean s the President of the Council;  
(j) “regulations ” means the r egulations made under this Act;  
(k) “rules ” means th e rules made under this Act;  
(l) “Vice -Presid ents” means the Vice -Presidents of the Council.  
4. Incorporation of the Council. –(1) The Indian Council of World Affairs is hereby constituted as a 
body corporate by the name of the Indian Council of World Affairs and as such body corporate it shall 
have perpetual succession and a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this  Act, to acquire, 
hold and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to contract and shal l by that name sue 
and be sued.   
4 
 (2) The head office of the Council shall be at Delhi and the Council may, with the previous approval 
of the Central Governme nt, establish bra nches at other places in India.  
5. Transfer of assets and liabilities of the existing Council to the Council. –(1) On and from the 
appointed day, – 
(a) all properties and other assets vested in the existing Council immediately before that day, shall 
vest in the  Council;  
(b) all debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and 
things engaged to be done by, with or fo r the existing Council immediately before that day for or in 
connection with the purposes of the existing Council, shall be deemed to have been incurred, entered 
into and engaged to be do ne by, with or for the Council;  
(c) all sums of money due to the exis ting Council, immediately before that day, shall be d eemed 
to be due to the Council;  
(d) all suits and other legal proceedings instituted or which could have been instituted by or 
against the existing Council, immediately before that day, may be continued or instituted  by or 
against the Council; and  
(e) every employee holding any office under the existing Council immediately before that day, 
shall, on that day, hold his office or service under the Council with the same rights and privileges as 
to pension, g ratuity and other matters as would have bee n admissible to him if there had been no such 
vesting; and shall continue to do so unless and until his employment under the Council is duly 
terminated or until his remuneration and other conditions of service a re duly altered by the Council.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947) or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the absorption of any employee by the Council in its regular service 
under this secti on shall not entitle such emplo yee to any compensation under that Act or any other law 
and no such claim shall be entertained by any cour t, tribunal or other authority.  
6. Obligation to transfer property or assets. –(1) Every person having possession, custody or 
control of property forming part of the properties and other assets referred to in clause ( a) of  
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 shall deliver forthwith such pr operty to the Director -General.  
(2) Any person in  charge of the property and other assets of th e existing Council immediately before 
the commencement of this Act shall, within ten days from that day, furnish to the Director -General a 
complete inventory of all properties and assets (inclu ding particulars of book debts and investments and 
belongings) immediately before the commencement of this Act and also of all agreements entered into by 
the existing Council or any person on its behalf.  
7. Composition of the Council. –(1) On and from the 1st day of September, 2001 and until the 
appointment of date un der sub -section ( 2), the Council shall consist of the following members, namely: – 
(a) the Vice -President of India, who shall be President, ex officio ; 
(b) the Prime Minister of India;  
(c) the speaker of the Lok Sabha;  
(d) the Leader of the House, Rajya Sabha;   
5 
 (e) the Leader of the Opposit ion, Lok Sabha;  
(f) the Leader of the Opposition, Rajya Sabha.  
(2) On and from such date as may be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette 1*** the Coun cil shall consist of the follow ing members, namely: – 
(a) the Vice -President of India, who shal l be the President, ex officio ; 
(b) three Vice -Presidents 2[to be nominated, in the first instance by the Council constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) and thereafter by the Council constituted under this sub-section ]; 
3[(c) Director -General , ex officio  Member -Secretary;]  
(d) five members of the Lok Sabha to be nominated by the Speaker of the Lok Sabha and three 
members of the Rajya Sabha to be nominate d by t he Chairman of the Rajya Sabha;  
(e) seven members, who are distinguished in the field of diplomacy, international affairs, 
international law, Multilateral or United Nations affairs, security and disarmament  4[to be nominated, 
in the first instance by  the Council constituted under sub -section ( 1) and thereafter by the Council 
constituted under this sub -section;]  
(f) seven members, who are representatives (of which at least two shall be the Vice -Chancellors) 
of Universities or research institutions of higher learning from amongst experts in the fields of 
history, economics and other social sciences  4[to be nominated, in the first instance by the Council 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) and thereafter by the Council constituted under this sub -section;]  
(g) seven members, who are 5[either media personalities or persons from organisations] such as 
India International Centre, Centre for Policy Research, Indian Council of Social Science Research, 
Institute of  Defence Studies and Analyses, Indian Council of C ultural Relations, and interested in the 
work and objectives of the Council to be 6[nominated]  by the  Governing Body of the Council;  
(h) five members 7[from Business or]  Chambers of Commerce, Federation of Indian Chambers of 
Commerce and Industry, Confederation of Indian Industry, Associated Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry of India,  Federation of Indian Export Org anisations to be nominated by the  Governing Body 
of the C ouncil;  
 
                                                           
1. Certain words and figures o mitted by Act 5 of 2004 , s. 2 ( w.e.f. 7-1-2004 ). 
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “ as may be nominated by the Council”  (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ). 
3. Subs . by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( c) (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ). 
4. Subs . by s. 2, ibid., for “to be nominated by the Council” (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ). 
5. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “either media personalities or representatives of  organisations ”  (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ). 
6. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “selected” (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ). 
7. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “who are representatives of Business or” (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
6 
 (i) three members from the Ministry of  External Affairs, ex officio  [Foreign Secretary, Financial 
Advisor, and Dean (Foreign Servi ce Institute)]  1***; 
(j) five members to be nominated by the Central Government to represent respectively the 
Ministr ies of the Central Government dealing with Education, Culture, Urban Development, Science 
and Technology and Defence, ex officio . 
(3) It is hereby declared that the office of the member of the Council shall not disqualify its holder for 
being chosen as, or  for being, a Member  of either House of Parliament.  
(4) A person shall be disqualified for being nominated  or selected as a member if he – 
(a) has been convicted and sentenced to imprisonment for an offence whi  ch, in the opinion of the 
Central Governmen t, involves moral turpitude; or  
(b) is an undischarged insolvent; or  
(c) is of unsound mind and stands so  declared by a competent court.  
8. Term of office and vacancies among members. –(1) Save as otherwise provided in this section, 
the term of office of a mem ber shall be three years from the date o f his nomination.  
(2) The term of office of the member nominated to fill a casual vacancy shall continue for remainder 
of the term of the member in whose place he is nominated.  
(3) A member shall, unless the Central Government otherwise directs, continue in office until another 
person is nomi nated as a member in his place.  
(4) The Central Government shall remove a member if he – 
(a) becomes subject to any of the disqualifications mentioned in sub -section ( 4) of section  7; or 
(b) refuses to act or becomes incapable of acting; or  
(c) is, without obtaining leave of absence from the Council, absent from three consecut ive 
meetings of the Council; or  
(d) in the opinion of the Central Government, has so abused his position as to render his 
continuance in office detr imental to the public interest:  
Provided that no member shall be removed under this clause unless he has been given a 
reasonable opportunit y of being heard in the matter.  
(5) A member shall, unless disqualified under sub -section ( 4) of section 7, be eligib le for                  
re-nomination.  
(6) A member may resign from his office by writing under his hand addressed to the Central 
Government but  shall continue in his office until his resignation is accepted by that Government.  
(7) The manner of filling vacancies among members shall be such  as may be prescribed by rules.  
9. Powers and functions of President. –The President shall exercise such power s and discharge such 
functions as are laid down in this Act or as may be prescribed by rules.  
                                                           
1. The words “ , to be nominated by the Chai rperson of the Governing Body” omitted by Act 5 of 2004, s. 2 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ). 
  
7 
 10. Powers and functions of Vice -Presidents. –The Vice -Presidents shall exercise such of the 
powers and perform such of the functions of the President as may be pr escribed by rules or as may be 
delegated to hi m by the President.  
11. Allowances of members. –Members shall receive such allowances, if any, from the Council  as 
may be prescribed by rules.  
12. Meetings of Council. –The Council shall hold its first meeting at such time and place as may be 
appointed by the Central Government and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at the first meeting as may be laid down by that Government; an d thereafter the 
Council shall meet at such times and places and observe such rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of business at its meetings as ma y be prescribed by regulations.  
13. Objects of Council. –The o bjects of the Council shall be – 
(a) to promote the study of Indian and international affairs so as to develop a body of informed 
opinion on international matters;  
(b) to promote India's relations with other countries through study, research, discussion, lectures, 
exchange of ideas and inform ation with other organisations within and outside India  engaged in 
similar activities;  
(c) to serve as a clearing house of information and kno wledge regarding world affairs;  
(d) to publish books, periodicals, journals, reviews, papers, pamphlets and other literature on 
subjects covered under clauses ( a) and ( b); 
(e) to establish contacts with organisations promoting obj ects mentioned in this section;  
(f) to arrange conferences and seminars to discuss and study the Indian policy tow ards 
international affairs; and  
(g) to undertake such other activities for the promotion of ideas and attainment of the           
above -mentioned objects.  
14. Governing Body and other committees of Council. –(1) There shall be a Governing Body of the 
Council  which shall be c onstituted by the Council.  
(2) The Governing Body shall be the executive committee of the Council and shall exercise such 
powers and discharge such functions as the Council may, by regulations made in this behalf, confer or 
impose upon it. 
(3) On and from such date as may be appointed by the Central Government by notification in the 
Official Gazette, the Vice -President of India, ex officio  shall be the Chairperson of the Governing Body 
and shall exercise such powers and discharge such fu nctions as ma y be prescribed by regulations.  
(4) The procedure to be followed by the Governing Body in the exercise of its powers and discharge 
of its functions and the term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among the members of the 
Governing Bod y, shall be such as ma y be prescribed by regulations.  
(5) Subject to such control and restrictions as may be prescribed by rules, the Council may constitute 
as many standing committees and as many ad hoc  committees as it thinks fit for exercising any power  or  
8 
 discharging any f unction of the Council or for in quiring into, or reporting or advising upon, any matter 
which  the Council may refer to them.  
(6) The Chairperson and members of the Governing Body or a standing committee or an ad hoc  
committee shall receive such allowances as may be prescribed by regulations.  
15. Staff of Council. –1[(1) There shall be a Director -General of the Council who shall, before a 
Coun cil is constituted under sub -section ( 2) of section 7, be appointed by the Council constituted under 
sub-section ( 1) of that section and thereafter during the tenure of a Council constituted under sub -section 
(2) of section 7, by that Council.  
(1A) Every appointment of the Director -General under sub -section ( 1) shall be made from  a panel of 
at least two names recommended by the Government of India in the Ministry of External Affairs.  
(1B) The Director -General shall be the chief executive officer of the Council.  
(1C) The Director -General shall be at least equivalent to the rank of Additional Secretary to the 
Government of India and shall have a tenure not exceeding three years.  
(2) The Director -General shall act as ex officio  Member -Secretary to the Council, its Governing Body 
and other bodies and Committees thereof.]  
(3) The Direct or-General shall exercise such powers and discharge such functions as may be 
prescribed by regulations or as may be delegated to him by the Council or the President or the Gov erning 
Body or the Chairperson.  
(4) The Financial Advisor of the Ministry of External Affairs shall be the Fi nancial Advisor of the 
Council.  
(5) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Council may appoint such number of 
other officers and employees as may be necessary for the exercise of its powers and efficient di scharge of 
its functions and may determine the designations an grades of suc h other officers and employees.  
(6) Subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, the Director -General and other officers and 
employees of the Council shall be entitled to s uch salary and allowances and shall be governed by such 
conditions of service in respect of leave, pension gratuity, provident fund and other matters, as may be 
prescribed by regulations made in this behalf.  
16. Functions of Council. –The Council shall unde rtake various plans to promote, organise and 
implement various programmes for efficiently achieving the objects of the Council specified in section 13 
and shall also perform s uch other functions as the Centr al Gover nment may, by rules, prescribe.  
17. Payme nt to Council. –The Central Government may, after due appropriation made by Parliament 
by law in this behalf, pay to the Council in each financial year such sums as may be considered necessary 
for the exercise of powers and efficient discharge of functions of the Council under this Act.  
18. Fund of Council. –(1) The Council shall maintain a Fund  to which shall be credited to – 
(a) all moneys receiv ed from the Central Government;  
                                                           
1. Subs . by Act 5 of 2004 , s. 3, for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ). 
  
9 
 (b) all moneys received by the Council by way of grants, gifts, donations, benefac tions, bequests 
or transfers; and  
(c) all moneys received by the Council in any other m anner or from any other source.  
(2) All moneys credited to the Fund shall be deposited in such banks or invested in such manner as 
the Council may, subject to the approv al of the Central Government, decide.  
(3) The Fund shall be applied towards meeting the administrative and other expenses of the Council, 
including expenses incurred in the exercise of its powers and discharge of its functions under section 16 
or in relation to any of the activities referred to therein or for anything relatable thereto.  
19. Budget of Council. –The Council shall prepare, in such form and at such time every year, as may 
be prescribed by rules, a budget in respect of the financial year ne xt ensuing, showing the estimated 
receipts and expenditure  of the Council and shall forw ard to the Central Government such number of 
copies thereof as may be prescribed by rules.  
20. Accounts and audit. –(1) The Council shall maintain proper accounts and ot her relevant records 
and prepare an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet in such form as the Central 
Government may, by rules,  prescribe and in accordance wit h such general directions as may be issued by 
that Government, in consultation  with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Council shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and 
any expenditure incurred by him in connection with such audit shall be payable by the Council to the 
Comptroller and Auditor -General of I ndia.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed by him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the Council shall have the same rights, privileges and authority in 
connection with suc h audit as the Comptroller and Auditor General of India has in connection with the 
audit of the Government accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand the production of 
books, accounts, connected vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect the office or offices 
of the Council.  
(4) The accounts of the Council as certified by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India or any 
other person appointed by him in this behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government a nd that Govern ment shall cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
21. Annual report. –The Council shall prepare every year, in such form and at such time as may be 
prescribed by rules, an annual report giving a true and full account of its activities during the previous 
year and copies thereof shall be forwarded to the Central Government an d that Government shall cause 
the same to be laid b efore each House of Parliament.  
22. Authentication of orders and instruments of Council. –All orders and decisions of the Council 
shall be authenticated by the signature of the President or the Vice -Preside nt and all other instruments 
issued by the Council shall be authenticated by the signature of the Director -General or any other officer 
of the Council authorised  by the Council in this behalf.  
   
10 
 23. Vacancy, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of the Counc il.–No act or proceeding of the 
Council, Governing Body or any standing or ad hoc committee under this Act shall be invalid merely by 
reason of – 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Council; or  
(b) any  defect in the appointment of a person act ing as a member of the Council; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Council not affecting the merits of the case.  
1[23A. Transitory provision. –For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that till the 
constitution of a Council in terms of sub -section ( 2) of section 7, the Council referred to in sub -section ( 1) 
thereof shall be deemed to have been a Council for the purposes of this Act notwithstanding anything 
contrary contained in any provision of t his Act:  
Provided that anything done or any action taken or any proceeding initiated under any provision of 
this Act or rules or regulations made there under shall not be called in question before any court or other 
authority because of non -existence of a Council in terms of sub -section ( 2) of section 7.]  
24. Reports, returns and information. –The Council shall furnish to the Central Government such 
reports, returns and other information as that Government may require from time to time.  
25. Power to make ru les.–(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules to carry out the provisions of this A ct. 
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) the manner of filling vacancies among members under sub -section ( 7) of section 8;  
(b) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the President and the             
Vice -Presidents under section s 9 and 10, as the case may be;  
(c) the allowances to be paid t o the members under section 11;  
(d) the control and restrictions in relation to the constitution of standing and ad hoc committees 
under sub -section ( 5) of section 14;  
(e) the number of other officers and emp loyees that may be appointed by the Council and the 
manner of such appointment under sub -section ( 5) of section 15;  
(f) the salaries and allowances payable to the Director -General and other officers and employees 
of the Council under sub -section ( 6) of se ction 15;  
(g) such other functions to be performed b y the Council under section 16;  
(h) the form in which and the time at which the budget shall be prepared by the Council and the 
number of copies thereof to be forwarded to the Centr al Government under section 19;  
                                                           
1.  Ins . by Act 5 of 2004, s. 4 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ).  
11 
 (i) the form in which an annual statement of accounts including the balance -sheet shall be 
prepared by the Council under sub -section ( 1) of section 20;  
(j) the form in which and the time at which the annual report of the activities of the Counc il shall 
be submitted to the Centr al Government under section 21;  
(k) any other matter which has to be or may be prescribed by rules.  
26. Power to make regulations. –(1) The Council may make regulations consistent with the 
provisions of this Act and the rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or a ny of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) the summoning and holding of meetings, other than the first meeting of the Council, the time 
and place where such meetings are to be held and the transaction of business at such meetings under 
section 12;  
(b) the p owers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the Governing Body and the 
Chairperson under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) of section 14;  
(c) the procedure to be followed by the Governing Body in exercise of its powers and discharge 
of its functions and t he term of office of, and the manner of filling vacancies among, the members of 
the Governing Body under sub -section ( 4) of section 14;  
(d) the allowances to be paid to the Chairperson and members of the Governing Body, standing 
and ad hoc committees under  sub-section ( 6) of section 14;  
(e) the powers and functions to be exercised and discharged by the Director -General under      
sub-section ( 3) of section 15;  
(f) the conditions of service of the Director -General and other officers and employees of the 
Coun cil under  sub-section ( 6) of section 15;  
(g) any other matter which has to be or ma y be prescribed by regulations.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the first regulations under this Act shall be 
made by the Governing Body and any regulations so made may be altered or rescinded by the Council in 
exercise of its powers under sub -section ( 1). 
27. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament. –Every rule and every regulation made 
under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be aft er it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it 
is in session, for a  total period of thirty days whi ch may be comprised in one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the sessio n or the 
successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modi fication in the rule or regulati on or 
both Houses agree that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter 
have effect only in such modified fo rm or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such 
modif ication or annulment shall be wi thout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under 
that rule or regulation.   
12 
 28. Power to remove difficulties. –(1) If any difficulty ar ises in giving effect to the provisions of this 
Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not 
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act . 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
1[28A. Power to remove difficulties .–(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
the Indian Council of World Affairs (Amendment) Act, 2003  (5 of 2004) , the Central Government may, 
by order, do anything not inconsistent with such provisions for th e purpose of removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the 
commencement of the Indian Council of World Affairs (Amendment) Act, 2003  (5 of 2004) . 
(2) Every order made under this sectio n shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.]  
29. Repeal and saving .–(1) The Indian Council of World Affairs (Second) Ordinance, 2001 (Ord. 3 
of 2001) is  hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the said Ordinance, anything done or any action taken under the 
said Ordinance shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act. 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 5 of 2004, s. 5 (w.e.f. 7 -1-2004 ). 
--------------------------The Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers Rights Act, 2001--------------------------
1 
 THE PROTECTION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND FARMERS’  RIGHTS  ACT, 2001  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTION S 
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extend and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
PROTECTION OF PLANT  VARIETIES AND FARMERS’  RIGHTS  AUTHORITY  AND REGISTRY  
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’  Rights Authority  
3. Establishment of Authority.  
4. Meeting s of Authority.  
5. Committee s of Authority.  
6. Officers and  other  employees of Authority.  
7. Chairperson to be Chief Executive.  
8. General functions of Authority.                            
9. Authentication of orders, etc., of Authority.  
10. Delegation.  
11. Power of Authority.  
Registry  
12. Registry and office s thereof.  
13. National Register  of Plant Varieties.  
 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND ESSENTIALLY DERIVED VARIETY  
Application for registration  
14. Application for registration.  
15. Registrable varieties.  
16. Persons who may make application.  
17. Compulsory variety denomination.  
18. Form of application.  
19. Test to be conducted.  
20. Acceptance of application or amendment thereof.  
21. Advertisement of application.  
22. Registrar to consider grounds of opposition.  
 
  2 
 Registration of essentially derived variety  
SECTIONS  
23. Registration of essentially derived variety.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
DURATION AND EFFECT OF REGISTRATION AND BENEFIT SHARING  
24. Issue of certificate of registration.  
25. Publication of list of varieties.  
26. Determination of benefit sharing by Authority.  
27. Breeder to deposit seeds or propagating material.  
28. Registration to confer right.  
29. Exclusion of certain var ieties.  
30. Researcher’s rights.  
31. Special provisions relating to application for registration from citizens of convention countries.  
32. Provisions as to reciprocity.  
 
CHAPTER V  
SURRENDER AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE AND RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION  OF REGISTER  
33. Surrender of certificate of registration.  
34. Revocation of protection on certain grounds.  
35. Payment of annual fees and forfeiture of registration in default thereof.  
36. Power to cancel or change registration and to rectify the Register . 
37. Correction of Register . 
38. Alteration of denomination of a registered  variety.  
 
CHATER VI  
FARMERS’  RIGHTS  
39. Farmers’  rights.  
40. Certain information to be given in application for registration.  
41. Rights of communities.  
42. Protection of innocent infringement.  
43. Authorisation of farmers’  variety.  
44. Exemption from fees. 
45. Gene Fund.  
46. Framing of schemes, etc.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
COMPULSORY  LICENCE  
47. Power of Authority to make order for compulsory licence in certain circumstances.  
48. When requirement of public deemed to have not been satisfied.  
49. Adjournment of application for grant of compulsory licence.  3 
 SECTIONS  
50. Duration of compulsory licence . 
51. Authority to settle terms and condition s of licence.  
52. Revocation of compulsory licence.  
53. Modification of compulsory licence.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PLANT VARIETIES  PROTECTION  APPELLANTE TRIBUNAL  
54. Tribunal.  
55. Composition of Tribunal.  
56. Appeal s to Tribunal.  
57. Orders of Tribunal.  
58. Procedure of Tribunal.  
59. Transitional provision.  
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
60. Grants by Central Government.  
61. Authority Fund.  
62. Budget, accounts and audit.  
63. Financial and administrative powers of Chairperson.  
 
CHAPTER X  
INFRINGEMENT, OFFENCES, PENALTIES AND PRODURE  
Infringement  
64. Infringement.  
65. Suit for infringement, etc.  
66. Relief in suits for infringement.  
67. Opinion of scientific adviser.  
Offences, penalties and procedure  
68. Prohibition to apply denomination of a registered  variety.  
69. Meaning of  falsely  applying denomination of a registered  variety.  
70. Penalty for applying false denomination, etc.  
71. Penalty for selling varieties to which false denomination is applied, etc.  
72. Penalty for falsely representing a variety as registered . 
73. Penalty for subsequent offence.  
74. No offence in certain cases.  
75. Exemption of certain pers ons employed in ordinary course  of business.  
76. Procedure where invalidity of registration is pleaded by the accused.  
77. Offences by companies.  
 
  4 
 CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
SECTIONS  
78. Protection of security of India.  
79. Implied warranty on sale of registered  variety, etc.  
80. Death of party to a proceeding.  
81. Right of registered  agent and the registered  licensee to institute su it. 
82. Evidence of entry in Register , etc., and things done by the Authority and the Registrar.  
83. Authority, Registrar and other officers no t compellable to production of Register , etc.  
84. Document open to  public inspection.  
85. Report of Authority to be placed before  Parliament.  
86. Government to be bound.  
87. Proceedings before Authority or Registrar.  
88. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
89. Bar of jurisdiction.  
90. Members and staff of Authority, etc., to be public servants.  
91. Exemption from tax on wealth and income.  
92. Act to have  overriding effect.  
93. Power of Central Government to give directions.  
94. Power to remove difficulties.  
95. Power to make regulations.  
96. Power of  Central Government to make rules.  
97. Rules, regulations and schemes to be laid before Parliament.  
 
 
 
  5 
 THE PROTECTION OF PLAN T VARIETIES AND FARMERS’  RIGHTS ACT, 2001  
ACT NO. 53 OF 2001  
[30th October , 2001.]  
An Act to provide for the establishment of an effective system for protection of plant  varieties, 
the right s of farmers and plant breeders  and to encourage the develop ment of new varieties of 
plants.  
WHEREAS  it is considered necessary to recognise and protect the rights of the farmers in respect of 
their contribution made at any time in conserving, improving and making available plant genetic 
resources for the  development of  new plant varieties ; 
AND WHEREAS  for accelerated agricultural development in the country, it is necessary to protect plant 
breeders'  rights to stimulate investment for research and development, both in the public and private 
sector, for the  development of  new plant varieties;  
AND WHEREAS  such protection will facilitate the growth of the seed industry in the country which 
will ensure the  availability of high quality seeds and plant ing material to the farmers;  
AND WHEREAS , to give effect to the aforesaid obj ectives, it is necessary to undertake measures for the 
protection of  the rights of farmers and plant breeders;  
AND WHEREAS  India, having ratified the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual 
Property Rights  should , inter  alia, make provision for giving effect to sub -paragraph ( b) of paragraph 3 of 
article 27 in Part II of  the said Agreement relating to protection of plant varieties.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -second Year of the Republic of India as follows :— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short t itle, extent and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Protection of Plant 
Varieties and Farmers’  Rights Act, 2001.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notificatio n in the 
Official  Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in  any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force  of that provisi on. 
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless  the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Authority ” means the Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’  Rights Authority 
established under sub-section  (1) of section 3;  
(b) “benefit sharing ”, in relation to a variety, means such proportion of the benefit accruing to a 
breeder of such  variety or  such proportion of the benefit accruing to the breeder from an agent or a 
licensee of such  variety, as  the case may be, for which a claimant shall be e ntitled as determined by 
the Authority under section 26.  
(c) “breeder ” means a person or group of persons or a farmer or group of farmers or any 
institution which has  bred, evolved or developed any variety;  
(d) “Chairman ” means the Chairman of the Tribunal;  
(e) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Authority appointed under clause ( a) of                     
sub-section ( 5) of section 3;  
(f) “convention country ” means a country which has acceded to an international con vention for 
the protection  of plant varieties to which India has also acceded, or a country which has a law on 
protection of plant varieties  on the basis of which India has entered into an agr eement for granting 
plant breeders' right to the citizens of  both the countries;  
                                                           
1. 11th November, 2005, ss. 2 to 13 (both inclusive) and ss. 95, 96 and 97, vide notification No. S.O. 1588(E), dated 11th 
November, 2005, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
 19th October, 2006, s. 1 and ss. 14 to 94 (both inclusive)  vide notification No. S.O. 1797(E), dated 19th October, 2006, see 
Gazette of India Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 6 
 (g) “denomination ”, in relation to a variety or its propagating material or essentially derived 
variety or its  propagating material, means the denomination of such variety or its propagating material 
or essentially derived  variety or its propagating material, as the case may be, expressed by means of 
letters or a combination of letters  and figures written in any language;  
(h) “essential characteristics ” means such heritable traits of a plant variety which are  determined 
by the expression o f one or more genes of other heritable determinants that contribute to the  principle 
features, performance or value of the plant variety;  
(i) “essentially derived variety ”, in respect of a variety (the initial variety) , shall be said to be 
essentially deri ved from such initial variety when it — 
(i) is predominantly derived from such initial va riety, or from a variety that  itself is 
predominantly  derived from such initial variety, while retaining the expression of the essential 
characteristics that results fr om the genotype or combination of genotype of such initial variety;  
(ii) is clearly distinguishable from such initial variety; and  
(iii) conforms (except for the differences which result from the act of derivation) to such 
initial variety  in the expression  of the essential characteristics that result from the genotype or 
combination of genotype of  such initial variety;  
(j) “extant variety ” means a variety available in India which is — 
(i) notified under section 5 of the Seeds Act, 1966  (54 of 1966); or  
(ii) farmers’  variety; or  
(iii) a variety about which there is common knowledge; or  
(iv) any other va riety which is in public domain;  
(k) “farmer ” means any person who — 
(i) cultivates crops  by cultivating the land himself; or  
(ii) cultivates crops by directly supervising the cultivation of land through any other person; 
or 
(iii) conserves and preserves, severally or jointly, with any person any wild species or 
traditional  varieties or adds value to such wild species or traditional varieties through selection 
and identification of their  useful properties;  
(l) “farmers ’ variety ” means a variety which — 
(i) has been traditionally cultivated and evolved by the farmers in their fields; or  
(ii) is a wild relative or land race of a variety about which the farme rs possess the common 
knowledge;  
(m) “Gene Fund ” means the National Gene Fund constituted under sub-section  (1) of section 45;  
(n) “Judicial Member ” means a Member of the Tribunal appointed as such under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 55 and includes  the Chairman ; 
(o) “Member ” means a Judicial Member or a Technical member of the Tribunal and includes  the 
Chairman;  
(p) “member ” means a member of the Authority appointed under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 5) of 
section 3 and  includes the member -secretary;  
(q) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(r) “propagating material ” means any plant or its component or part thereof including an intended 
seed or seed  which is capable of , or suitable for , regeneration into a plant;  
(s) “Register ” means a national Register  of Plant Varieties referred to in section 13;  7 
 (t)  “Registrar ” means a Registrar of Plant Varieties appointed under sub -section ( 4) of section 12 
and includes  the Registrar -General;  
(u) “Registrar -General ” means the Registrar -General of  Plant Varieties appointed under                 
sub-section ( 3) of section12;  
(v) “Registry ” means the Plant Variety Registry referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(w) “regulations ” means regulations made by the Authority under this Act;  
(x) “seed” means a type of living embryo or propagule capable of regeneration and giving rise to 
a plant which is  true to such type;  
(y) “Tribunal ” means the Plant Varieties Protection Appellate Tribunal established under               
section 54;  
(z) “Technical Mem ber” means a Member of the Tribunal who is not a Judicial Member ; 
(za) “variety ”, means a plant grouping except micro -organism within a single botanical taxon of 
the lowest  known rank, which can be — 
(i) defined by the expression of the characteristics resulting from a given genotype of that 
plant  grouping;  
(ii) distinguished from any other plant grouping by expression of at least one of the said  
characteristics; and  
(iii) considered as a unit with regard to its suitability for being propagated, which re mains 
unchanged  after such propagation,  
and includes propagating material of such variety, extant variety, transgenic variety,  farmers’  variety and 
essentially derived variety.  
CHAPTER II  
PROTECTION OF PLANT  VARIETIES  AND FARMERS’  RIGHTS AUTHORITY  AND REGISTRY  
Protection of Plant Varieties and Farmers’  Rights Authority  
3. Establishment of Authority .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official 
Gazette, establish an authority to be  known as the Protection  of Plant Varieties and Farmers’  Rights 
Authority for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) The Authority shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having perpetual  succession and a 
common seal with power to acquire, hold and dispose of properties, both movable and  immovable, and to 
contract, and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) The head office of the Authority shall be at such place as the Central Government may, by 
notification in  the Official Gazette, specify and the Authority may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government,  establish branch offices at other places in India.  
(4) The Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and fifteen members.  
(5) (a) The Chairperson to be appointed by the Central Government  shall be a person of outstanding 
caliber and eminence, with long practical experience to the satisfaction of that Government especially in 
the field of  plant varietal research or agricultural development.  
(b) The members of the Authority, to be appointed by the Central Government, shall be as  follows , 
namely :— 
(i) the Agriculture Commissioner, Government of India, Department of Agriculture and  
Cooperation, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(ii) the Deputy Director General in charge of Crop Sciences, Indian Council of Agricultural  
Research, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(iii) the Joint Secretary in charge of Seeds, Government of I ndia, Department of Agriculture and  
Cooperation, New Delhi, ex officio ; 8 
 (iv) the Horticulture Commissioner, Government of In dia, Department of Agriculture  and 
Cooperation, New Delhi, ex officio;  
(v) the Director, National Bureau of Plant Genetic Resources, New Delhi, ex officio ; 
(vi) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, to  represent 
the Department of Bio -technology, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(vii) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to  represent 
the Ministry of Environment and Forests , Government of India, ex officio ; 
(viii) one member not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India to  represent 
the Ministry of Law , Justice and Company Affairs, Government of India, ex officio ; 
(ix) one representative from a National or State level farmers’  organisation to be nominated  by 
the Central Government;  
(x) one representative from a tribal organisation to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xi) one representative from the seed industry to be nominated by the Central Government;  
(xii) one repre sentative from an agricultural U niversity to be nominated by the Central  
Government;  
(xiii) one representative from a National or State level women’s organisation associated with  
agricultural activities to be nominated by the Central Government;  and 
(xiv) two representatives of State Governments on rotation basis to be nominated by the  Central 
Government.  
(c) The R egistrar -General shall be the ex officio  member -secretary of the Authority.  
(6) The term of office of the Chairperson and the manner of filling the post shall be such as  may be 
prescribed.  
(7) The Chairperson shall appoint a Standing Committee consisting o f five members, one of  whom  
shall be a member who is a representative from a farmers organisation , to advise the  Authority on all 
issues including farmers’  rights.  
(8) The Chairperson shall be entitled to such salary and allowances and shall be subject to  such 
conditions of service in respect of leave, pension, provident fund and other matters as  may be prescribed. 
The allowances for non -official members for attending the meeting s of the  Authority shall  be as such as 
may be prescribed.  
(9) The Chairperson may resign his office by giving notice thereof in writing to the Central  
Government and on such resignation being accepted, he shall be deemed to have vacated his  office.  
(10) On the resignation of the Chairperson or on the vacation of the office of Chairperson for  any 
reason, the Central Government may appoint one of the members to officiate as  Chairperson till a regular 
Chairperson is appointed in accordance with clause ( a) of sub -section  (5). 
4. Meetings of Authority .—(1) The Authority shall meet at such time and place and shall observe 
such rules of  procedure in regard to the transacti on of business at its meetings [ including the quorum at its  
meetings and the transaction or business of its Standing Committee appointed under sub -section  (7) of 
section 3]  as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chairperson of the Authority shall preside at the meetings of the Authority.  
(3) If, for any reason the Chairperson is unable  to attend any meeting of the Authority, any  member of 
the Authority chosen by the members present shall preside at the  meeting.  
(4) All questions which come before any meeting of the Authority shall be decided by a  majority of 
the votes of the members of the Authority present and voting and in the event of  equality of votes, the 
Chairperson of the Authority or in his absence, the person presiding  shall have and exercise a second or 
casting vote.  9 
 (5) Every member who is in any way, whether directly, indirectly or personally, concerned or  
interested in a matter to be decided at the meeting shall d isclose the nature of his concern of  interest and 
after such disclosure, the member , concerned or interested , shall not attend that  meeting.  
(6) No act or proceeding of the Authority shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect i n the constitution of , the Authority; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as the Chairperson or a member of the  
Authority; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Authority not affecting the merits of the case.  
5. Committees of Authority .—(1) The Authority may appoint such committees as may be necessary 
for the efficient  discharge of its duties and performance of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The persons appointed as members of the committee under sub -section ( 1) shall be  entitled to 
receive such allowances or fees for attending the meetings of the committee as may  be fixed by the 
Central Government.  
6. Officers and other employees of Authority .—Subject to such control and restriction as may be 
prescribed, the Authority may appoint  such officers and other employees as may be necessary for the 
efficient performance of its  functions and the method o f appointment, the salary  and allowances and other  
conditions o f service of such other officers and employees of the Authority shal l be such as  may be 
prescribed.  
7. Chairperson to be Chief Executive .—The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive of the 
Authority and shall exercise such  powers and perform such duties as may be prescribed.  
8. General f unctions of Authority .—(1) It shall  be the duty of the Authority to promote, by such 
measures as it thinks fit, the  encouragement for the development of new varieties of plants and to protect 
the rights of the  farmers and breeders.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions, the  measures 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) may provide for — 
(a) the registration of extant varieties subject to such terms and conditions and  in the manner as 
may be prescribed;  
(b) developing characterisation and documentation of varieties registered  under this Act;  
(c) documentation, indexing and cataloguing of farmers’  varieties;  
(d) compulsory cataloguing facilities for all varieties of plants;  
(e) ensuring that seeds of the varieties registered  under this Act are available to the farmers  and 
providing for compulsory licensing of such varieties if the breeder of such varieties or  any other 
person entitled to produce such variety under this Act does  not arrange for  production and sale of the 
seed in the manner as may be prescribed;  
(f) collecting statistics with regard to plant varieties, including the contribution of any person  at 
any time in the evolution or development of any plant variety, in Ind ia or in any other  country, for 
compilation and publication;  
(g) ensuring  the maintenance of the Register . 
9. Authentication of orders , etc.,  of Authority. —All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be 
authenticated by the signature of the  Chairperson  or any other member authorised by the Authority in this 
behalf.  
10. Delegation. —The Authority may, by general or special order in writing, delegate to the 
Chairperson,  any member or officer of the Authority subject to such conditions or limitations, if any, as  
may be specified in the order, such of its powers and functions (except the power to make  regulations 
under section 95 ) under this Act as it may deem necessary.  
 10 
 11. Power of Authority. —In all proceedings under this Act before the Authority or the Registrar ,— 
(a) the Authority or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall have all the powers of a civil  court for 
the purposes of receiving evidence, administering oaths, enforcing the attendance of  witnesses, 
compelling the discovery and production of do cuments and issuing commissions  for the examination 
of witnesses;  
(b) the Authority or the Registrar may, subject to any rules made in this behalf under this Act,  
make such orders as to cost as it considers reasonable and any such order shall be executable  as a 
decree of a civil court.  
Registry  
12. Registry and offices thereof. —(1) The Central Government shall establish , for the purpose of 
this Act, a Registry which  shall be known as the Plant Varieties Registry.  
(2) The head office of the Plant Varieties Registry shall be located in the head office of the  Authority, 
and for the purpose of f acilitating the registration of  varieties, there may be  established, at such places, as 
the Authority may think fit, branch offices of the Registry.  
(3) The Auth ority shall appoint a Registrar -General of Plant Varieties who shall be entitled to  such 
salary and allowances and shall be subject to such conditions of service in respect of  leave, pension, 
provident fund and such other matters as may be prescribed.  
(4) The Au thority may appoint such number of Registrars as it thinks necessary for  registration of 
plant varieties under the superintendence and direction of the Registrar -General under this Act and may 
make regulations with respect to their duties and jurisdiction.  
(5) The term of office and the conditions of service of the Registrars shall be such as may be  provided 
by regulations.  
(6) The Authority may, by notification in the Official Gazette, define the territorial limits  within 
which a branch office of the Regis try may exercise its functions.  
(7) There shall be a seal of the Plant Varieties Registry.  
13. National Register  of Plant Varieties .—(1) For the purposes of this Act, a Register  called the 
National Register  of Plant Varieties  shall be kept at the head office of the Registry, wherein shall be 
entered the names of all the  registered  plant varieties with the names and addresses of their respective 
breeders, the right  of such breeders in respect of the registered  varieties , the particulars of the 
denominati on of  each Registered  variety, its seed  or other propagating material along with specification 
of salient features thereof and such other  matters as may be prescribed.  
(2) Subject to the superintendence and direction of the Central Government, the Register  shall  be kept 
under the control and management of the Authority.  
(3) There shall be kept at each branch office of the Registry a copy of the Register  and such  other 
documents as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  direct.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION OF PLANT VARIETIES AND ESSENTIALLY DERIVED  VARI ETY 
Application for registration  
14. Application for r egistration .—Any person specified in section 16 may make an application to 
the Registrar for  registration of any variety — 
(a) of such genera and species as specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 29; or  
(b) which is an extant variety; or  
(c) which is a farmers’  variety.  
15.  Registrable varieties. —(1) A new variety shall be registered  under this Act if it conforms to the 
criteria of  novelty, distinctiv eness, uniformity and stability.  11 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1), an extant variety shall be  registered  under 
this Act within a specified period if it conforms to such criteria of  distinctiveness, uniformity and stability 
as shall be specified under the regulations .  
(3) For the purposes of sub -section s (1) and ( 2), as the case may be , a new variety  shall b e deemed to 
be— 
(a) novel, if , at the date of filing of the application for registration for protection, the  propagating 
or harvested material of such variety has not been sold or otherwise disposed of  by or with the 
consent of its breeder or his successor  for the purposes of exploitation of such  variety — 
(i) in India, earlier than one year;  or 
(ii) outside India , in the case of trees or vines earlier than six years, or in any other case,  
earlier than four years,  
before the date of filing such application:  
Provided that a trial of a new variety which has not been sold or otherwise disposed of shall  not 
affect the right to protection:  
Provided further that the fact that on the date of filing the application for registration , the 
propagating or harvested mater ial of such variety has become a matter of common  knowledge  other 
than through the aforesaid manner shall not affect the criteria of novelty for such  variety;  
(b) distinct, if it is clearly distinguishable by at least one essential characteristic from any  another 
variety whose existence is a matter of common knowledge in any country at the time  of filing of the 
application.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the filing of an application  for 
the granting of a breeder’ s right t o a new variety or for entering such variety in the official  register  of 
varieties in any convention country shall be deemed to render that variety a matter  of common 
knowledge from the date of the application in case the application leads to the  granting of the 
breeder's right or to the entry of such variety in such official register , as the  case may be;  
(c) uniform , if subject to the variation that may be expected from the particular features of its  
propagation it is sufficiently  uniform in its essential characteristics;  
(d) stable, if its essential characteristics remain unchanged after repeated propagation or, in  the 
case a particular cycle of propagation, at the end of each such cycle.  
(4) A new variety shall not be registered  under this Act if the denomination given to such  variety — 
(i) is not capable of identifying such variety; or  
(ii) consists solely of figures; or  
(iii) is liable to mislead or to cause confusion concerning the characteristics, value identity of  
such variety  or the identity of breeder of such variety; or  
(iv) is not different from every denomination which designates a variety of the same  botanical 
species or of a closely related species registered  under this Act; or  
(v) is likely to deceive the public or caus e confusion in the public regarding the identity of  
such variety;  or 
(vi) is likely to hurt the religious sentiments respectively of any class or section of the  citizens 
of India; or  
(vii) is prohibited for use as a name or emblem for any of the purpose s mentioned in                 
section 3  of the Emblems and Names (Prevention  of Improper Use) Act, 1950  (12 o f 1950) ; or 
(viii) is comprised of solely or partly of geographical name:  12 
 Provided that the r egistrar may register  a variety , the denomination of which comprises  solely or 
partly of a geographical  name, if he considers that the  use of such denomination in  respect of such variety 
is an honest use under the circumstances of the case.  
16. Persons who may make application. —(1) An application for registration under section 14 shall 
be made by — 
(a) any person claiming to be  the breeder of the variety; or  
(b) any successor of the breeder of the variety; or  
(c) any person being the assignee of the breeder of the variety in respect of the right to make  such 
application ; or 
(d) any farmer or group of farmers or community of farmers claiming to be the breeder of the  
variety;  or 
(e) any person authorised in the prescribed manner by a person specified under clause s (a) to (d) 
to make application on his beha lf; or  
(f) any university or publicly funded agricultural institution claiming to be the breeder of the  
variety.  
(2) An application under sub -section ( 1) may be made by any of the persons referred to  therein 
individually or jointly with any other person.  
17. Compulsory v ariety denomination. —(1) Every application shall assign a single and distinct 
denomination to a variety with  respect to which he is seeking registration under this Act in accordance 
with the regulations.  
(2) The Authority shall, having rega rd to the provisions of any international convention or  treaty to 
which India has become a party, make regulation  governing the assignment of  denomination to a variety.  
(3) Where the denomin ation assigned to the variety does  not satisfy the requirements sp ecified  in the 
regulations, the Registrar may require the applicant to propose another denomination  within such time as 
may be specified  by such regulations.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Trade Mark s Act, 1999  (47 of 1999) , a denomination  
assigned to a variety shall not be registered  as a trade mark under that Act.  
18. Form of application .—(1) Every application for registration under section 14 shall — 
(a) be with respect to a variety;  
(b) state the denomination assigned to such variety by the applicant;  
(c) be accompanied by an affidavit sworn by the applicant that such variety does not contain  any 
gene or gene sequence involving terminator technology;  
(d) be in such form a s may be specified by regulations;  
(e) contain a complete passport d ata of the parental lines from which the variety has been  derived 
along with the geographical location in India from where the genetic material has  been taken and all 
such information relating to the contribution, if any, of any farmer, village  community, institution or 
organisation in breeding, evol ving or developing the variety;  
(f) be accompanied by a statement containing a brief description of the variety bringing out  its 
characteristics of novelty, distinctiveness, uniformity and stability as required for registration;  
(g) be accompanied by such fees as may be prescribed;  
(h) contain a declaration that the genetic material or parental material acquired for breeding, 
evolving or developing the variety has been lawfully acquired; and  
(i) be accompanied by  such other particulars as may be prescribed:  
Provided that in case where the application is for the registration of farmers’  variety, nothing  
contained in clause s (b) to ( i) shall apply in respect of the application and the application  shall be  in such 
form as may be prescribed.  13 
 (2) Every application referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be filed in the office of the Registrar.  
(3) Where such application is made by virtue of a succession or an assignment of the right to  apply 
for registration, there shall  be furnished at the time of making the application, or within  such period after 
making the application as may be prescribed, a proof of the right to make  the application.  
19. Test to be  conducted. —(1) Every applicant shall, along with the application for registration 
made under this Act,  make available to the Registrar such quantity  of seed  of a variety for registration of 
which  such application is made, for the purpose of conducting tests to evaluate whether seed of  such 
variety  along with parental material conform to the standards as may be specified by regulations:  
Provided that the Registrar or any person or test centre to whom such seed has been sent for  
conducting test shall keep such seed during his or its possession in such manner and in such  condition that 
its viability and quality shall remain unaltered.  
(2) The applicant shall deposit such fees as may be prescribed for conducting tests referred to  in                
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) The tests  referred to in  sub-section ( 1) shall be conduc ted in such manner and by such method as  
may be prescribed.  
20. Acceptance of a pplication or amendment  thereof. —(1) On receipt of an application under 
section 14, the Registrar may, after making such  inquiry as he thinks fit with respect to the particulars  
contained in such application, accept  the application absolutely or subject to such condition s or 
limitations as he deems fit.  
(2) Where the Registrar is satisfied that the application does not comply with the  requirements of this 
Act or any rules or regulations m ade thereunder, he may, either — 
(a) require the applicant to amend the application to his satisfaction;  or 
(b) reject the application:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected unless the applicant has been given a  reasonable 
opportunity of presenting his case.  
21. Advertisement of application .—(1) Where an application for registration of a variety has been 
accepted absolutely or  subject  to conditions or limitations under sub -section ( 1) of section 20, the 
Registrar shall, as  soon as after  its acceptance, cause such application together with the conditions or  
limitations, if any, subject to which it has been accepted and the specifications of the variety  for 
registration of which such application is made includ ing its photographs or drawing s, to be advertised in 
the prescribed  manner calling objections from  the persons interested in the  matter.  
(2) Any person may, within three months from the date of the advertisement of an application  for 
registration on payment of the prescribed fees, give  notice  in writing in the prescribed  manner, to the 
Registrar  of his opposition to the registration.  
(3) Opposition to the registration under sub -section ( 2) may be made on any of the following grounds, 
namely: — 
(a) that the person opposing the applica tion is entitled to the breeder’ s right as against the  
applicant; or  
(b) that the variety is not registrable under this Act;  or 
(c) that the grant of certificate of registration may not be in public interest;  or 
(d) that the variety may have adverse effect on the environment.  
(4) The Registrar shall serve a copy of the notice of opposition on the applicant for  registration and, 
within two months from the receipt by the applicant of such copy of the  notice of opposition, the 
applicant shall send to the Registrar  in the prescribed manner a  counter -statement of the grounds on which 
he relies for his application, and if he does not do  so, he shall be deemed to have abandoned his 
application.  14 
 (5) If the applicant sends such counter -statement, the Registrar shall serv e a copy thereof on  the 
person giving notice of opposition.  
(6) Any evidence upon which the opponent and the applicant may rely shall be submitted, in  the 
manner prescribed and within the time prescribed, to the Registrar and the Registrar shall  give an 
opportunity to them to be heard, if so desired.  
(7) The Registrar shall, after hearing the parties, if so required, and considering the evidence,  decide 
whether and subject to what conditions or limitations, if any, the registration is to be  permitted and may 
take into account a ground of objection whether relied upon by the  opponent or not.  
(8) Where a person giving notice of opposition or  an applicant sending a counter -statement  after 
receipt of a copy of such notice neither resides nor carries on business in India, the  Registrar may require 
him to give security for the cost of proceedings before him and in  default of such security being duly 
given may treat the opposition or application, as the case  may be, as abandoned.  
(9) The Registrar may, on r equest, permit correction of any error in, or any amendment of, a  notice of 
opposition or a counter -statement on such terms as he may think fit.  
22. Registrar to consider grounds for opposition. —The Registrar shall consider all the grounds on 
which the app lication has been opposed  and after giving reasons for his decision, by order, uphold or 
reject the opposition.  
Registration of essentially derived variety  
23. Registration of essentially derived variety. —(1) An application for the registration of an 
essentially derived variety of the genera or  species specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 29 by the 
Central Government shall be  made to the Registrar by or on behalf of any person referred to in section 14 
and in the  manner specified in section 18 as  if for the word “variety ”, the words “essentially derived  
variety ” have been substituted therein and shall be accompanied by such documents and fees as may be 
prescribed.  
(2) When the Registrar is satisfied that the requirements of sub -section ( 1) have be en complied with 
to his satisfaction, he shall forward the application with his report and all the  relevant document to the 
Authority.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 2), the Authority shall get examined such  
essentially derived variety  to determine as to whether the essentially derived variety is a  variety derived 
from the initial variety by conducting such tests and following such procedure  as may be prescribed.  
(4) When the Authority is satisfied on the report of the test referred to in sub -section ( 3) that  the 
essentially derived variety has been derived from the initial variety, it may direct the  Registrar to register  
such essentially derived variety and the Registrar shall comply with the  direction of the Authority.  
(5) Where the Au thority is not satisfied on the report of the test referred to in sub -section ( 3) that the 
essentially derived variety has been derived from the initial variety it shall refuse the  application.  
(6) The rights of the breeder of a variety contained in sectio n 28 shall apply to the breeder of  
essentially derived variety:  
Provided that the authorisation by the breeder of initial variety to the breeder of essentially  derived 
varie ty under  sub-section ( 2) of section 28 may be subject to such terms and  conditions as both the parties 
may mutually agree upon.  
(7) An essentially derived variety shall not be registered  under this section unless it satisfies  the 
requirements of section 15 as if for the word “variety ”, the words “essentially derived  variety ” have been 
substituted therein.  
(8) When an essentially derived variety has been registered  by the Registrar in compliance  with the 
direction of the Authority under sub -section ( 4), the Registrar shall issue to the  applicant a certificate of 
registration i n the prescribed form and sealed with seal of the  Registry and send a copy thereof to the 
Authority and to such other authority, as may be  prescribed, for information.  
 15 
 CHAPTER IV  
DURATION AND EFFECT OF REGISTRATION AND BENEFIT SHARING  
24. Issue of certificate of registration. —(1) When an application for registration of a variety (other 
than an essentially derived  variety)  has been accepted and either — 
(a) the application has not been opposed and the time of notice of opposition has expired; or  
(b) the application has been opposed and opposition has been rejected,  
the Registrar shall  register  the variety.  
(2) On the registration of the variety (other than an  essentially derived variety), t he Registrar  shall 
issue to the applicant a certificate of reg istration in the prescribed form and sealed with  the seal of the 
Registry and send a copy to the Authority for determination of benefit sharing  and to such other authority, 
as may be prescribed, for information. The maximum time  required by the Registrar f or issuing the 
certificate of registration from the date of filing of  the application for registration of a variety shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where registration of a variety (other than an essentially derived variety), is not completed  within  
twelve months from the date of the application by reason of default on the part of the  applicant, the 
Registrar may , after giving notice to the applicant in the prescribed manner , treat the application as 
abandoned unless it is completed within the time s pecified in that behalf in  the notice.  
(4) The Registrar may amend the register  or a certificate of registration for the purpose of  correcting a 
clerical error or an obvious mistake.  
(5) The Registrar shall have power to issue such directions to protect th e interests of a  breeder against 
any abusive act committed by any third party during the period between filing  of application for 
registration and decision taken by the Authority on such application.  
(6) The certificate of registration issued under this se ction or sub -section ( 8) of section 23  shall be 
valid for nine years in the case of trees and vines and six years in the case of other  crops and may be 
reviewed and renewed for remaining period on payment of such fees as may be fixed by the rules made in 
this behalf subject to the condition that the total period of validity shall not exceed ,— 
(i) in the case of trees and vines, eighteen years from the date of registration of the variety;  
(ii) in the case of extant variety, fifteen years from the date of the  notification of that variety  by 
the Central Government under section 5 of the Seeds Act , 1966  (54 of 1966) ; and  
(iii) in other cases, fifteen years from the date of registration of the variety.  
25. Publication of list of varieties .—The Authority shall, wi thin such intervals as it thinks 
appropriate, publish the list of  varieties which have been registered  during that interval . 
26. Determination of benefit sharing by Authority .—(1) On receipt of a copy of the certificate of 
registration under sub -section ( 8) of section  23 or sub -section ( 2) of section 24, the Authority shall 
publish such contents of the certificate  and invite claims of benefit sharing to the variety registered  under 
such certificate in the  manner as may be prescribed.  
(2) On invitation of the claims under sub -section ( 1), any person or group of persons or firm or                   
governmental  or non -governmental  organisation shall submit its claim of benefit sharing to such variety 
in the  prescribed form within such period, and accompanied with such fees, as may be prescribed:  
Provided that such cl aim shall only be submitted by a ny— 
(i) person or group of persons, if such person or every person constituting such group is a citizen 
of India; or  
(ii) firm or government al or non -government al organisation, if such firm or organisation is 
formed or established in India.  16 
 (3) On receiving a claim under sub -section ( 2), the Authority shall send a copy of such claim  to the 
breeder of the variety registered  under such certificate and the breeder may , on receipt of  such copy, 
submit his opposition to such claim within such period and in such manner as maybe prescribed.  
(4) The Authority shall, after giving an opportunity of being heard to the parties , dispose of the  claim 
received under sub -section ( 2). 
(5) While disposing of the claim under sub -section ( 4), the Authority shall explicitly indicate  in its 
order the amount of the benefit sharing, if any, for which the claimant shall be entitled  and shall take into 
consideration the following matters, nam ely:— 
(a) the extent and nature of the use of genetic material of the claimant in the development of  the 
variety relating to which the b enefit sharing has been claimed;  
(b) the commercial utility and demand in the market of the variety relating to which the benefit 
sharing has been claimed.  
(6) The amount of benefit sharing to a variety determined under this section shall be  deposited by the 
breeder of such variety in the manner referred to in clause ( a) of sub -section  (1) of section 45 in the 
National Gene Fund.  
(7) The amount of benefit sharing determined under this section shall, on a reference made by  the 
Authority in the prescribed manner, be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue by the  District Magistrate 
within whose local limits of jurisdictio n the breeder liable for such benefit  sharing resides.  
27. Breeder to deposit seeds or propagating material .—(1) The breeder shall be required to deposit 
such quantity of seeds or propagating  material including parental line seeds of registered  variety in the 
National Gene Bank as may  be specified in the regulations for reproduction purpose at the breeder's 
expense within such  time a s may be specified in that regulation . 
(2) The seeds or propagating material or parental line seeds to be deposite d under sub -section  (1) 
shall be deposited to the National Gene Bank specified by the Authority.  
28. Registration to confer right. —(1) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, a certificate of 
registration for a variety  issued  under this Act shall conf er an exclusive right on the breeder or his 
successor, his agent  or licensee, to produce, sell, market, distribut e, import or export the variety:  
Provided that in the case of an extant variety, unless a breeder or his successor establishes his  right, 
the C entral Government, and in cases where such extant variety is notified for a State  or for any area 
thereof under section 5 of the Seeds Act, 1966  (54 of 1966),  the State Government, shall be  deemed to be 
the owner of such right.  
(2) A breeder may authorise any person to produce, sell, market or otherwise deal with the variety  
registered  under this Act subject to such limitations and condi tions as may be specified by regulations.  
(3) Every authorisation under this section shall be in suc h form as may be specified by  regulations.  
(4) Where an agent or a licensee referred to in sub -section ( 1) becomes entitled to produce,  sell, 
market, distribute, import or export a variety, he shall apply in the prescribed manner  and with the 
prescribed fees to the Registrar to register  his title and the registrar shall , on receipt of application and on 
proof of title to his satisfaction, register  him as an agent or a  licensee, as the case may be, in respect of the 
variety for which he is entitled for such right,  and shall cause particulars of such entitlement and 
conditions or restrictions, if any, subject to  which such entitlement is made, to be entered in the Register : 
Provided that when the validity of such entitlement is in dispute between the parties, the Registrar 
may refuse to register  the entitlement and refer the matter in the prescribed manner  to the Authority and 
withhold the registration of such entitlement until the right of the parties  in dispute  so referred to has been 
determined by the Author ity. 
(5) The Registrar shall issue a certificate of registration under sub -section ( 4) to the  application after 
such registration and shall enter in the certificate the brief conditions of  entitlement, if any, in the 
prescribed manner, and such certificate  shall be the conclusive  proof of such entitlement and the 
conditions or restriction thereof, if any.  17 
 (6) Subject to any agreement subsisting between the parties, an agent or licensee of a right to  a variety 
registered  under sub -section ( 4) shall be entitl ed to call upon the breeder or his  successor thereof to take 
proceedings to prevent infringement thereof, and if the breeder or  his successor refuses or neglects to do 
so within three months after being so called upon, such  registered  agent or licensee may  institute 
proceedings for infringement in his own name as if  he were the breeder, making the breeder or his 
successor a defendant.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a breeder or his successor so added  as 
defendant shall not be liable for any costs unless he enters an appearance and takes part in  the 
proceedings.  
(8) Nothing in this section shall confer on a registered  agent or registered  licensee of a variety  any 
right to transfer such  right further thereof.  
(9) Without prejudic e to the registration under sub -section ( 4), the terms of registration — 
(a) may be varied by the Registrar as regards the variety in respect of which, or any condition  or 
restriction  subject to which, it has effect on receipt of an application in the prescribed  manner of the 
registered  breeder of such variety  or his successor ; 
(b) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in the prescribed manner of the  
registered  breeder o f such variety or his successor or of the registered  agent or registered  licensee of 
such variety;  
(c) may be cancelled by the Registrar on the application in the prescribed manner of any  person 
other than the breeder, his successor, the registered  agent or the registered  licensee on  any of the 
following  grounds, namely: — 
(i) that the breeder of a variety or his successor or the registered  agent or registered  licensee  
of such variety, misrepresented, or failed to disclose, some fact material to the application for  
registration under sub -section ( 4) which if accurately represented or disclosed would have  
justified the refusal of the application for registration of the registered  agent or registered  
licensee;  
(ii) that the registration ought not to hav e effected having regard to the right vested in the  
applicant by virtue of a contract in the performance of which he is interested;  
(d) may be cancelled by the R egistrar on the application in the prescribed manner of the  breeder 
of a registered  variety or his successor on the ground that any stipulation in the  agreement between 
the registered  agent or the registered  licensee, as the case may be, and  such breeder or his successor 
regarding the variety for which such agent or licensee is  registered  is not bei ng enforced or is not 
being complied with;  
(e) may be cancelled by the  registrar on the application of any person in the prescribed  manner on 
the ground that the variety relating to the registration is no longer existing.  
(10) The r egistrar shall issue notice in the prescribed manner of' every application under this  section 
to the registered  breeder of a variety or his successor and to each registered  agent or  registered  licensee 
(not being the applicant) of such variety.  
(11) The Registrar shall , before  making any order under sub -section ( 9) forward the  application made 
in that behalf along with any objection received by any party after notice  under sub-section  (10) for the 
consideration of the Authority, and the Authority may, after  making such i nquiry as it thinks fit, issue 
such directions to the Registrar as it thinks fit and  the Registrar shall dispose of the application in 
accordance with such directions.  
29. Exclusion of certain varieties —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act , no 
registration of a variety shall be  made under this Act in cases where prevention of commercial 
exploitation of such variety is  necessary to protect public order or public morality or human, animal and 
plant life and  health or to avoid serious prejudice to the environment.  18 
 (2) The Central Government shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify the genera  or 
species for the purposes of registration of varieties other th an extant varieties and farmers’  varieties under 
this Act.  
(3) Notwithstanding a nything contained under sub -section ( 2) and sub -sections ( 1) and  (2)                          
of section 15, no variety of any genera or species which involves any technology  which is injurious to the 
life or health of human beings, animals or plants shall  be registered  under this Act. .  
Explanation .—For the purpose s of this sub -section,  the expression “any technology ” includes  genetic 
use restriction technology and terminator technology.  
(4) The Central Government shall not delete any genera or species from the list of genera or  species 
specified in a notification issued under sub -section ( 2) except  in the public interest.  
(5) Any variety belonging to the genera or species excluded under sub -section ( 4) shall not be  eligible 
for any protection under this  Act. 
30. Researcher’s r ights —Nothing contained  in this Act shall prevent — 
(a) the use of any variety registered  under this Act by any person using such variety for  
conduc ting experiment or research; or  
(b) the use of a variety by any person as an initial source of variety for the purpose of  creating 
other varieties:  
Provided that the authorisation of the breeder of a registered  variety is required where the  repeated 
use of such variety as a parental line is necessary for commercial production of such  other  newly 
developed variety.  
31. Special provisions relating to application  for registration from citizens of convention  
countrie s.—(1) With a view to the fulfilment of a treaty, convention or arrangement with any country  
outside India which affords to citizens of India similar privileges as granted to its own  citizen s, the 
Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare such  country to be a convention 
country for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Where a person has made an applicati on for the granting of a breeder's right to a variety  or for 
entering such variety in the official register  of varieties in a convention country and  that person , or any 
person entitled to make application on his behalf under section 14 or  section 23 , makes  an application for 
the registration of such variety in India within twelve  months after the date on which the application was 
made in the convention country, such  variety shall, if registered  under this Act, be registered  as of the 
date on which the appli cation  was made in the convention country and that date shall be deemed for the 
purposes of this  Act to be the date of registration.  
(3) Where applications have been made for granting of a breeder's right to a variety , or for  entering 
such variety in the official register  of varieties in two or more convention countries,  the period of twelve 
months referred to in sub-section  (2) shall be reckoned  from the date on which the earlier or earliest of 
those application s were made.  
(4) Nothing in this Act shall entitle the breeder of a registered  variety to infringement of  rights other 
than protected under this Act which took place prior to the date of application of  registration under this 
Act. 
32. Provisions as to reciprocity .—Where any country declared by the Central Government in this 
behalf  by notification in  the Official Gazette under sub -section ( 1) of section 31 does not accord to 
citizens of India  the same rights in respect of the registration and protection of a variety,  as it accords to 
its own nationals, no nationals of such country shall be entitled, either solely or jointly with any  other 
person, to apply for the registration of a variety or be entitled to get a variety registered  under this Act . 
  19 
 CHAPTER V  
SURRENDER  AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE AND  RECTIFICATION AND CORRECTION OF REGISTER  
33. Surrender of certificate of r egistration. —(1) A breeder of a variety registered  under this Act 
may, at any time by giving notice in  the prescribed manner to the Registrar, offer to surrender his 
certificate of registration.  
(2) Where such an offer is made, the Registrar shall notify in the prescribed manner every  registered  
agent or registered  licensee relating to such certificate.  
(3) Any of such agent or licensee may , within the prescribed period after such notification , give 
notice to the Registrar of his opposition to the surrender and where any such notice is  given, the Registrar 
shall intimate the contents of such notice to the breeder of such variety.  
(4) If the Registrar is satisfied after hearing the applicant and all the opponents, if desirous of  being 
heard , that the certificate of registration may properly be surrendered, he may accept the  offer and by 
order revoke the certificate of registration.  
34. Revocat ion of protection on certain grounds .—Subject to the provisions contained in this Act, 
the protection granted to a breeder in  respect of a variety may, on the application in the prescribed manner 
of any person interested,  be revoked by the A uthority on any  of the following grounds, namely: — 
(a) that the grant of the certificate of registration has been based on incorrect information  
furnished by the applicant;  
(b) that the certificate of registration has been granted to a person who is not eligible for  
protection under this Act;  
(c) that the breeder did not provide the Registrar wit h such information, documents or  material as 
required for registration under this Act;  
(d) that the breeder has failed to provide an  alternative denomination of the variety which is the 
subject matter of the registration to the Registrar in case where the earlier denomination  of such 
variety provided to the Registrar is not permissible for registration under this Act;  
(e) that the breeder did not provide the necessary seeds or prop agating material to the person  to 
whom compulsory licence has been issued under section 47  regarding the variety in  respect of which 
registration certificate has been issued to such breeder;  
(f) that the breeder has not complied with the provisions of this  Act or rules or  regulations made 
thereunder;  
(g) that the breeder has failed to comply with the directions of the Authority issued under this  
Act; 
(h) that the grant of the certificate of registration is not in the public intere st: 
Provided that no such protection shall be revoked unless the breeder is given a reasonable  opportunity 
to file objection and of being heard in the matter.  
35. Payment of annual fees and forfeiture of registration in default thereof .—(1) The Authority 
may, with the prior approva l of the Central Government ,  by notification in the Official Gazette, impose a 
fees to be paid annually, by every breeder of a  variety, agent and licensee thereof registered  under this Act 
determined on the basis of  benefit or royalty gained by such breed er, agent or licensee, as the case may 
be, in respect of  the variety, for the retention of their registration under this Act.  
(2) If any breeder, agent or licensee fails to deposit the fees referred to in sub -section ( 1) imposed 
upon him under that sub-section in the prescribed manner up to two consecutive  years, the Authority shall 
issue notice to such breeder, agent or licensee and on service of  such notice if he fails to comply with the 
direction in the notice, the Authority shall declare  all the protection admissible under registration 
certificate issued to such breeder or agent or  licensee forfeited.  
(3) The arrears of fees imposed under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be arrears of land  revenue 
and shall be recoverable accordingly.  20 
 36. Power to cancel or change registration and to rectify the Register —(1) On an application 
made in the prescribed manner to the Registrar by any person  aggrieved, the Registrar may make such 
order as he may think fit for cancelling or changing  any certificate of r egistration issued under this Act on 
the ground of any contravention of the  provisions of this Act or failure to  observe a condition subject to 
which such registration  certificate is issued.  
(2) Any person aggrieved by the absence or omission from the Register  of any entry, or by  any entry 
made in the Register  without sufficient cause, or by any entry wrongly remaining on the  Register , may 
apply in the pr escribed manner to the Registrar and the Registrar may make such  order for making, 
expunging or vary ing the entry as he may think fit.  
(3) The Registrar may , in any proceeding  under this section , decide any question that may be  
necessary or expedient to decide in connection  with the rectification of the Register . 
(4) The Registrar  on his own motion may, after giving notice in the prescribed manner to the  parties 
concerned and after giving them an opportunity of being heard , make any order  referred to in               
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2). 
37. Correction of Register .—(1) The Registrar may, on  an application in the prescribed manner by 
the breeder of a  variety registered  under this Act ,— 
(a) correct any error in the Register  in the name, address or description of such breeder or any  
other entry relating to such variety;  
(b) enter in the Register  any change in the name, address or description of such breeder;  
(c) cancel the entry in the Register  of the variety in respect of which such application is made;  
and may  make any consequential amendment or alteration in the certificate of registr ation and for  
that purpose require the certificate of registration to be produced to him.  
(2) The Registrar may, on application made in the prescribed Register  by a registered  agent or  a 
registered  licensee of a variety and after notice to the registered  breeder of such variety,  correct any error, 
or enter any change, in the name, address or description of such registered  agent or registered  licensee, as 
the case may be, in the Register  or certificate of r egistration  under this Act.  
38. Alteration of denomination of a registered  variety .—(1) The breeder of a variety registered  
under this Act may apply in the prescribed manner  to the Registrar to delete any part or to add to or alter 
the denomination of such variety in any  manner not subst antially affecting the identity thereof, and the 
Registrar may  refuse  leave or  may grant it on such terms and subject to such limitations as he may think 
fit to avoid any  conflict with the rights of other breeders of the varieties registered  under this Act.  
(2) The Registrar may cause an application under this section to be advertised in the  prescribed 
manner in any case where it appears to him that it is expedient so to do, and where  he does so, if within 
the prescribed time from the date of  the advertisement any person gives  notice to the Registrar in the 
prescribed manner of opposition to the application, the Registrar  shall, after hearing the parties if so 
required, decide the matter.  
(3) Where leave is granted under this section, the deno mination of the variety as altered shall  be 
advertised in the prescribed manner, unless the application has already been advertised  under                 
sub-section ( 2). 
CHAPTER VI  
FARMERS’  RIGHTS  
39. Farmers’  rights .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, — 
(i) a farmer who has bred or developed a new variety shall be entitled for registration and  other 
protection in like manner as a bree der of a variety under this Act;  
(ii) the farmers’  variety shall be entitled for registration if th e application contains  declarations as 
specified in clause ( h) of sub -section ( 1) of section 18;  21 
 (iii)  a farmer who is engaged in the conservation of genetic resources of land races and wild  
relatives of economic plants and their improvement through selection and preservation shall  be 
entitled in the prescribed manner for recognition and reward from the Gene  Fund:  
Provided that material so selected and preserved has been used as donors of genes in varieties  
registrable under this Act;  
(iv) a farmer  shall be deemed t o be entitled to save, use, sow  resow, exchange, share or sell his 
farm  produce including seed of a variety protected under this Act in the same manner as he was  
entitled before th e coming into force of this Act:  
Provided that the farmer sha ll not be entitled to sell branded seed of a variety protected under  this 
Act. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of clause ( iv), “branded seed ” means any seed put in a package or  any 
other container and labelled in a manner indicating that such seed is of a var iety protected under this Act.  
(2) Where any propagating material of a variety registered  under this Act has been sold to a  farmer or 
a group of farmers or any organisation of farmers, the breeder of such variety shall  disclose to the farmer 
or the group of farmers or the organisation of farmers, as the case may  be, the expected performance 
under given conditions, and if such propagating material fails  to provide such performance under such 
given conditions , the farmer or the group of  farmers or the organi sation of farmers, the case may be, may 
claim compensation in the  prescribed manner before the Authority and the Authority , after giving notice 
to the  breeder of the variety and after providing him an opportunity to file opposition in the  prescribed 
manner  and after hearing the parties, may direct the breeder of the variety to pay  such compensation as it 
deems fit, to the farmer or the group of  farmers or the organisation of  farmers, as the case may be.  
40. Certain information to be given in application reg istration .—(1) A breeder or other person 
making application for registration of any variety under  Chapter III shall disclose in the application the 
information regarding the use of genetic  material conserved by any tribal or rural families in the breeding 
or development of such  variety.  
(2) If the breeder or such other person fails to disclose any information under sub -section ( 1), the 
Registrar may , after being satisfied that the breeder or such person has wilfully and  knowingly concealed 
such information , reject the application for registration.  
41. Rights of communities. —(1) Any per son or group of persons (whether actively engaged in 
farming or not) or any  governmental or non -governmental organisation may , on behalf of any village or 
local  community in India, file in any centre notified, with the previous approval of the Central  
Government , by the Authority , in the Official Gazette , any claim attributable to the  contribution of the 
people of that village or local community , as the case may be , in the  evolution of any variety for the 
purpose of staking a claim on behalf of such village or local  community.  
(2) Where any claim is made under sub -section ( 1), the centre notified under that sub -section  may 
verify the claim made by such person or group of persons or such governmental or non -governmental  
organisation in such manner as it deems fit , and if it is satisfied that such village  or local community has 
contributed significantly to the evolution of the variety which has  been registered  under this Act , it shall 
report its findings to the Authority.  
(3) When the Authority, on a report under sub -section ( 2) is satisfied, after such i nquiry as it  may 
deem fit, that the variety with which the report is related has been registered  under the  provision s of th is 
Act, it may issue notice in the prescribed manner to the breeder of that  variety and after providing 
opportunity to such breeder to file objection in the prescribed  manner and of being heard, it may subject 
to any limit notified by the Central Government,  by order, grant such sum of compensation to be paid to a 
person or group of persons or  governmental or non -governmental organisation which has made claim 
under sub -section ( 1), as it may deem fit.  
(4) Any compensation granted under sub -section (3) shall be deposited by the breeder of the  variety 
in the Gene Fund.  
(5) The compensation granted under sub -section ( 3) shall be deemed to be an arrear of land  revenue 
and shall be recoverable by the Authority accordingly.  22 
 42. Protection of innocent infr ingement .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act ,— 
(i) a right established under this Act shall not be deemed to be infringed by a farmer who at  the 
time of such infringement was not aware of the existence of such right; and  
(ii) a relief which a court may grant in any suit for infringement referred to in section 65 shall  not 
be granted by such court , nor any cognizance of any offence under this Act shall be taken , for such 
infringement by any court against a farmer who proves, before such court, t hat at the  time of the 
infringement he was not aware of the existence of the right so infringed.  
43. Authorisat ion of farmers’  variety .—Notwit hstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 6) of 
section 23  and section 28 , where an essentially derived variety  is derived from a farmers’  variety, the 
authoris ation under sub -section ( 2) of section 28 shall not be given by the breeder of such farmers’  variety  
except with the consent of the farmers or group of farmers or community of farmers who  have made 
contribution in the preservation or development of such variety.  
44. Exemption from fees.—A farmer or group of farmers or village community shall not be liable to 
pay any fees in any proceeding before the Authority or Registrar or the Tribunal or the High Court under 
this Act or  the rules made thereunder.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “fees in any proceeding ” includes any fees payable 
for inspection of any document or for obtaining a copy of any decision or order or  document under this 
Act or the rules made thereunder.  
45. Gene Fund .—(1) The Central Government shall constitute a Fund to be called the National Gene 
Fund  and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) the benefit sharing received in the prescribed manner f rom the breeder of a variety  or                      
an essentially derived variety registered  under this Act , or propagating material of such variety or  
essentially derived variety, as the case may be;  
(b) the annual fees payable to the A uthority by way of royalty under sub-section  (1) of section  35; 
(c) the compensation deposited in the Gene Fund under sub -section ( 4) of section 41;  
(d) the contribution from any national and international organisation and other sources.  
(2) The Gene Fund shall , in the prescribed manner , be applied for meeting — 
(a) any amount to be paid by way of benefit sharing under sub -section ( 5) of section 26;  
(b) the compensation payable under sub -section ( 3) of section 41;  
(c) the expenditure for supporting the conservation and sustainable use of g enetic resources  
including in-situ and ex-situ collections and for strengthening the capability of the Panchayat  in 
carrying out such conservation and sustainable use;  
(d) the expenditures of the sche mes relating to benefit sharing  framed under section 46.  
46. Framing of schemes , etc.—(1) The Central Government shall, for the purposes of section 41 and 
clause ( d) of sub -section  (2) of section 45 , frame , by notification in the Official Gazette, one or more 
schemes.  
(2) In particular , and without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the 
scheme may provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the registration of the claims for the purposes of section 41 under the scheme and all  matters 
conne cted with such registration;  
(b) the processing of such claims for securing their enforcement and matters connected  therewith;  
(c) the maintenance of records and Register s in respect of such claims;  
(d) the utilisation, by way of disbursal (including appor tionment) or otherwise, of any  amounts 
received  in satisfaction of such claims;  23 
 (e) the procedure for disbursal or apportionment by the Authority in the event of dispute  
regarding such claims;  
(f) the utilisation of benefit sharing for the purposes relating to breeding, discovery or  
development of varieties;  
(g) the maintenance and audit of accounts with respect to the amounts referred to in clause  (d). 
CHAPTER VII  
COMPULSORY LICENCE  
47. Power of Authority to make order for compulsory licenc e in certain circumstances .—(1) At 
any time, after the expiry of three years from the date of issue of a certificate of  registration of a variety, 
any person interested may make an application to the Authority  alleging that the reasonable requ irements 
of the pu blic for seed  or other propagating material  of the variety have not been satisfied or that the seed 
or other propagating material of the  variety is not available to the public at a reasonable price and pray for 
the grant of a  compulsory licence to undertake production, distribution and sale of the seed or other  
propagating material of that variety.  
(2) Every application under sub -section ( 1) shall contain a statement of the nature of the  applicant’ s 
interest together with such particulars as may be prescribed and the facts upon  which the application is 
based.  
(3) The Authority, after consultation with Central Government, and if satisfied after giving an  
opportunity to the breeder of such variety, to file opposition and after hearing the parties, on  the issue that 
the reasonable requirements of the public with respect to the variety have not  been satisfied or that the  
seed or other propagating material of the variety is not available to the public at a reasonable price, may 
order  such breeder to grant a licence to the applicant upon such terms and conditions as it may  deem fit 
and send a copy of such order to the Registrar to register  the title of such applicant as licensee  under               
sub-section  (4) of section 28  on payment of such fees by the applicant as is referred to in that sub -section.  
48. When requirement of public deemed to have not been satisfied. —In determining the question 
as to whether the reasonable requirements of the public for  seeds of a variety or its propagating materia l 
as referred to in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section  (3) of section 47, the Authority shall take into account — 
(i) the nature of the variety, the time which has elapsed since the grant of the certificate of  
registration of the variety, price of the seed of t he variety and the measures taken by the  breeder or 
any registered  licensee of the variety to meet the requirement of the public; and  
(ii) the capacity, ability and technical competence of the applicant to produce and market the  
variety to meet the require ment of the public.  
49. Adjournment of applicatio n for grant of compulsory licenc e.—(1) If the breeder of a variety 
registered  under this Act in respect of which any  application has been pending before the Authority under 
section 47 makes a written request  to the Authority on the ground that due to any reasonable factor, such 
breeder has been  unable to produce seed or other propagating material of the variety on a commercial 
scale to  an adequate extent till the date of making such request, the Authority may , on being satisfied  that 
the said ground is reasonable, adjourn the hearing of such application for such period not  exceeding 
twelve months in aggregate as it may consider s ufficient for optimum production  of the seed or 
propagating material of such varie ty, as the case  may be, by such breeder.  
(2) No adjournment of the application under sub -section ( 1) shall be granted unless the  Authority is 
satisfied that the breeder of the variety registered  under this Act in respect of  which such application is 
made , has taken immediate measures to meet the reasonable  requirem ents of the public for the seed  or 
other propagating material of such variety.  
50. Duration of compulsory licence .—The Authority shall determine the duration of the compulsory 
licences granted un der this  Chapter and such duration may vary from case to case keeping in view the   
gestation periods  and other relevant factors but in any  case  it shall  not exceed the total remaining period        24 
 of the  protection of that variety and when a compulsory licence is granted the prescribed authority  shall , 
in the prescribed manner make available to the licensee of such compulsory licence, the  reproductive 
material of the variety relating to such compulsory licence stored in the National  Gene Bank or any other 
centre.  
51. Authority to settle terms and conditions of licence .—(1) The Authority shall, while 
determining the terms and conditions of a compulsory  licence under the provisions of this Chapter, 
endeavour to secure — 
(i) reasonable compensation  to the breeder of the variety relating to the compulsory licence  
having regard to the nature of the variety, the expenditure incurred by such breeder in  breeding the 
variety or for developing it , and other relevant factors;  
(ii) that the compulsory licensee of such variety possesses the adequate means to provide to  the 
farmers, the seeds or its other propagating material of such variety timely and at  reasonable market 
price.  
(2) No compulsory licence granted by the Authority shall authorise the licen see to import the  variety 
relating to such licence or any seed or other propagating material of such variety from  abroad where such 
import would constitute an infringement of the rights of the breeder of  such variety.  
52. Revocation of compulsory licence .—(1) The Authority, may on its own motion or on application 
from an aggrieved person  made to it in the prescribed form, if it is satisfied that a compulsory licensee 
registered  under  this Chapter has violated any terms or conditions of his licence or it is not appropriate to  
continue further such licence in public interest, it may after giving such licensee an  opportunity to file 
opposition and of being heard make order to revoke such licence.  
(2) When a licence is revoked under sub -section  (1) by an order o f the Authority, the  Authority shall 
send a copy of such order to the Registrar to rectify the entry or correct the  Register  relating to such 
revocation and the Registrar shall rectify the entry or correct the  Register  accordingly.  
53. Modification of comp ulsory licence .—The Authority may , on its own motion or on application 
from licensee of a compulsory  licence, after providing the opportunity of being heard to the breeder of the 
variety registered  under this Act relating to such compulsory licence, if it considers, in public interest, so 
to do,   modify, by order, such terms and conditions as it thinks fit and send a copy of such order to  the 
Registrar to correct the entries and Register  according to such modification and the  Registrar shall ensure 
such corrections to be made accordingly.  
CHAPTER VIII  
PLANT  VARIETIES  PROTECTION  APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  
54. Tribunal .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, establish a 
Tribunal  to be known as the Plant Varieties Protection Appellate T ribunal to exercise the jurisdiction,  
powers and authority conferred on it by or under this Act.  
55. Composition of Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal shall consist of a Chairman and such number of 
Judicial Members and  Technical Members as the Central Government may deem fit to appoint.  
(2) A Judicial Member shall be a person who has for at least ten years held a judicial office in  the 
territory of India or who has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a  post in Grade -II of 
that Service or any equ ivalent or higher post for at least three years or who  has been an advocate for at 
least twelve years.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, — 
(i) in computing the period during which a person has held judicial office in the territory of  India,  
there shall be included any period, after he has held any judicial office, during which  the person has 
been an advocate or has held the office of a member of a tribunal or any post,  under the Union or a 
State, requiring special knowledge of law;  25 
 (ii) in computing the period during which a person has been an advocate, there shall be  included 
any period during which the person has held judicial office or the office of a  member of a tribunal or 
any post, under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledg e of law after he became an advocate.  
(3) A Technical Member shall be a person who is an eminent agricultural scientist in the field  of plant 
breeding and genetics and possesses an experience of at least twenty years to deal  with plant variety or 
seed deve lopment activity, or who has held the post in the Central  Government or  a State Government 
dealing with plant variety or seed development equivalent  to the Joint Secretary to the Government of 
India for at least three years and possesses the  special knowle dge in the field of plant breeding and 
genetics.  
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a Judicial Member of the Tribunal to be the  Chairman 
thereof.  
(5) The Central Gov ernment may appoint one of the Members of the Tribunal to be the s enior  
Member thereo f. 
(6) The s enior M ember or a Member shall exercise such of the powers and perform such of  the 
functions of the Chairman as may be delegated to him by the Chairman by a general or  special order in 
writing.  
56. Appeals to Tribunal .—(1) An appeal shall be preferred to the Tribunal within the prescribed 
period from any — 
(a) order or decision of the Authority or Registrar, relating to registration of a variety; or  
(b) order or decision of the Registrar relating to regist ration as an agent or a licens ee of a v ariety; 
or 
(c) order or decision of the Authority relating to claim for benefit sharing; or  
(d) order or decision of the Authority regarding revocation of compulsory licence or  modification 
of compulsory licence; or  
(e) order or decision of  the Authority r egarding payment of compensation, made under this Act  or 
rules made thereunder.  
(2) Every such appeal shall be preferred by a petition in writing and shall be in such form and  shall 
contain such particulars as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Tribunal in disposing of an appeal under this section shall have the power to make  any order 
which the Authority or the Registrar could make under this Act.  
57. Orders of  Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal may, after giving both the parties to the appeal an 
opportunity of be ing heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit.  
(2) The Tribunal may, at any time within thirty days from the date of the order, with a view to  
rectifying the mistake apparent from the record, amend any order passed by it under sub -section  (1), and 
make such amendment if the mistake is brought to its notice by the  appellant or the opposite party.  
(3) In every appeal, the Tribunal may,  where it is possible, hear and decide such appeal within a  
period of one year from the date of filing of the appeal.  
(4) The Tribunal  shall send a copy of any order  passed under this section to the Registrar.  
(5) The orders of the Tribunal under this Act shall be executable as a decree of a civil court.  
58. Procedure of Tribunal .—(1) The powers and functions of the Tribun al may be exercised and 
discharged by  Benches constituted by the Chairman of the Tribunal from among the Members thereof.  
(2) A B ench shall consist of one Judicial Member and one Technical Member.  
(3) If the M embers of a Bench differ in opinion on any poin t, they shall state the point or points on 
which they differ, and the case shall be referred  to the Chairman for hearing on such point or points by 
one or more of the other Members and  such point or points shall be decided according to the opinion of 
the m ajority of the Members  who have heard the case, including those who first heard it.  26 
 (4) Subject to the provision s of this Act, the Tribunal shall have power to regulate its own  procedure 
and the procedure of Benches thereof in all matters arising out of the exercise of its  powers or the 
discharge of its functions, including the places at which the Benches shall  holding their sitting s. 
(5) The Tribunal shall, for the purpose of discharging its functions, have all the powers which  are 
vested in the Registra r under section 11, and any proceeding before the Tribunal shall  be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the measuring of sections 193 and 228 and for the  purposes of section 196 of 
the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a  civil court for all the 
purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the C ode of Criminal  Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act or in any other  law for the 
time being in force, no int erim order (whether by way of injunction or stay or any  other manner) shall be 
made on, or in , any proceedings relating to an appeal unless — 
(a) copies of such appeal and of all documents in support of the plea for such interim order  are 
furnished to the p arty against whom such appeal is made or proposed to be made; and  
(b) opportunity is given to such party to be heard in the matter.  
59. Transitional provision .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, till the establishment 
of the Tribunal  under section 54, the Intellectual Property Appellate Board established under section 83 of  
the Trade Marks Act, 1999 (47 of 1999) shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on  
the Tribunal under this Act subject to the modification that in any Bench of such Intellectual  Property 
Appellate Board constituted for the purpose s of this section, for the Technical  Member referred to in               
sub-section ( 2) of section 84 of the Trade Marks Act,  the Technical Member shall be appointed under this 
Act and he shall be deemed to be the  Technical Member for constituting the Bench under the said                   
sub-section ( 2) of section 84 for  the purposes of this Act.  
CHAPTER IX  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
60. Grants by Central Government .—The Central government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament by law in this  behalf, make to the Authority grants and loans of such sums of money as the 
Central  Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
61. Authority Fu nd.—(1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the Protection of Plant 
Varieties  Authority Account and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all grants and loans made to the Authority by the Central Government under section 60;  
(b) all fees received  by the Authority and the Registrars except the annual fees determined on  the 
basis of benefit or royalty under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(c) all sums received by the Authority from such other sources as may be decided upon by the  
Central Government.  
(2) The Protection of Plant Varieties Authority Account shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salaries, allowances and other remuneration of the Chairperson, officers and other  
employees of the Authority and allowances, if any, payable to the members;  
(b) the other expenses of the Authority in connection with the discharge of its functions and  for 
purposes of this Act.  
62. Budget, accounts and audit. —(1) The Authority shall prepare a budget, maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant  records (including the  accounts and other relevant records of the Gene Fund) 
and prepare an  annual statement of account s in such form as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in  consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Author ity shall be audited by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India at 
such intervals as may be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in  connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Authority to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  27 
 (3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person appointed by him in  
connection with the audit of the accounts of the Authority shall have the same right and  privileges and 
authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India generally has in 
connection with the audit of the G overnment accounts and, in  particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected  vouchers and other documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the Authority as certified  by the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India or any 
other person appointed by him in his behalf together with the audit report  thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Centra l Government and that Government shall  cause the same to be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
63. Financial and administrative powers of the Chairperson .—The Chairperson shall exercise 
such financial and administrative powers over the  functions of the Authority as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall have the authority to delegate such of his financial and  
administrative powers as he may think fit to a member or any other officer of the Authority  subject to the 
condition that the membe r or such officer shall, while exercising such  delegated powers, continue to be 
under the direction, control and supervision of the  Chairperson.  
CHAPTER X  
INFRINGEMENT , OFFENCES, PENALATIES AND PROCEDURE  
Infringement  
64. Infringement .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, a right established under this Act is 
infringed by a  person — 
(a) who, not being the breeder of a variety registered  under this Act or a registered  agent or  
registered  licensee of that variety, sells, exports, imports or produces such variety without the  
permission of its bree der or within the  scope of a registered  licence or registered  agency  without 
permission of the registered  licensee or registered  agent, as the cas e may be;  
(b) who uses, sells, exports, imports or produces any other variety giving such variety, the  
denomination identical with or deceptively similar to the denomination of a variety registered  under 
this Act in such manner as to cause confusion in the  mind or general people in  identifying such 
variety so registered . 
65. Suit for infringement , etc.—(1) No suit — 
(a) for the infringement of a variety registered  under this A ct; or  
(b) relating to any right in a variety registered  under this Act,  
shall be instituted in any court inferior to a District Court having jurisdiction to try the suit.  
(2) For the purpose s of clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section ( 1), “District court having  jurisdiction ” shall 
mean the District Court within the local limit of whose jur isdiction the  cause of action arises.  
66. Relief in suits for infringement. —(1) The relief which a court may grant in any suit for 
infringement referred to in section  65 includes an injunction and at the option of the plaintiff, either 
damages or a share of the  profits.  
(2) The order of injunction under sub -section ( 1) may include an ex parte  injunction or any  
interlocutory order for any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) discovery of documents;  
(b) preserving of infringing variety or documents or othe r evidence which are related to the  
subject -matter of the suit;  
(c) attachment of such property of the defendant which the court deems necessary to recover  
damages, costs or other pecuniary remedies which may be finally awarded to the plaintiff.  28 
 67. Opinio n of scientific adviser .—(1) When the court has to form an opinion upon any question of 
fact or a scientific issue,  such court may appoint an independent scientif ic adviser to suggest it or to 
inquire and report  upon the matter to enable it to from the desired opinion.  
(2) The scientific adviser may be paid such remuneration or  expenses as the court may fix.  
Offences, penalties and procedure  
68. Prohibition to apply the denomination of a registered  variety .—(1) No person other than the 
breeder of a variety registered  under this Act or a registered  licensee or registered  agent thereof shall use 
the denomination of that variety in the manner  as may be prescribed.  
(2) A person shall be deemed to apply the denomina tion of a variety registered  under this Act  who— 
(a) applies it to the variety itself; or  
(b) applies it to any package in or with which the variety is sold, or exposed for sale, or had in  
possession such package for sale or for any purpose of trade or pro duction; or  
(c) places, encloses or annexes the variety which is  sold, or exposed for sale, or had in  possession 
for sale or for any purpose of trade or production, in or with any package or other  thing to which the 
denomination of such variety registered  under this Act has been applied;  or 
(d) uses the denomination of such variety registered  under this Act in any manner reasonably  
likely to lead to the belief that the variety or its propagating material in connection with  which it is 
used is designated or described by that denomination; or  
(e) in relation to the variety uses such denomination in any advertisement, invoice, catalogue,  
business letter, business paper, price list or other commercial document and such variety is  delivered 
to a person in pursuan ce of a request or order made by reference to the  denomination as so used.  
(3) A denomination shall be deemed to be applied to a variety whether it is woven in,  impressed on, 
or otherwise worked into, or annexed or affixed to, such variety or to any  packag e or other thing.  
69. Meaning of falsely applying denomination of a registered  variety. —(1) A person shall be 
deemed to falsely apply the denomination of a variety registered  under this Act who, without the assent of 
the breeder of such variety ,— 
(a) applies such denomination or a deceptively similar denomination to any variety or any  
package containing such variety;  
(b) uses any package bearing a denomination which is identical with or deceptively similar to  the 
denomination of such variety registered  under this Act, for the purpose of packing, filling  or wrapping 
therein any variety other than such variety registered  under this Act.  
(2) Any denomination of a variety registered  under this Act falsely applied as mentioned in                   
sub-section  (1), is in this Act referred to as false denomination.  
(3) In any prosecution for falsely applying a denomination of a variety registered  under this  Act the 
burden of proving the assent of the breeder of such variety shall lie on the accused.  
70. Penalty for applying false denomination , etc.—(1) Any person who — 
(a) applies any false denomination to a variety; or  
(b) indicates the false name of a country or place or  false name and address of the breeder of a 
variety  registered  under this Act in the course of trading such  variety,  
shall unless he proves that he acted, without intend to defraud, be  punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which shall not be less  than three months but which may extend to two years, or with fine  which 
shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may  extend to five lakh rupees, or with both.  
71. Penalty for selling varieties to which false denomination is applied, etc .—Any person who 
sells, or exposes for sale, or has in his  possession for sale or for any purpose of trade or production or any  
variety to which any false denomination is applied or to which an  indication of the country or place in 29 
 which such variety was made or  produced or the name and address of the breeder of such variety  
registered  under this Act has been falsely made, shall, unless he  proves — 
(a) that having taken all reasonable precautions  against committing an offence against this 
section, he had  at the time of commission of the alleged offence no reason  to suspect the gen uineness 
of the denomination of such  variety or that any offence had been committed in respect  of indication of 
the country or place in which such variety  registered  under this Act, was made or produced or the  
name and address of the breeder of such variety;  
(b) tha t, on demand by or on behalf of the  prosecutor, he gave all the information in his 
possession  with respect to the person from whom he obtained such  variety; or  
(c) that otherwise he had acted innocently,  
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less  than six months but which may 
extend to two years, or with fine  which shall not be less than fifty thousand rupees but which may  extend 
to five lakh rupees, or with both.  
72. Penalty for falsely representing a variety as registered .—Whoever makes any representation 
with respect to the  denomination of a variety or its propagating material or essentially  derived variety or 
its propagating material not being variety or its  propagating material or essentially derived variety or  its 
propagating  material registered  under this Act, to the effect that it is a variety or  its propagating material 
or essentially derived variety or its  propagating material registered  under this Act or otherwise  represents 
any variety, or its propagating  material, or essentially  derived variety or its propagating material not 
registered  under this  Act to the effect that it is registered  under this Act shall be  punishable with 
imprisonment for a term, which shall not be less  than six months but which may e xtend to three years, or 
with  fine which shall not be less than one lakh rupees but which may  extend to five lakh rupees, or with 
both.  
73. Penalty for subsequent offence. —Whoever having already been convicted of an offence  under 
this Act is again convict ed of such offence shall be  punishable for the second and for every subsequent 
offence with  imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but  which may extend to three 
years, or with fine which shall not be  less than two lakh rupees but whi ch may extend to twenty lakh  
rupees, or with both.  
74. No offence in certain cases. —The provisions of this Act relating to offences shall be  subject to 
the right created as recognis ed by this Act and no act or  omission shall be deemed to be an of fence under 
the provisions of this Act if such act or omission is permissible under this Act.  
75. Exemption  of certain persons employed in ordinary course of business .—Where a person 
accused of an offence under this Act  proves that in the ordinary course of his employment, he has acted  
without any intention to commit the offence and having taken all  reasonable precautions against 
committing the offence charged, he  had, at the time of the commission of the alleged offence, no reason  
to suspect the genuinene ss of the act so charged as an offence and  on demand made by or on behalf of the 
prosecutor, he gave all the  information in his possession with respect to the persons on whose  behalf the 
offence was committed, he shall be acquitted.  
76. Procedure where inv alidity of registration is pleaded by the accused .—(1) Where the offence 
charged under this Act is in  relation to a variety or its propagating material or essentially derived  variety 
or its propagating material registered  under this Act and the  accused pleads that the registration of such 
variety or its propagating material or  essentially derived variety or its propagating material, as the case 
may be, is invalid and the  court is satisfied that such offence is prima facie not tenable, it shall not 
procee d with the  charge but shall adjourn the proceedings for three months from the date on which the 
plea of  the accused is recorded to enable the accused to file an application before the Registrar under  this 
Act for the rectification of the Register  on the gr ound that the registration is invalid.  
(2) If the accused  proves to the court that he has  made  such application within the time so limited or 
within such further  time as the court for sufficient cause allow, the further proceedings  in the prosecution 
shall  stand stayed till the disposal of such  application for rectification.  30 
 (3) If within a period of three months or within such  extended time as may be allowed by the court, 
the accused fails to  apply to the Registrar for rectification of the Register , the co urt shall  proceed with the 
case as if the registration were valid.  
(4) Where before institution of a complaint of an offence  referred to in sub -section ( 1), any 
application for the rectification of  the Register  concerning the registration of the variety or  its propagating 
material or essentially derived variety or its propagating  material, as the case may be, in question on the 
ground of invalidity  of such registration has already been properly made to and is  pending before the 
Registrar, the court shall st ay the further  proceedings in the prosecution pending the disposal of the  
application aforesaid and shall determine the charge against the  accused in conformity with the result of 
the application for  rectification.  
77. Offences by companies .—(1) If the person committing an offence under this Act is  a company, 
the company as well as every person in charge of, and  responsible to, the company for the conduct of its 
business at the  time of the commission of the offence shall be deemed to be guilty of  the off ence and shall 
be liable to be proceeded against and punished  accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall  render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that  the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had  exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such  offence . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act  has been 
committed by a  company and it is proved that the offence has been committed w ith the consent or 
connivance of, or that the commission of the offence is  attributable to any neglect on the part of any 
director, manager,  secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,  secretary or other 
officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that  offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished  accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section ,— 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and  includes a firm or ot her association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner  in the firm.  
CHAPTER XI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
78. Protection of security of India. —Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the  Authority 
or the Registrar shall — 
(a) not disclose any information relating to the registration of a variety or any application relating 
to the  registration of a variety under this Act, which it considers  prejudicial to the interest of the 
security of India; and  
(b) take any action regarding the cancellation of  registration of such v arieties registered  under this 
Act which the Central Government may by notification in the  Official Gazette specify in the interest 
of the security of  India.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, the  expression “security of India ” means any action 
necessary for the  security of India which relates to the use of any produce of any  variety registered  under 
this Act directly or indirectly for the  purposes of war or military establishment or for the purposes of war  
or other emergency in  international relations.  
79. Implied warranty on sale of registered  variety, etc .—Where a denomination of a variety or its 
propagating  material or essentially derived variety or its propagating material  registered  under this Act 
has been applied to the variety or its  propagating material or essentially derived variety or its propagating  
material, as the case may be, on sale or in the contract for sale of  such variety or its propagating material 
or essentially deriv ed variety  or its propagating material, as the case may be, the seller shall be  deemed to 
warrant that the denomination is a genuine  denomination and not falsely applied, unless the contrary is  
expressed in writing signed by or on behalf of the seller and  delivered at the time of the sale of the variety 
or its propagating  material or essentially derived variety or its propagating material, as  the case may be, or 
contract to and accepted by the buyer.  31 
 80. Death of p arty to proceeding. —If a person who is a pa rty to a proceeding under this  Act (not 
being a proceeding in a court) dies pending the proceeding,  the Authority or the Registrar, as the case may 
be, may, on request,  and on proof to the satisfaction of such Authority or Registrar, of  the transmission of  
the interest of the deceased person, sub stitute in the proceedings his successor in interest in his place, or, 
if the  Authority or the Registrar is of opinion that the interest of the  deceased person is sufficiently 
represented by the surviving party,  permit the proceedings to continue without the substitution of his  
successor in interest.  
81. Right of registered  agent and the registered  licensee to institute suit .—The registered  agent or 
the registered  licensee of a  variety or its propagating material or essentially derived variety or  its 
propagating material registered  under this Act may institute  appropriate proceedings in the court under 
this Act on behalf of the  breeder of such variety or its propagating material or essentially  derived variety 
or its propagating material, as the case may be, if  such age nt or licensee has been authoris ed in the 
prescribed  manner by such breeder for doing so.  
82. Evidence of entry in Register , etc., and things done by the Authority and the Registrar .—(1) 
A copy of any entry in the Register , or of any  document issued under this Act purporting to be certified 
by the  Authority or the Registrar and sealed with the seal of such Authority  or Registrar, as the case may 
be, shall be admitted in evidence in all  courts and in all proceedings without further proof or production 
of the original.  
(2) A certificate purporting to be under the hand of the  Authority or the Registrar, as the case may be, 
as to any entry,  matter or things that such Au thority or Registrar is  authoris ed by  this Act or the rules to 
make or do shall be prima facie evidence of  the entry having been made, and of the content thereof, or of 
the matter or things having been done or not done.  
83. Authority, Registrar and other officers not compellable  to production of Register , etc.—The 
Authority or the Registrar or any officer working  under the Authority or the Registrar, as the case may be, 
shall not,  in any legal proceedings, be compelled to produce the Register  or any other document in its or 
his c ustody, the content of which can  be proved by the production of a certified copy issued under this 
Act in the prescribed manner or to appear as a witness to prove the  matter therein recorded unless by 
order of the court made for  special cause.  
84. Document open to public inspection .—Any person may, on an application to the Authority or  
the Registrar, as the case may be, and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed, obtain a certified 
copy of any entry in the  Register  or any other document in an y proceedings under this Act  pending before 
such Authority or Registrar or may inspect such  entry or document.  
85. Report of Authority to be placed before Parliament. —The Central Government shall cause to 
be placed  before both Houses  of Parliament once a y ear a report regarding the  performance of the 
Authority under this Act.  
86. Government to be bound .—The provisions of this Act shall be binding on the  Government.  
87. Proceedings before Authority or Registrar .—All proceedings before the Authority or the 
Registrar,  as the case may be, relating to registration of variety or essentially  derived variety, registration 
of agent, registration of licence or  registration of compulsory licensing under this Act shall be deemed  to 
be judicial proceedings within the m eaning of sections 193 and  228, and for the purpose of section 196 of 
the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the Authority or the Registrar, as the case may be, shall be  
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and  Chapter XXVI of the Cod e of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
88. Protection of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Central Government, or against the Chairperson, or  members, or the Registrar or any 
person acting under such  Government, Authority or Registrar under the provisions of this Act,  for 
anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in  pursuance of this Act or any rule, 
regulation, scheme or order made  thereunder.  
89. Bar of jurisdiction .—No c ivil court shall have jurisdiction in respect of any  matter which the 
Authority or the Registrar or the Tribunal is  empowered by or under this Act to determine.  32 
 90. Members and staff of Authority, etc.,  to be public  servants .—The Chairperson, members, 
officers and other  employees of the Authority and the Registrar -General and the  officers and other 
employees working under him shall be deemed to  be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of 
the Indian  Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
91. Exemption from tax on wealth and income .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Wealth -tax Act, 1957  (26 of 1957) , the Income -tax Act, 1961  (43 of 1961) , or any other enactment for the  
time being in force relating to tax on wealth, income, profits or  gains, the Author ity shall not be liable to 
pay wealth -tax, income -tax or any other tax in respect of its wealth, income, profits or gains  derived.  
92. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect  notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any  other  law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having  effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
93. Power of Centra l Government to give directions .—The Central Government may give 
direction s to the  Authority as  it may think necessary in the public interest for the  execution of all or any of 
the functions of the Authority under any  provision of this Act or rules and regulations made thereunder.  
94. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the  provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order,  published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be  necess ary for removing the difficulty : 
Provided that no order shall be made under this section  after the expiry of two years from the date of 
commencement of this  Act. 
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid  before each House of Parliament.  
95. Power to make regulations. —(1) The Authori ty may, with the previous approval of  the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette,  make regulations consistent with this Act and the 
rules made  thereunder to carry  out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice  to the generality of  the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely :— 
(a) duties and jurisdiction of the Registrars under  sub-section ( 4) of section 12;  
(b) the term of office and the conditions of service of  the Registrars under sub -section ( 5) of 
section 12;  
(c) the criteria of distinctiveness, uniformity and  stability for registration of extant variety under 
sub-section  (2) of section 15;  
(d) the manner in which a single and distinct  denomination to a variety shall be assigned by the  
applicant under sub -section ( 1) of section 17;  
(e) the  matter s governing the assignment of  denomination to a variety under sub -section ( 2) of 
section  17; 
(f) the time within which the Registrar may require  the applican t to propose another denomination 
under  sub-section ( 3) of section 17;  
(g) the form of application under clause ( d) of sub-section  (1) of section 18;  
(h) the standards for evaluating seed during test  sunder sub -section ( 1) of section 19;  
(i) the quantity of seeds or propagating material  including parental line seeds to be deposited by a 
breeder  and the time to be specified under sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(j) the limitations and conditions subject to which a  breeder may authoris e a person to produce, 
sell, market  or otherwise deal with variety under sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
  33 
 (k) the form for authoris ation under sub -section ( 3) of section 28.  
96. Power of  Central Government to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in  the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this  Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality  of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the  following matters, namely :— 
(i) the term of office of the Chairperson and the  manner of filling the post under sub -section ( 6) of 
section 3;  
(ii) the salary and allowances of the Chairperson and  his conditions of service in respect of leave, 
pension,  provident fund and other matters and the allowances for  non-official members for attending 
the meeting under sub-section  (8) of section 3;  
(iii) the time and place of meetings of the Authority  and the rules of procedure in regard to the 
transaction of  business at its meetings [including the quorum at its  meetin gs and the transaction of 
business of its Standing  Committee appointed under sub -section ( 7) of section 3 ] under                   
sub-section ( 1) of section 4;  
(iv) the control and restriction regarding appointment  of the officers and other employees of t he 
Authority and the  method of such appointment, salary and allowances and  other conditions of service 
under section 6;  
(v) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under  section 7;  
(vi) the terms and conditions subject to which and the  manner in which the  measures referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 8 may provide for the registration of new extant  varieties under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(vii) the manner for arranging production and sale of  the seed under clause ( e) of sub-section ( 2) 
of section 8;  
(viii) the order s by the Authority or the Registrar as to  costs under clause ( b) of section 11;  
(ix) the salary and allowances of Registrar -General of  Plant Varieties and the conditions of 
service in respect of his  leave, pens ion, provident fund and other matters under  sub-section ( 3) of 
section 12;  
(x) the matter s to be included in the National Register  of Plant Varieties under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 13;  
(xi) the manner of authoris ing a person under clause  (e) of sub-section ( 1) of section 16 ; 
(xii) the fees under clause ( g) and the other particulars  under clause ( i) which shall accompany the 
application  under sub -section ( 1) of section 18;  
(xiii) the form of application under the proviso to sub -section  (1) of sect ion 18;  
(xiv) the period within which after making application a  proof of the right to make the application 
is to be furnished  under sub -section ( 3) of section 18;  
(xv) the fees to be deposited by the applicant under  sub-section ( 2) of section 19;  
(xvi) the manner and method of conducting the tests  under sub -section ( 3) of section 19;  
(xvii) the manner of advertising application, conditions  or limitations and specifications of variety 
for registration  including its photographs or drawings under sub -section (1) of section 21;  
(xviii) the manner of giving notice and the fees payable  therefor under sub -section ( 2) of                
section 21;  
(xix) the manner of sending counter -statement under  sub-section ( 4) of section 21;  
(xx) the manner of submitting eviden ce and the time  within which such evidence may be 
submitted under sub -section  (6) of section 21;  34 
 (xxi) the documents and fees under sub -section ( 1) and  the tests to be conducted and the 
procedure to be followed  under sub -section ( 3) of section 23; 
(xxii) the form of a certificate of registration and the  other authority to which a copy thereof shall 
be sent under  sub-section ( 8) of section 23;  
(xxiii) the form of a certificate of registration and the  other authority to which a copy thereof and 
the maximum  time for issuing the certificate of registration under sub-section  (2) of section 24;  
(xxiv) the manner of giving notice to the applicant  under sub -section ( 3) of section 24;  
(xxv) the fees for review and renewal under sub -section  (6) of section 24;  
(xxvi) the contents of the certificate and the manner of  publishing such contents and inviting 
claim of benefits  sharing under sub -section ( 1) of section 26;  
(xxvii) the form for submitting claims of benefit  sharing and the fees to be accompanied therewith 
under  sub-section ( 2) of section 26;  
(xxviii ) the matter in which and the time within which  opposition to claims shall be submitted 
under sub -section  (3) of section 26;  
(xxix) the manner of making reference under sub-section  (7) of section 26;  
(xxx) the manner o f making an application for  registration for title and the fees to be accompanied  
therewith under sub -section ( 4) of section 28;  
(xxxi) the manner of referring the disputes regarding  registration of entitlement under the proviso 
to sub -section  (4) of section 28;  
(xxxii ) the manner to enter into a certificate the brief  conditions of entitlement under                
sub-section ( 5) of section  28; 
(xxxii i) the manner of making an application for  varying the terms of registration under clause ( a) 
of sub-section  (9) of section 28;  
(xxxiv) the manner of making an application by the  registered  breeder and certain other for 
cancellation of  terms of registration under clause ( b) of sub -section (9) of section 28;  
(xxxv) the manner of application by any person other  than the breeder, his successor, the 
registered  agent or the  registered  licensee for cancellation of terms of registration  under clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 9) of section 28;  
(xxxvi) the manner of application for cancellation of  the terms of registrat ion under clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 9) of section 28;  
(xxxvii ) the manner of application for cancellation of  the terms of registration under clause ( e) of 
sub-section ( 9) of section 28;  
(xxxviii ) the manner of issuing notice to the registered  breeder of a variety or his successor or to 
each registered  agent  or registered  licensee (not being the applicant) under  sub-section ( 10) of section 
28; 
(xxxix) the manner of giving notice to the r egistrar  under s ub-section ( 1) of section 33;  
(xl) the mann er of notifying to the registered  agent or  registered  licensee  under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 33;  
(xli) the period within which the notice of opposition  under sub -section ( 3) of section 33 may be 
given;  
(xlii) the manner of making application under section  34; 
(xliii) the manner of depositing fees under sub -section  (2) of section 35;  
(xliv) the manner of making application under sub-section  (1) of section 36;  
(xlv) the manner of applying to the Registrar under  sub-section ( 2) of section 36;  35 
 (xlvi) the manner of giving notice under sub -section  (4) of section 36;  
(xlvii)  the manner of application under sub -section ( 1) of section 37;  
(xlviii) the manner of making application under sub-section  (2) of section 37;  
(xlix) the manner to apply to the Registr ar under sub-section  (1) of section 38;  
(l) the manner of advertising application and to give  notice to the Registrar, and the time from the 
date of the  advertisement within which a person may give such notice  under sub -section ( 2) of      
section 38;  
(li) the manner of advertising the denomination of the  variety under sub -section ( 3) of section 38;  
(lii) the manner of recognition and reward from Gene  Fund under clause ( iii) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 39;  
(liii) the manner of claiming compensation and fi ling of opposition under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 39;  
(liv) the manner of issuing notice and filing objection  under sub -section ( 3) of section 41;  
(lv) the manner of receiving benefit sharing under  clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 45;  
(lvi) the m anner of applying Gene Fund under sub-section  (2) of section 45;  
(lvii) the particulars to be contained in the  application under sub -section ( 2) of section 47;  
(lviii) the authority and the manner in which such  authority shall make available to the 
compulsory licensee  the reproduction material of the variety under section 50;  
(lix) the form for making application under sub-section  (1) of section 52;  
(lx) the period within which an appeal shall be  preferred under sub -section ( 1) of section 56;  
(lxi) the form of petition and the particulars which  such petition shall contain under                             
sub-section ( 2) of section  56; 
(lxii ) the form for preparing annual statement of  accounts under sub -section ( 1) of section 62;  
(lxiii) the financial and administrative powers which  the Chairperson shall exercise under              
section 63;  
(lxiv) the manner of using the denomination of a  variety under sub -section ( 1) of section 68;  
(lxv) the manner of authoris ing registered  agent or  registered  licensee under section 81;  
(lxvi) the manner of issuing certified copy of content  of Register  or any other document under 
section 83;  
(lxvii) the fees payable for obtaining a certified copy of,  or to inspect, any entry in the Register  or 
any other  document under section 84;  
(lxviii ) any other matter which is to be, or may be,  prescribed or in respect of which this Act 
makes no  provision or makes insufficient provision and provision is,  in the opinion of the Central 
Government, necessar y for the  proper implementation of this Act.  
97. Rules, regulations and schemes  to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule and every regulation 
and every scheme  made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is  made, before each House 
of Parli ament, while it is in session, for a  total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or  in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the  session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions  aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule  or regulation or scheme or both House s agree that the rule or  regulation or scheme should not 
be made, the rule or regulation or  scheme shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be  of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such  modification or annulment shall be without 
prejudice to the validity  of anything previously done under that rule or regulation or  scheme.  
