--------------------------The Delhi Municipal Corporation (Validation of Electricity Tax) Act and Other Laws (Repeal) Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION (VALIDATION OF  
ELECTRICITY TAX) ACT AND OTHER LAWS  
(REPEAL) ACT, 2002  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Repeal of certain enactments . 
THE SCHEUDULE .  2 
 THE DELHI MUNICIPAL CORPORATION (VALIDATION OF  
ELECTRICITY TAX) ACT AND OTHER LAWS  
(REPEAL) ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 41 OF 2002  
[8th August , 2002.]  
An Act to repeal th e Delhi Municipal Corporation (V alidation of Electricity Tax) Act, 1966, the 
Goa, Daman and Diu (Opinion Poll) Act, 1966, the Punjab Pre -emption (Chandigarh and 
Delhi Repeal) Act, 1989 and certain other enactments which are in force in the Union 
territory of Chandigarh.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title. —This Act may be called the Delhi Municipal Corporation (Validation of Electricity 
Tax) Act and Other Laws (Repeal) Act, 2002.  
2. Repeal of certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby repealed to 
the extent mentioned in the fourth col umn thereof.  
 
 
  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
REPEAL OF E NACTMENTS  
 
Name of the Act  Year  Act No.  Extent of repeal  
1 2 3 4 
The Delhi Municipal Corporation (Validation of Electricity 
Tax) Act, 1966  1966  35 The whole.  
The Goa, Daman and Diu (Opinion Poll) Act, 1966  
 1966  38 Ditto.  
The Punjab Pre -emption (Chandigarh and Delhi Repeal) 
Act, 1989  1989  22 Ditto.  
The Colonisation of Government Lands (Punjab) Act, 1912  1912  Pb. Act V  As in force in the Union 
territory of Chandigarh.  
The Punjab Town Improvement Act, 1922  1922  Pb. Act IV  Ditto.  
The Repealing (Punjab Loans Limitation) Act, 1923  1923  Pb. Act III  Ditto.  
The Punjab Aerial Ropeways Act, 1926  1926  Pb. Act V  Ditto.  
The Punjab Urban Immovable Property Tax Act, 1940  1940  Pb. Act 
XVII  Ditto.  
The Punjab Jagirs Act, 1941  1941  Pb. Act V  Ditto.  
The East Punjab Local Authorities (Restriction of Function) 
Act, 1947  1947  East Pb. Act 
IX  Ditto.  
The East Punjab Armed Bands (Arrest and Detention) Act, 
1947  1947  East Pb.  Act 
XI Ditto.  
The East Punjab Extension of Limitation Act, 1947  1947  East Pb. Act 
XVI Ditto.  
The East Punjab Refugees Rehabilitation (Loan and Grants) 
Act, 1948  1948  East Pb. Act 
II Ditto.  
The East Punjab Refugees (Registration of Claims) Act, 
1948  1948  East Pb. Act 
VII Ditto.  
The East Punjab Refugees (Registration of  Land Claims) 
Act, 1948  1948  East Pb. Act 
XII Ditto.  
The East Punjab Refugees Rehabilitation (Buildings and 
Building Sites) Act, 1948  1948  East Pb. Act 
XLII  Ditto.  
The East Punjab Refugees Rehabilitation (House Building 
Loans) Act, 1948  1948  East Pb. Act 
XLIII  Ditto.  
The Punjab New Townships (Street Lighting and Water 
Supply) Fees Act, 1950  1950  Pb. Act IX  Ditto.  
The Punjab Development of Damaged Areas Act, 1951  1951  Pb. Act X  Ditto.  
The Punjab Resumption of Jagirs Act, 1957  1957  Pb. Act 39  Ditto.  
The Punjab New Mandi Townships (Development and 
Regulation) Act, 1960  1960  Pb. Act II  Ditto.  
The Punjab Urban Estates (Development and Regulation) 
Act, 1964  1964  Pb. Act 22  Ditto.  
 
--------------------------The Delimitation Act, 2002--------------------------
1 THE DELIMITATION ACT, 2002 
_______ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
_________ 
SECTIONS
1. Short title.
2. Definitions.
3. Constitution of Delimitation Commission.
4. Duties of the Commission.
5. Associate members.
6. Casual vacancies.
7. Procedure and powers of the Commission.
8. Readjustment of number of seats.
9. Delimitation of constituencies.
10. Publication of orders and their date of operation.
10A. Deferment of delimitation in certain cases.
10B. Delimitation Commission's order with respect to the State of Jharkhand not to have any legal 
effect.
11. Power to maintain delimitation orders up-to-date.
12. Repeal.2 THE DELIMITATION ACT, 2002 
ACT NO. 33 OF 2002
[3rd June , 2002.] 
An Act to provide for the readjustment of the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the 
States, the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State, the division of 
each State and each Union territory having a Legislative Assembly into territorial 
constituencies for elections to the House of the People and Legislative Assemblies of the 
States and Union territories and for matters connected therewith. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
1. Short title.— This Act may be called the Delimitation Act, 2002. 
2. Definitions.— In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “article” means an article of the Constitution; 
(b) “associate member” means a member nominated under section 5; 
(c) “Commission” means the Delimitation Commission constituted under section 3; 
(d) “Election Commission” means the Election Commission referred to in article 324; 
(e) “member” means a member of the Commission and includes the Chairperson; and 
(f) “State” includes a Union territory having a Legislative Assembly but does not include the 
State of Jammu and Kashmir. 
3. Constitution of Delimitation Commission.— As soon as may be after the commencement of this 
Act, the Central Government shall constitute a Commission to be called the Delimitation Commission 
which shall consist of three members as follows: — 
(a) one member, who shall be a person who is or has been a Judge of the Supreme Court, to be 
appointed by the Central Government who shall be the Chairperson of the Commission; 
(b) the Chief Election Commissioner or an Election Commissioner nominated by the Chief 
Election Commissioner, ex officio : 
Provided that after the nomination of an Election Commissioner as a member under this clause, 
no further nomination under this clause shall be made except to fill the casual vacancy of such 
member under section 6; and 
(c) the State Election Commissioner of concerned State, ex officio . 
1[Explanation. —For the purposes of clause ( c), the State Election Commissioner of concerned 
State, — 
(i) in respect of the duties of the Commission relating to a State (other than the States of 
Meghalaya, Mizoram and Nagaland), means the State Election Commissioner appointed by the 
Governor of that State under clause ( 1) of article 243K; and 
(ii)in respect of the duties of the Commission relating to the State of Meghalaya or the State of 
Mizoram or the State of Nagaland, as the case may be, means a person nominated by the Governor of 
that State under clause ( 1) for such purposes].  
4. Duties of the Commission.— (1) The readjustment made, on the basis of the census figures as 
ascertained at the census held in the year 1971 by the Delimitation Commission constituted under section 
3 of the Delimitation Act, 1972 (76 of 1972), of the allocation of seats in the House of the People to the 
several States and the total number of seats in the Legislative Assembly of each State shall be deemed to 
be the readjustment made by the Commission for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 1) and any other law for the time being in force, the 
Commission shall readjust the division of each State into territorial constituencies for the purpose of 
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2004, s. 2, for the Explanation (w.e.f. 31-10-2003). 3 elections to the House of the People and to the State Legislative Assembly on the basis of the census 
figures as ascertained at the census held in the year 1[2001]: 
Provided that where on such readjustment only one seat is allocated in the House of the People to a 
State, the whole of that State shall form one territorial constituency for the purpose of elections to the 
House of the People from that State. 
5. Associate members.— (1) The Commission shall associate with itself for the purpose of assisting it 
in its duties in respect of each State, ten persons five of whom shall be members of the House of the 
People representing that State and five shall be members of the Legislative Assembly of that State: 
Provided that where the number of members of the House of the People representing any State is five 
or less, then, all such members shall be the associate members for that State and in the latter case the total 
number of associate members shall be less than ten by such number as by which the total number of 
members of the House of the People representing that State is less than five. 
(2) The persons to be so associated from each State shall be nominated, in the case of the members of 
the House of the People, by the Speaker of that House, and in the case of members of a Legislative 
Assembly, by the Speaker of that Assembly, having due regard to the composition of the House or, as the 
case may be, of the Assembly. 
(3) The first nominations to be made under sub-section ( 2)— 
(a) shall be made by the Speakers of the several Legislative Assemblies within one month, and by 
the Speaker of the House of the People within two months, of the commencement of this Act; and 
(b) shall be communicated to the Chief Election Commissioner, and where the nominations are 
made by the Speaker of a Legislative Assembly, also to the Speaker of the House of the People. 
(4) None of the associate members shall have a right to vote or to sign any decision of the 
Commission. 
(5) The Commission shall have power to call upon —
(a) the Registrar-General and Census Commissioner, India or his nominee; or 
(b) the Surveyor General of India or his nominee; or 
(c) any other officer of the Central Government or State Government; or 
(d) any expert in geographical information system; or 
(e) any other person, 
whose expertise and knowledge are considered necessary by the Commission to provide assistance to it in 
addition to the assistance provided by the persons referred to in sub-section ( 1) and the officers and 
persons so called upon shall be duty bound to assist the Commission. 
(6) The Secretary to the Election Commission shall be the ex officio Secretary of the Commission and 
shall discharge his functions with the assistance of the employees of the Election Commission under the 
supervision of the Chairperson of the Commission. 
6. Casual vacancies.— If the office of the Chairperson or of a member or of an associate member 
falls vacant owing to his death or resignation, it shall be filled as soon as may be practicable by the 
Central Government or the Speaker concerned under and in accordance with the provisions of section 3 
or, as the case may be, of section 5. 
7. Procedure and powers of the Commission.— (1) The Commission shall determine its own 
procedure and shall, in the performance of its functions, have all the powers of a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of witnesses; 
(b) requiring the production of any document; and 
(c) requisitioning any public record from any court or office. 
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2004, s. 3, for “1991”(w.e.f. 31-10-2003).4 (2) The Commission shall have power to require any person to furnish any information on such points 
or matters as in the opinion of the Commission may be useful for, or relevant to, any matter under the 
consideration of the Commission. 
(3) The Commission may authorise any of its members to exercise any of the powers conferred on it 
by clauses ( a) to ( c) of sub-section ( 1) and sub-section ( 2), and any order made or act done in exercise of 
any of those powers by the member authorised by the Commission in that behalf shall be deemed to be 
the order or act, as the case may be, of the Commission. 
(4) If there is a difference of opinion among the members, the opinion of the majority shall prevail, 
and acts and orders of the Commission shall be expressed in terms of the views of the majority. 
(5) The Commission as well as any group of associate members shall have power to act 
notwithstanding the temporary absence of a member or associate member or the existence of a vacancy in 
the Commission or in that or any other group of associate members; and no act or proceeding of the 
Commission or of any group of associate members shall be invalid or called in question on the ground 
merely of such temporary absence or of the existence of such vacancy. 
(6) The Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of 
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
Explanation. —For the purposes of enforcing the attendance of witnesses, the local limits of the 
jurisdiction of the Commission shall be the limits of the territory of India. 
8. Readjustment of number of seats.— The Commission shall, having regard to the provisions of 
articles 81, 170, 330 and 332, and also, in relation to the Union territories, except National Capital 
Territory of Delhi, sections 3 and 39 of the Government of Union Territories Act, 1963 (20 of 1963) and 
in relation to the National Capital Territory of Delhi sub-clause ( b) of clause ( 2) of article 239AA, by 
order, determine, — 
(a) on the basis of the census figures as ascertained at the census held in the year 1971 and 
subject to the provisions of section 4, the number of seats in the House of the People to be allocated to 
each State and determine on the basis of the census figures as ascertained at the census held in the 
year 1[2001] the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for the 
Scheduled Tribes of the State; and 
(b) on the basis of the census figures as ascertained at the census held in the year 1971 and 
subject to the provisions of section 4, the total number of seats to be assigned to the Legislative 
Assembly of each State and determine on the basis of the census figures as ascertained at the census 
held in the year 1[2001] the number of seats, if any, to be reserved for the Scheduled Castes and for 
the Scheduled Tribes of the State: 
Provided that the total number of seats assigned to the Legislative Assembly of any State under clause 
(b) shall be an integral multiple of the number of seats in the House of the People allocated to that State 
under clause ( a). 
9. Delimitation of constituencies.— (1) The Commission shall, in the manner herein provided, then, 
distribute the seats in the House of the People allocated to each State and the seats assigned to the 
Legislative Assembly of each State as readjusted on the basis of 1971 census to single-member territorial 
constituencies and delimit them on the basis of the census figures as ascertained, at the census held in the 
year 1[2001], having regard to the provisions of the Constitution, the provisions of the Act specified in 
section 8 and the following provisions, namely: — 
(a) all constituencies shall, as far as practicable, be geographically compact areas, and in 
delimiting them regard shall be had to physical features, existing boundaries of administrative units, 
facilities of communication and public convenience; 
(b) every assembly constituency shall be so delimited as to fall wholly within one parliamentary 
constituency; 
(c) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Castes shall be distributed in 
different parts of the State and located, as far as practicable, in those areas where the proportion of 
their population to the total is comparatively large; and 
1. Subs. by Act 3 of 2004, s. 4, for “1991”(w.e.f. 31-10-2003).5 (d) constituencies in which seats are reserved for the Scheduled Tribes shall, as far as practicable, 
be located in areas where the proportion of their population to the total is the largest. 
(2) The Commission shall — 
(a) publish its proposals for the delimitation of constituencies, together with the dissenting 
proposals, if any, of any associate member who desires publication thereof, in the Gazette of India 
and in the Official Gazettes of all the States concerned and also in such other manner as it thinks fit; 
(b) specify a date on or after which the proposals shall be further considered by it; 
(c) consider all objections and suggestions which may have been received by it before the date so 
specified, and for the purpose of such consideration, hold one or more public sittings at such place or 
places in each State as it thinks fit; and 
(d) thereafter by one or more orders determine — 
(i) the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies; and 
(ii) the delimitation of assembly constituencies, 
of each State. 
10. Publication of orders and their date of operation.— (1) The Commission shall cause each of its 
orders made under section 8 or section 9 to be published in the Gazette of India and in the Official 
Gazettes of the States concerned and simultaneously cause such orders to be published at least in two 
vernacular newspapers and publicize on radio, television and other possible media available to the public 
and after such publication in the Official Gazettes of the States concerned, every District Election Officer 
shall cause to be affixed, the Gazette version of such orders relating to the area under his jurisdiction, on a 
conspicuous part of his office for public notice. 
(2) Upon publication in the Gazette of India, every such order shall have the force of law and shall 
not be called in question in any court. 
(3) As soon as may be after such publication, every such order shall be laid before the House of the 
People and the Legislative Assemblies of the States concerned. 
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub-section ( 5), the readjustment of representation of the several 
territorial constituencies in the House of the People or in the Legislative Assembly of a State and the 
delimitation of those constituencies provided for in any such order shall apply in relation to every election 
to the House or to the Assembly, as the case may be, held after the publication in the Gazette of India of 
that order and shall so apply in supersession of the provisions relating to such representation and 
delimitation contained in any other law for the time being in force or any order or notification issued 
under such law in so far as such representation and delimitation are inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act: 
1[Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall apply to the delimitation orders published in relation 
to the state of Jharkhand.] 
(5) Nothing in this section shall affect the representation in the House of the People or in the 
Legislative Assembly of a State until the dissolution of the House or of the Assembly, as the case may be, 
existing on the date of publication in the Gazette of India of the final order or orders of the Commission 
relating to the delimitation of parliamentary constituencies or, as the case may be, of the assembly 
constituencies of that State and any bye-election to fill any vacancy in such House or in any such 
Assembly shall be held on the basis of the provisions of the laws and orders superseded by sub-section ( 4) 
as if the said provisions had not been superseded. 
(6) The Commission shall endeavour to complete and publish each of its orders referred to in sub-
section ( 1) in the manner provided in that sub-section, 2[within a period not later than 31st day of July, 
2008] under section 3. 
3[10A. Deferment of delimitation in certain cases.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
sections 4, 8 and 9, if the President is satisfied that a situation has arisen whereby the unity and integrity 
1. Ins. by Act 9 of 2008, s. 2 (w.e.f. 14-1-2008).
2. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for “within two years of the constitution of the Commission” (w.e.f. 14-1-2008).
3. Ins. by s. 3, ibid.(w.e.f. 14-1-2008).6 of India is threatened or there is a serious threat to the peace and public order, he may, by order, defer the 
delimitation exercise in a State. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid before each House of Parliament. 
10B. Delimitation Commission's order with respect to the State of Jharkhand not to have any 
legal effect.— Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 2) of section 10, the final orders 
relating to readjustment of number of seats and delimitation of constituencies in respect of the State of 
Jharkhand published under the said section vide Order O.N. 63(E), dated 30th April, 2007 and O.N. 
110(E), dated 17th August, 2007 shall have no legal effect and the delimitation of the constituencies as it 
stood before the publication of the said Orders shall continue to be in force until the year 2026 in relation 
to every election to the House of the People or to the Legislative Assembly, as the case may be, held after 
the commencement of the Delimitation (Amendment) Act, 2008 (9 of 2008).] 
11. Power to maintain delimitation orders up-to-date.— (1) The Election Commission may, from 
time to time, by notification in the Gazette of India and in the Official Gazette of the State concerned, — 
(a) correct any printing mistake in any of the orders made by the Commission under section 9 or 
any error arising therein from an inadvertent slip or omission; and 
(b) where the boundaries or name of any district or any territorial division mentioned in any of 
the said orders are or is altered, make such amendments as appear to it to be necessary or expedient 
for bringing the orders up-to-date, so, however, that the boundaries or areas or extent of any 
constituency shall not be changed by any such notification. 
1[Provided that the Election Commission may make such amendments, as appear to it to be 
necessary or expedient, for bringing the said orders up-to-date by including therein and excluding 
therefrom the relevant areas, consequent upon the exchange of one hundred and eleven enclaves of 
India and fifty-one enclaves of Bangladesh with effect from 31st July, 2015, in pursuance of the 
Constitution (One Hundredth Amendment) Act, 2015.] 
(2) Every notification under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued, before the 
House of the People and the Legislative Assembly of the State concerned. 
12. Repeal.— The Delimitation Act, 1972 (76 of 1972), is hereby repealed. 
1.  The proviso ins. by Act 10 of 2016, s. 3 (w.e.f. 4-3-2016). 
--------------------------The Haj Committee Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE HAJ COMMITTEE ACT, 2002  
_______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
HAJ COMMITTEE  OF INDIA  
3. Constitution and incorporation of Haj Committee of India.  
4. Composition of Committee.  
5. Notification of members.  
6. Term of office.  
7. Chairperson and Vice -Chairpersons.  
8. Reconstitution of Committee.  
9. Duties of Committee.  
10. Meetings of Committee.  
11. Appointment of Standing and sub -committees.  
12. Disqualification for being nominated, or for continuing, as a member of Committee.  
13. Resignation of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and members.  
14. Removal of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and members.  
15. Filling of a casual vacancy.  
16. Chief Executive Officer and other employees.  
 
CHAPTER III  
STATE  HAJ COMMITTEE S 
17. Establishment and incorporation of State Haj Committee.  
18. Composition of State Committee.  
19. Notification of members.  
20. Term of office . 
21. Chairperson.  
22. Reconstitution of a State Committee.  
23. Disqualification for being nominated, or for continuing, as a member of the  Committee.  
24. Resignation of Chairperson and members.  
25. Removal of Chairperson and members.  
26. Filling of a casual vacancy.  
27. Duties of State Committee.  
28. Meetings of State Committee.  
29. Executive Officer and employees of State Committee.  
 
  2 
 CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT  
SECTIONS  
30. Central Haj Fund.  
31. Application of Central Haj Fund.  
32. State Haj Fund.  
33. Application of State Haj Fund.  
34. Accounts and audit.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Powers of Committee to issue Pilgrim Passes and levy fees.  
36. Supersession of Committee.  
37. Membership of Committee or State Committee not to constitute office of profit.  
38. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceeding s of Committee.  
39. Officers and employees of Committee to be public servants.  
40. Indemnity.  
41. Power to amend Schedule.  
42. Redressal of grievances.  
43. Vesting of proper ties and o ther rights, etc., in Committees.  
44. Power to make rules.  
45. Power to make bye -laws.  
46. Power to delegate.  
47. Power to make rules by State Governments.  
48. Provisions as to employees of the existing Committee before the commencement of this Act.  
49. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
50. Power to remove difficulties.  
51. Power to give directions.  
52. Repeal.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE HAJ COMMITTEE ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 35 OF 2002  
[11th June , 2002.]  
An Act to establish a Haj Committee of India and State  Haj Committees for making 
arrangements for the pilgrimage of Muslims for Haj, and f or matters connected therewith.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be call ed the Haj Committee Act, 2002.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 or dates as the Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of thi s Act and  for different States.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherw ise requires, — 
(a) “bye-laws” means the bye-laws made under section 45;  
(b) “Chief Executive Officer or the Executive Officer ’ means the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Committee or the Executive Officer of the State Committee appointed under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 16 or sub -section ( 1) of section 29, as the case may be ; 
(c) “Committee ” means the Haj Committee of Ind ia constit uted under section 3;  
(d) “member” means a member of the Haj Committee of India nominated under section 4 or of a 
State Haj Committee nominated under section 18, as the case may be, and includes the Chai rperson 
and a Vice -Chairperson;  
(e) “notification ” means a notification published in the Gazette of India or the Official Gazette of 
a State, as the case may be;  
(f) “pilgrim” means a Muslim proceed ing to, or returning from, Haj;  
(g) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under section 44 by the Central  Government or, 
as the case may be, under sect ion 47 by the State Government;  
(h) “State Committee ” means a State Haj Committee constituted under section 18 and includes 
Joint State Committee;  
(i) “State Government ”, in relation to a Union territory, means the Administrator of that Union 
territory appointed by the President under article 239 of the Constitution.  
CHAPTER II  
HAJ COMMITTEE OF  INDIA  
3. Constitution and incorporation of Haj Committee of India .—(1) With effect from such date as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be 
constituted a Committee by the nam e of the Ha j Committee of India.  
(2) The Committee shall be a body corporate, by the name  aforesaid, having perpetual succession and 
a common seal with power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and  immovable, to create a charitab le trust or endowment, and to contract and sha ll by the 
said name sue and be sued. 
(3) The Committee shall have its headquarters at Mumbai and as and when the Committee considers 
it functionally necessary, additional regional offices may be opened in consultation with the Central 
Government.  
                                                           
1. 5th December, 2002, vide notification No . S.O. 1267(E), dated by 5th December, 2002, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec . 3(ii). 4 
 4. Composition of C ommittee. —The Committee shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(i) three members of Parliament of whom two are to be nominated by the Speaker of the House 
of the People from among its Muslim members, and one by the Chairman of the Council of States  
from among its Muslim members:  
Provided that a member of Parliament shall, upon ceasing to be a member, cease to be a 
member of the Committee and the Speaker of the House of the People or the Chairman of the 
Council of States, as the case may be, sh all make a fresh nomination upon req uest by the Central 
Government;  
(ii) nine Muslim members of the Committee shall be elected, three from those States sending 
largest number of pilgrims during last three years and one each from the zones as specified in t he 
Schedule, in such manner as may be prescr ibed:  
Provided that not more than one member shall be elected from a State falling in the zon e as 
specified in the Schedule;  
(iii) four persons not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India nom inated 
by that Government to represent the Ministries of External Affairs, Home, Finance and Civil 
Aviation, as ex officio  members;  
(iv) seven Muslim members shall be nominated by the Central Government from among the 
following categories of persons, namel y:— 
(a) two members who have special knowledge of public administration, finance, education, 
culture or social work and out of w hom one shall be a Shia Muslim;  
(b) two women members, out of  them one shall be Shia Muslim;  
(c) three members who have special knowledge of Muslim theology and law, out of them one 
shall be a Shia Muslim.  
5. Notification of members .—As soon as may be after the nomination of the members of the 
Committee under section 4, the Central Government shall publish in the Official Gazette the names of all 
such members.  
6. Term of office .—(1) The term of office of the members of the Committee (other than the ex officio  
members and members filling casual vacancies) shall be three years, commencing on the day following 
the publication of the list of members und er section 5: 
Provided that the term of the members of the Committee may be extended by the Central Government 
by a notification in the Official Gazette for a period not exceeding six months at a time but, in any case, 
not exceeding beyo nd a total period of one year.  
(2) The allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of, the Chairperson,                           
Vice -Chairpersons and members shall be such as may be prescribed.  
7. Chairperson and Vice -Chairperson s.—(1) After the publication of the names of members of the 
Committee under section 5, the Central Government shall convene within forty -five days of such 
publication the first meeting of t he Committee at which the Commi ttee shall elect a Chairperson and two 
Vice -Chairper sons from amongst its members :  
Provided that a Minister shall not be the Chairperson of the Committee and ex officio  members shall 
not take part in the election of the Chairpers on or of the Vice -Chairpersons.  
(2) If the Committee fails to elect the Chairperson or the Vice -Chairpersons the Central Government 
may appoint a member of the Committee to be the Chairperson thereof or Vice -Chairpersons, as the case 
may be.  
(3) The Chairperson shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties as m ay be  prescribed.  
(4) The Vice -Chairpersons shall exercise such powers and discharge such duties as may be 
determined by bye -laws made in  this behalf by the Committee : 5 
 Provided that till such bye -laws are made, the Vice -Chairpersons shall exercise such powers a nd 
discharge such duties as may be determined by an order made by the Chairperson in this regard.  
(5) The election of the Chairperson and the Vice -Chairpersons shall be notified by the Central 
Gove rnment in the Official Gazette.  
(6) The term of office of t he Chairperson and the Vice -Chairpersons, as the case may be, shall be               
co-terminus with the term of the Committee and no person shall hold office of the Chairperson or the                  
Vice -Chairpersons, as the case may be, for m ore than two consecutive terms.  
(7) Any casual vacancy in the office of the Chairperson or a Vice -Chairperson shall be filled for the 
remainder of the term in accordance with sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be.  
8. Reconstitution of Commit tee.—(1) The Central Government shall take or cause to be taken all 
necessary steps for the reconstitution of a new Committee at least four months before the expiry of the 
term, or the extended term, as the case may be, of the committee.  
(2) An outgoing member s hall be eligible for renomination on the Committ ee for not more than two 
terms:  
Provided that not more than fifty per cent. of the members may be renominated for a second term in 
such manner as may be prescribed.  
9. Duties of Committee .—(1) The du ties of t he Committee shall be — 
(i) to collect and disseminate information useful to pilgrims, and to arrange orientation and 
training programmes for pilgrims;  
(ii) to advise and assist pilgrims during their stay at the embarkation points in India, while 
proceeding  to or returning from pilgrimage, in all matters including vaccination, inoculation, 
medical inspection, issue of pilgrim passes and foreign exchange , and to liaise with the local 
authorities concerned in such matters;  
(iii) to give relief to pilgrims in distress;  
(iv) to finalise the annual Haj plan with the approval of the Central Government, and execute 
the plan, including the arrangements for travel by air or any other means, and to advise in matters 
relating to accommodation s; 
(v) to approve the budge t estimates of the Committee and submit it to the Central Government 
at least three months before the beginning of the fina ncial year for its concurrence;  
(vi) to co -ordinate with the Central Government, railways, airways and travel agencies for the 
purpos e of securing trav elling facilities for pilgrims;  
(vii) to generally look aft er the welfare of the pilgrims;  
(viii) to publish such proceedings of the Committee and such matters of interest to pilgrims as 
may be determined by bye -laws made i n this behalf b y the Committee;  
(ix) to discharge such other duties in connection with Haj as may be prescr ibed by the Central 
Government.  
(2) The Central Government shall afford all reasonable assistance to the Committee in the discharge 
of the duties specified in sub-section ( 1). 
10. Meetings of Committee .—(1) The Committee shall meet at least three times in a year before the 
commencement of the Haj season to plan and make arrangements for Haj and once after that to review all 
arrangements made by the Committee.  
(2) In addition to the meetings specified in sub -section ( 1), the Committee may hold meetings as and 
when requisitioned by at least one -third of its members or when considere d necessary by the Chairperson.  
(3) The number of members required to make a quorum at any meeting of the Committee sha ll be 
one-third of its members.  6 
 (4) All matters shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and, in the event of an 
equality of votes, the Chairperson or other person presi ding shall have a casting vote.  
(5) The Committee shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at its 
meetings as  may be determined by bye -laws.  
11. Appointment of Standing Committees and sub -committees .—(1) The Committee shall appoint 
two Standing  Committees, each headed by a Vice -Chairperson of the Committee, to deal with matters 
relating to finance and Haj arrangements, from amongst its member consisting of such number of 
members and with such powers and functions as may be determined by bye -laws made i n this behalf by 
the Committee:  
Provided that the Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of the Standing Committee in case he 
attends the mee ting. 
(2) The Committee may also appoint other sub -committees for such purposes as it may think fit and 
any such sub -committee shall consist of such number of members and other persons as may be 
determined by bye -laws made i n this behalf by the Committee.  
12. Disqualification for being nominated, or for continuing, as a member of                   
Committee .—A person shall be disqualified for being nominated, or for continuing as a member of the 
Committee, if he — 
(i) is not a citizen of India;  
(ii) is not a Muslim, except for  ex officio  members as provided in clause ( iii) of section 4;  
(iii) is less  than twen ty-five years of age;  
(iv) is of unsound mind and stands so declared by a competent  court;  
(v) is an undischarged insolvent;  
(vi) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Governme nt, involves a 
moral turpitude;  
(vii) has been o n a previous occasion — 
(a) removed from his office as a member; or  
(b) removed by an order of a competent authority either for not acting in the interest of the 
pilgrims or for corruption.  
13. Resignation of Chairperson, Vice -Chairperson and members .—The Chairperson, the                
Vice -Chairperson or any other member may resign his office by writing under his hand addressed to the 
Central Government and it shall be eff ective from the date of such resignation . 
14. Removal of Chairperson, Vice -Chair person and members. —(1) The Central Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette, remove the Chairperson, a Vice -Chairperson of the 
Committe e or any member thereof, if he — 
(i) is or becomes subject to any of the disqualification s specified in se ction 12; or  
(ii) refuses to act or is incapable of acting or acts in a manner which the Central Government, 
after hearing any explanation that he may offer, considers to be prejudicial to the interests of the 
Committee or the interests of  the pilgrims; or  
(iii) fails, in the opinion of the Committee, to attend three consecutive meetings of the 
Commit tee, without sufficient excuse.  
(2) Where the Chairperson or a Vice -Chairperson of the Committee is removed under sub -section ( 1), 
he shall also cease to be a member of the Committee.  
15. Filling of a casual vacancy .—(1) When the seat of a member becomes vacant by his removal, 
resignation, death or otherwise, a new member shall be nominated or elected, as the case may be, in his 
place and such member sha ll hold office so long as the me mber whose place he fills would have been 
entitled to hold office if  such vacancy had not occurred.  7 
 (2) Any casual vacancy under sub -section ( 1) shall be filled up by the same category to which the 
former member belonged.  
16. Chief Executi ve Officer and other employees. —(1) The Central Government shall appoint a 
person, from a panel of Muslim officers of the Central Government and of the State Governments not 
below the rank of Deputy Secreta ry to the Government of India, to  be the Ch ief Executive Officer of the 
Committee on such terms and c onditions as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chief Executive Officer shall be the ex officio  Secretary of  the Committee.  
(3) The Chief Executive Officer shall be appointed for a period of three years, which may be 
extended by a maximum period of one year by the Central Government.  
(4) The Chief Executive Officer shall execute the decisions of the Committee and perform such oth er 
functions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that in case of any difference of opinion between the Chief Executive Officer and the 
Committee, he shall bring the matter to the notice of the Central Government, whose decision thereon 
shall b e final.  
(5) The C ommittee may, with the previous sanction of the Central Government, employ such other 
officers and employees as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act, on such terms and 
conditions as may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER III  
STATE  HAJ COMMITTEES  
17. Establishment and incorporation of State Haj Committee .—(1) With effect from such date as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, the 
Government of a State shall constitute  a Committee by the name of t he......[na me of the State] Haj 
Committee:  
Provided that in case it appears to the Central Government for any reasons that it is not necessary for 
a State or Union territory to establish a Haj Committee, it may authorise the State Haj Committee of a 
contig uous State to deal with those pilgrims an d suggest suitable representation of thos e States and Union 
territories.  
(2) The State Committee shall be a body corporate, by the name aforesaid, having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power, subject to  the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and 
dispose of property, both movable and immovable, to create a c haritable trust or endowment, and to 
contract and shall by  the said name sue and be sued.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, an  agreement may be entered into — 
(a) by two or more Gover nments of contiguous States, or  
(b) by the Central Government (in respect of one or more Union territories) and one or more 
Governments of States contiguous to such Union territory or Union territorie s,  
to be in force for such period and to be subject to renewal for such further period, if any, as may be 
specified in the agreement to provide for the constituti on of a Joint State Committee, — 
(i) in a case referred to in clause ( a), for al l the particip ating States, and  
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), for the participating Union territory or Union terri tories 
and the State or States.  
(4) An agreement under this section shall be published, in a case referred to in clause ( a) of                   
sub-section ( 2), in the Official Gazette of the participating States and in a case referred to in clause ( b) of 
that sub -section, in the Official Gazette of th e participating Union territory or Union territories and  
participating State or States.  
(5) Any reference in this Act to the State Committee shall, unless the context otherwise requires, be 
construed as including a Joint State Committee.  8 
 18. Composition of State Committee .—(1) A State Committee shall consist of sixteen members, to 
be nominated by  the State Government, namely: — 
(i) three memb ers from the Muslim members of — 
(a) Par liament representing the State;  
(b) State Legislative A ssembly; and  
(c) Legisl ative Council, where it exists;  
(ii) three members from Muslim members represen ting local bodies in the State;  
(iii) three members having expertise in Muslim theology and law including one who shall be a 
Shia Muslim;  
(iv) five members representing Muslim voluntary organisations working in the fields of public 
administration, finance, edu cation,  culture or social work;  
(v) the Chairpers on of the State Wakf Board; and  
(vi) Executive Officer of the State Committee, who shall be the ex officio  member of the State 
Committee:  
Provided that a Committee for any Union territory or a Joint State Committee  shall consist of such 
number o f members as may be prescribed.  
(2) In case where there is no Muslim member in any of the categories mentioned in clauses ( i) and ( ii) 
of sub -section ( 1), or where there is no Legislative Council in a State, nomination may be  made in such 
manner as may be prescribed.  
19. Notification of members .—As soon as may be after the nomination of the members of a State 
Committee under sub -section ( 1) of section 18, the State Government shall publish, in the Official 
Gazette of that State, the names of all such members.  
20. Term of office .—(1) The term of office of the members of the State Committee (other than the ex 
officio  members and members fill ing casual vacancies) shall be three years, commencing on the day 
following the publication of the li st of members under section 19.  
(2) The allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of the Chairperson and members 
shall be such as may be pr escribed.  
21. Chairperson .—(1) After the publication of the names of members of the State Committee under 
section 19, the State Government shall convene within forty -five days the first meeting of the State 
Committee at which the St ate Committee shall ele ct a Chai rperson from amongst its members : 
Provided that an ex officio  member shall not take part in t he election of the Chairperson.  
(2) If the State Committee fails to elect a Chairperson, the State Government may appoint a member 
of the State Committee to be the Chairperson thereof.  
(3) The election of the Chairperson shall be notified by the State Government in the  Official Gazette 
of the State.  
(4) The term of office of the Chairperson shall be three years and no person shall hold the office of 
the Chairperson for m ore than two consecutive terms.  
(5) Any casual vacancy in the office of the Chairperson shall be filled in accordance wit h                
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), as the case may be.  
 22. Reconstitution of a State Committee .—(1) The State Government shall take or cause to be 
taken all necessary steps for the reconstitution of a new State Committee at least four m onths before the 
expiry of t he term of the State Committee.  
(2) An outgoing member shall be eligible for re -nomination of the State Committ ee for not more than 
two terms:  9 
 Provided that fifty per cent . of the nominees may be re -nominated for a second term i n such ma nner 
as may be prescribed.  
23. Disqualification for being nominated, or for continuing , as a member of the Committee. —A 
person shall be disqualified for being nominated, or for continuing, as a member  of the State Committee, 
if he— 
(i) is not a citizen of India;  
(ii) is not a resident of that State;  
(iii) is not a Muslim, except for an Executive Officer as provided in clause ( vi) of sub-section ( 1) 
of section 18;  
(iv) is less  than twenty -five years of age;  
(v) is of unsound mind and stands so  declared by a competent court;  
(vi) is an undischarged insolvent;  
(vii) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the State Government, involves a 
moral turpitude;  
(viii) has been on a previous occasion — 
(a) removed from his office as a m ember; or  
(b) removed by an order of a competent authority either for not acting in the interest of the 
pilgrims or for corruption.  
24. Resignat ion of Chairperson and members. —The Chairperson or any other member may resign 
his office by writing under his  hand addressed to the State Government and it shall be effective from the 
date of such resignation.  
25. Remo val of Chairperson and members. —(1) The State Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, remove the Chairperson of the State Committe e or any member thereof, if he — 
(i) is or becomes subject to any of the disqualifications specified in section 23; or  
(ii) refuses to act or is incapable of acting or acts in a manner which the State Government, after 
hearing any explanation that he may offer, considers to be prejudicial to the interests of the State 
Committee or the interests of the pi lgrims; or  
(iii) fails, in the opinion of the State Committee, to attend three consecutive meetings of the State 
Commit tee, without sufficient excus e. 
(2) Where the Chairperson of the State Committee is removed under sub -section ( 1), he shall also 
cease to be a member of the State Committee.  
26. Filling of a casual vacancy .—(1) When the seat of a member becomes vacant by his removal, 
resignation, death or otherwise, a new member shall be nominated in his place and such member shall 
hold office so long as the member whose place he fills would have been entitled to hold office if  such 
vacancy had not occurred.  
(2) Any casual vacancy under sub -section  (1) shall be filled up by the same category to which the 
former member belonged.  
27. Duties of State Committee .—(1) It shall be the duty of a State Committee to implement the 
policy and directions of the Committee in  the interests of Haj pilgrims.  
(2) The  State Committee shall provide assistance to the Haj pilgrims including in the matter of their 
transport between their home States and the point of exit from India and their transit a ccommodation at 
points of exit.  
(3) The State Committee shall discharge s uch other duties in connection with Haj as may be 
prescribed by the State Government concerned, in consultati on with the Central Government.  10 
 28. Meetings of State Committee. —(1) A State Committee shall meet at least twice in a year before 
the Haj day and once after the Haj i s over.  
(2) The number of members required to make a quorum at any meeting of the State Committee sha ll 
be one -third of its members.  
(3) In addition to the number of meetings specified in sub -section ( 1), the State Committee may hold 
meetings as and when requisitioned by at least one -third of its members or when considere d necessary by 
the Chairperson.  
(4) All matters shall be decided by a majority of votes of the members present and, in the event of an 
equality of votes, the Chairperson  or other person presiding shall have a casting vote.  
29. Executive Officer and other employees of State Committee. —(1) The State Government shall 
appoint a person, from amongst its officers not below the rank of Deputy Secretary, to be the Executive 
Officer of the State Committee:  
Provided that the person so appointe d shall preferably be a Muslim.  
(2) The Executive Officer of the State Commit tee shall act as its Secretary.  
(3) The Executive Officer shall execute the decisions of the State Committee an d perform such other 
functions as may be prescribe d: 
Provided that in case of any difference of opinion between the Executive Officer and the State 
Committee, he shall bring the matter to the notice of the State Government whose decision thereon shall 
be final. 
(4) The State Committee shall, with the previous sanction of the State Government, employ such 
officers and other employees as it deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(5) The term of office and conditions of service of officers and  other employees shall be such as may 
be prescribed.  
CHAPTER IV  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS  AND AUDIT  
30. Central Haj Fund. —The Committee shall have its own Fund to be called the Central Haj Fund, 
and there shall be placed to the credit there of the following sums, namely:— 
(a) sums realised from any fees and service charges which m ay be levied by the Committee: — 
(i) for registrati on of applications for Haj; and  
(ii) for issue of Haj pilgrim travel passes;  
(b) money collected from p ilgrims for performance of Haj;  
(c) the income from all deposits and inves tment of the Committee's funds;  
(d) the sums realised from the sale of the effects of deceased pilgrims and sums of money left by 
them, which are unclaimed and have la psed to the Central Government;  
(e) any sums loane d by the Central or a State Government, or any other sou rce approved by the 
Government;  
(f) any amount that may be legally due to the Committee from any source; and  
(g) the amount standing at the commencement of this Act to the credit of the Haj Fund or t he 
Indigent Pilgrims Fund established under the Haj Committee Act, 1959 (51 of 1959).  
31. Application of Central Haj Fund .—The Central Haj Fund shall, subject to the provisions of this 
Act and the rules made thereunder, be under the control and management  of the Committee, and shall be 
applied to the following purposes, namely: — 
(a) pay and allowances of the Chief Executive Officer and ot her employees of the Committee;  
(b) payment of charges and expenses incidental to the obje cts specified in section 9; and 11 
 (c) any other expenses which are required to be met by the Committee or a State Committee, as 
approved by the Central Government . 
32. State Haj Fund. —The State Committee shall have its own fund to be called the State Haj Fund 
and the following sums sha ll be placed to the credit thereof, namely: — 
(i) all sums of money paid to it or any grant made by the Committee  for the purposes of this Act;  
(ii) any grant or loan that may be made to the State Committee by the State Government, or any 
other source for the purposes of this Act, as ap proved by the State Government;  
(iii) any amount that may be legally due to the State Committee from any source; a nd 
(iv) the moneys, if any, standing to the credit of a State Haj Committee, at the commencement of 
this Act.  
33. Application of State Haj Fund .—The State Haj Fund shall, subject to any rules that may be 
made under this Act, be under the control and management of the State Committee and shall be applied to 
the following purposes, namely: — 
(i) pay and allowances of the employees of the State Committee other than its Executive Officer 
whose pay and allowances shall be borne by the State Government;  
(ii) payment of charges and expenses incidental to the due performance of its duties by the State  
Committee for the objec ts specified in section 27; and  
(iii) any other expenses, as approved by the State Government which are required to  be met by 
the State Committee.  
34. Accounts and audit .—(1) The Committee and every State Committee shall maintain pr oper 
accounts and other relevant records and prepare an annual statement of accounts, in such form as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government, or as the cas e may be, the State Government.  
(2) The accounts shall be examined and audited annually by such auditors as the Central Government 
or, as the case may be, th e State Government may approve.  
(3) The accounts of the Committee or the State Committee as certified by the auditor together with 
the audit report thereon shall be forwarded annually by the said  Committee to the Central Government, or 
as the cas e may be, the State Government.  
(4) The Central Government shall, as soon as may be after the receipt of the audit report under                 
sub-section ( 3), cause the same to be laid b efore each House of Parliament.  
(5) The State Government shall, as soon as may be, after the receipt of the audit report under                      
sub-section ( 3), cause the same to be laid before the State Legislature.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
35. Powers of Committee to issue Pilgrim Passes and levy fees .—(1) The Committee shall have the 
power to issue a travel document called “Pilgrim Pass ” to a Haj pilgrim for his departure from India as a 
bona fide  pilgrim t o Saudi Arabia and the said Pilg rim shall be deemed to be exempted from the 
provisions of section 3 of the Passports Act, 1967 ( 15 of 1967).  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Passports Act, 1967 (15 of 1967), the Central 
Government may, in consultation with the Committee, levy such fees for registrati on of Haj pilgrims, 
issuance of Pilgrim Pass by the Committee and othe r related ma tters, as may be prescribed in connection 
with rendering of such services.  
36. Supersession of Committee. —(1) If, in the opinion of the Central Government, the Committee is 
unable to perform, or persistently makes default in the performance of the duties imposed on it by or 
under this Act or exceeds or abuses its powers, the C entral Government may, by an order published, 
together with a statement of the reasons therefor, in t he Official Gazette, supersede it for such period as  
may be specified in the order:  12 
 Provided that before making an order of supersession as aforesaid, the Central Government shall give 
a reasonable opportunity to the Committee to show cause w hy it should n ot be superseded.  
(2) When the Committee is superseded by a n order under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) all members shall, on such date as may be specified in the order, vacate their offices as such 
members without prejudice to their eligibility for nomination under clause ( d); 
(b) during the period of supersession of the Committee, all powers and duties conferred and 
imposed upon the Committee by or under this Act shall be exercised and performed by such officer or 
authority as the Central Govern ment may appoin t in that behalf ; 
(c) all property vested in the Committee shall, until it is reconstituted, vest in the Central 
Government;  
(d) before the expiry of the period of supersession, nominations shall be made by the Central 
Government for the purpose o f reconst ituting the Committee.  
(3) An order of supersession made under this section together with a statement of the reasons therefor 
shall be laid before each House of Parliament as soon as  may be after it has been made.  
(4) A State Government may exercise the sa me powers and duties in respect of a State Committee as 
mentioned in sub -sections ( 1), (2) and ( 3) of this section subject to the conditions mentioned therein and 
any directions issued by the Ce ntral Government i n this regard.  
37. Membership of Committee o r State Committee not to constitute office of                             
profit .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the office of a 
member of the Committee or State Committee shall not be deemed to be  an of fice of profit.  
38. Vacancies, etc., not to invalidate proceedings of Committee .—No act or proceeding of the 
Committee or of a State Committee or of a Joint State Committee, as the case may be, shall be invalid by 
reason only of the existence of any vacancy amongst its members, or any defect in the constitution 
thereof.  
39. Officers and employees of Committee to be public servants .—The officers and employees of 
the Committees and other persons duly appointed to discharge any duty under this Act or rules or                
bye-laws made thereunder, shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the 
Indian Penal Code (4 5 of 1860).  
40. Indemnity .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Chairperson, 
Vice -Chairpersons or any member of the Committee or a State Committee in respect of anything in good 
faith done or purporting to have been done under this Ac t, except with the prior permission of the Central 
or State Government, as the case may be.  
41. Power to am end Schedule .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that it is necessary or 
expedient so to do, it may, by notification published in the Official Gazette, amend the Schedule and 
thereupon the Schedule sh all be deemed to have been amen ded accordingly.  
(2) A copy of every notification made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid before each House of 
Parliament as soon as may be after it is made.  
42. Redressal of grievances .—Any Haj pilgrim, who is aggrieved by the discharge of any of the 
duties performed by the Haj Committee or the State Haj Committee, shall make a representation for the 
redressal of his grievance to the Haj Committee or the Stat e Haj Committee, as the case m ay be, and the 
same shall be disposed of by the said Committee, if necessary, after hearing the aggrieved person.  
43. Vesting of properties and other rights, etc., in Committees .—(1) On and from the 
commencement of this Act, all assets, rights, leaseholds , powers, authorities and privileges and all 
properties, movable and immovable, includi ng lands, buildings, store s, cash balances, cash on hand, 
reserve funds, investments and all other rights and interests in or arising out of such properties as were 
imme diately before such commencement in the ownership, power or control of Haj Committee, Mumbai, 
constituted under the Haj Committee Act, 1959 (51 of 1959) and all books of account, registers and all 
other documents of whatever nature relating thereto shall v est absolutely in and belong to the Committee.  13 
 (2) On and from the commencement of this Act, all assets, rights, leaseholds, powers, authorities and 
privileges and all properties, movable and immovable, including lands, buildings, stores, cash balances, 
cash on hand, reserve funds, investments and al l other rights and interests in or arising out of such 
properties as were immediately before such commencement in the ownership, power or control of Haj 
Committee of a State and, all books of account, registers and all other  documents of whatever nature 
relating thereto shall vest absolutely in and belong t o the Haj Committee of a State.  
(3) All debts, obligations and liabilities incurred, all contracts entered into and all matters and things 
engaged to be done by, with or for the Committee or a State Commit tee immediately before such 
commencement for or in connection with the purposes o f the Committee or a State Committee shall be 
deemed to have been incurred, entered into and engaged to be done by, with or for the Committee or a 
State  Committee, as the case  may be.  
(4) All sums of money due to the Committee or a State Committee immediately before such 
commencement shall be deemed to be due to the Committee or a State Committee, as the case may be.  
(5) All contracts made with and all instruments executed on behalf of the Haj Committee, Mumbai or 
the Haj Committee of a State shall be deemed to have been made or executed on behalf of the Committee, 
or as the case may be, the State Committee and shall be performed accordingly.  
(6) In all suits and legal proceedi ngs pending on the commencement of this Act in or to which the Haj 
Committee, Mumbai or the Haj Committee of a State was a party, the Committee, or as the case may be, 
the State Committee shall be deemed to have been su bstituted therefor.  
44. Power to make  rules.—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carr y 
out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, n amely:— 
(i) the manner of election of members of the Committee under clause ( ii) of section 4;  
(ii) the terms and conditions of the Chairperson  and members under sub -section ( 2) of section 6;  
(iii) the powers and duties of the Chairperson under sub -section  (3) of section 7;  
(iv) the manner in which the members may be re -nominated under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) 
of section 8;  
(v) duties in connection with Haj under clause ( ix) of sub -section ( 1) of section 9;  
(vi) the functions of the Chief Executive Of ficer and the terms and conditions of service of the 
Chief Executive Officer and other employees of the Committee under section 16;  
(vii) the number of members of a Joint State Committee or of a Committee for Union territory 
under the proviso to clause ( vi) of sub -section ( 1) of section 18;  
(viii) the manner in which the accounts shall be maintained by the Committee and the State 
Committees and the audit of such accounts under section 34;  
(ix) issue of Haj Pilgrim Pass under sub -section ( 1) of section 35;  
(x) amendment of the Schedule relating to the zones comprising contiguous States or Unio n 
territories under section 41;  
(xi) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive session s , and if, before the expiry of the session in which it is so 
laid, or the session immediat ely following, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or 
both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such 
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any su ch modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  14 
 45. Power to make bye -laws .—(1) The Committee may, by notification, make bye -laws consistent 
with the provisions of the Act and the rules made thereunder in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(i) powers and duties of the Vice -Chairpersons under sub -section ( 4) of section 7;  
(ii) providing for the publication of the proceedings of the Committee and any matter of interests 
to pilgrims under clause ( viii) of sub -section (1) of section 9;  
(iii) laying down the rules of procedure for transaction of business at meeting of the Committe e 
under sub -section ( 5) of section 10;  
(iv) powers and functions of the Standing Committee and determination of number of members 
and other persons in s ub-committees under section 11;  
(v) providing for any other matter which the Committee deems necessary for giving effect  to the 
provisions of this Act.  
(2) Bye -laws made by the Committee under this section shall be submitted to the Central Government 
and shall not take effect until they have been confi rmed by the Central Government.  
(3) Bye -laws which have been confirmed by the Central Government shall be published in the 
Official Gazette.  
46. Power to delegate. —Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder, the 
Committee may, by general or special order in writing, with the prior appro val of the Central 
Government, delegate to any member or Chief Executive Officer o n the Committee, and subject to such 
conditions and limitations, as may be specified in the order, such of its powers under this Act (except the 
powers to make bye -laws under  section 45) as it may deem necessary.  
47. Power to m ake rules by State Governments. —(1) The State Governments may, in consultation 
with the Central Government, by notification make rules to carry out the purposes of this Act in r espect of 
the State Committees.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(i) terms and conditions of the Chairperson and members of the State Committee under                     
sub-section ( 2) of section 20;  
(ii) the manner in which the members may be re -nominated under the proviso to sub -section ( 2) 
of section 22;  
(iii) duties of the State Committee under sub -section ( 3) of section 27;  
(iv) the functions of th e Executive Officer and the terms and conditions of service of officers and 
other employees under section 29;  
(v) any other matter which is requi red to be or may be prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after i t is made, before the 
State Legislature.  
48. Provisions as to employees of the existing Committee before the commencement of this 
Act.—Every officer and other employee of any of the existing Committee and the State Committee, as the 
case may be, shall, on  and from the commencement of this Act, stand transferred to or become an officer 
or other employee of the Committee or the State Committee, as the case may be, with such designation as 
such Committee may determine and shall hold office or service therein by the s ame tenure, at the same 
remunera tion, upon the same terms and conditions of service as he would have held under the Haj 
Committee constituted under the Haj Committee Act, 1959 (51 of 1959) and shall continue to do so as an 
officer or other employee  of the  Committee till such time the te rms and conditions are duly altered by 
such Committee:  
Provided that the tenure, remuneration and terms and conditions of service of any such officer or 
other employee of the Committee or of a State Committee, as the case may be, shall not be altered to his 15 
 disadvantage without the previous sanction of the C entral Government or State Government, as the case 
may be:  
Provided further that any service rendered by any such officer or other employee before the 
commencement  of this Act shall be deemed to be the service rendered under the Committee or, as the 
case may be, the State Committee.  
49. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Government or any officer or other employee of the Government or the Committee 
constituted under this Act in respect of anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under 
this Act.  
50. Power to remove difficulties. —(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order not inconsistent with the provisions of t his Act, remove 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such or der shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Any order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
51. Powers to give directions .—The Cen tral Government may, in exercise of its powers and 
performance of its functions under this Act, issue directions in writing to the Committee or the State 
Government or the State Committee and such Committee, State G overnment or State Committee, as the 
case may be, shall be bound to comply with such directions.  
52. Repeal .—(1) The Haj Committee Act, 1959 ( 51 of 1959) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, the Haj Committee constituted under the said Act shall, until the 
establishment of the Committee under this Act, continue to function as if this Act had not been passed and 
on such notificat ion under section 5 on the estab lishment of the Committee, the former Committee shall 
stand dis solved.  
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the Haj Committee Act, 
1959 (51 of 1959) shall be deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this 
Act.  16 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See sections 4( ii) and 41( 1)] 
 
ZONE -I NATIONAL CAPITAL TERRITORY OF DELHI, RAJASTHAN, JAMMU AND 
KASHMIR, PUNJAB, HARYANA, HIMACHAL PRADESH AND UNION 
TERRITORY OF CHANDIGARH.  
ZONE -II UTTAR PRADESH, BIHAR, UTTARANCHAL  AND JHARKHAND.  
ZONE -III ANDHRA PRADESH, MADHY A PRADESH, CHHATTISGARH AND ORISSA.  
ZONE -IV ASSAM, WEST BENGAL, TRIPURA, MANIPUR, SIKKIM, MEGHALAYA, 
ARUNACHAL PRADESH, MIZORAM, NAGALAND AND UNION TERRITORY OF 
ANDAMAN AND NICOBAR ISLANDS.  
ZONE -V MAHARASHTRA, GUJARAT, GOA AND UNION TERRIORIES OF DAMAN AND 
DIU AND DADRA AND NAGAR HAVELI.  
ZONE -VI TAMIL NADU, KERALA, KARNATAKA AND UNION TERRITORIES OF 
PONDICH ERRY AND LAKSH ADWEEP.  
 
--------------------------The Metro Railways (Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE METRO RAILWAYS (OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE) ACT, 2002  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINAR Y 
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER I I 
GOVERNMENT METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION  
3. Constitution of Government metro railway.  
4. Appointment of General Manager.  
 
CHAPTER II I 
FUNCTIONS AND POW ERS OF THE METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION  
5. Functions of metro railway administration.  
6. Powers of metro railway administration.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
COMMISSIONER OF METRO  RAILWAY SAFETY  
7. Appointment of Commissioner of Metro Railway Safety.  
8. Duties of Commissioner.  
9. Power s of Commissioner.  
10. Commissioner to be public servant.  
11. Facilities to be provided to Commissioner.  
12. Annual report  of Commis sioner.  
13. Annual report to be laid before Parliame nt. 
 
CHAPTER V  
OPENING OF METRO RAILWAY  
14. Sanction of Central Government to the opening of metro railway.  
15. Formalities to be complied with before giving sanction to the opening of metro railway.  
16. Sections 14 and 15 to apply to the opening of certain works.  
17. Temporary suspension of traffic.  
18. Power to close metro railway opened for public carriage of passengers.  
19. Re-opening of closed metro railway.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Use of rolling stock.  
21. Delegation of powers.  
22. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
WORKING OF THE METRO RAILWAY  
23. Exhibition of fare tables at station and supply of tickets.  
24. Exhibition and surrender of pass and ticket.  
25. Prohibition against travelling without pass or ticket.  
26. Carriage of goods.  
27. Prohibition against traveling of pers on suffering from infectious or contagious diseases and 
powers to remove them.  
28. Communication between passengers and metro railw ay officials in charge of trains.  
29. Right of metro railway administration to display commercial advertisements on metro railway  or 
on the premises occupied by it.  
30. Carriage of dangerous or offensive material.  
31. Power to remove persons from metro railway and its carriages.  
32. Power to make rules.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
FARE FIXATION  
33. Fixation of fare for carriage of passengers.  
34. Constitution of Fare Fix ation Committee.  
35. Other terms and conditions and procedure to be followed.  
36. Period for making recommendations .  
37. Recommendations to be binding on metro railway administration.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
ACCIDENTS  
38. Notice of metro railway accident.  
39. Inquiry by Commissioner.  
40. Inquiry by metro railway administration.  
41. Powers of Co mmissioner  in relation to inquiries.  
42. Statement made before Commissioner.  
43. Procedure for conducting inquiry.  
44. No inquiry , investigation, etc., to be made i f be made if the Commission of I nquiry is appointed . 
45. Inquiry into accident not covered by section 38.  
46. Returns.  
47. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter.  
  3 
 CHAPTER IX  
CLAIMS  COMMISSIONER  
SECTIONS  
48. Claims Commissioner.  
49. Qualifications for appointment as Claims Commissioner.  
50. Term of office.  
51. Resignation and removal.  
52. Salary and allowances and other conditions of service of Claims Commissioner.  
53. Procedure and powers of Claims Commissioner.  
54. Decision of Claims Commissioner.  
55. Savings as to certain rights.  
56. Power to make rules.  
 
CHAPTER X  
LIABILITY OF METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION DUE TO ACCIDENTS  
57. Extent of liability.  
58. Application for compensation . 
 
CHAPTER XI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
59. Drunkenness or nuisance on metro railway.  
60. Penalty for taking or causing to take offensive material upon metro railway.  
61. Penalty for taking or causing to take dangerous material upon metro railway.  
62. Prohibition of demonstrations upon metro railway.  
63. Penalty for travelling on roof, etc., of a train.  
64. Penalty for unlawfully entering or remaining upon metro railway or walking on m etro track.  
65. Endangering the safety of passengers by metro railway official.  
66. Abandoning train, etc., without authority.  
67. Obstructing running of train, etc.  
68. Obstructing metro railway official in his duties.  
69. Travelling without proper pass or ticket or beyond a uthorised distance.  
70. Needlessly interfering with means of communication in a train.  
71. Altering or defacing or counterfeiting pass or ticket.  
72. Defacing public notices.  
73. Any sale of articles on metro railway.  
74. Maliciously wrecking a train causing sabotage.  
75. Penalty  for unauthorised sale of tickets.  
76. Maliciously hurting or attempting to hurt person travelling by metro railway.  
77. Endangering safet y of persons travelling by metro railway by rash or negligent act or omission.  
78. Damage to or destruction of certain metro railway properties.  
79. Endangering the safely of persons travelling by metro railway by withful act or omission.  
80. Penalty for making a false claim for compensation.  
81. Offences by companies.  4 
 SECTIONS  
82. Power of arrest without warrant.  
83. Arrest of person likely to abs cond, etc.  
84. Magistrate having jurisdiction under the Act.  
85. Place of trial.  
 
CHAPTER XII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
86. Power of Central Government to issue directions.  
87. Prohibition to work as non -Government metro railway.  
88. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
89. Restriction on execution against metro property.  
90. Officials of metro railway administration to be public servants.  
91. Procedure for delivery to metro railway administration of property detained by a metro railway 
official.  
92. Proof of entries in records and documents.  
93. Servic e of notice, etc., on metro railway administration.  
94. Service of notice, etc., by metro railway administration  
95. Presumption where notice is served by registered post.  
96. Representation of metro railway administration.  
97. Appointment of security staff.  
98. Delegation of  powers.  
99. Power to remove difficulties.  
100. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
101. Power of metro railway administration to make regulations.  
102. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
103. Effect of Act inconsistent with other enactments.  
104. Application o f other Acts.  
105. Repeal and savings.  
 
  5 
 1[THE METRO RAILWAY S (OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE) ACT, 2002 ] 
ACT NO. 60 OF 2002  
[17th December , 2002 .] 
An Act to provide for the operation and maintenance and to regulate the working of the metro 
railway in the 1[National Capital Region, metropolitan city and metropolitan area ] and for 
matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—2[(1) This Act may be called the Metro Railways 
(Operation and Maintenance) Act, 2002.  
(2) It extends in the first instance to the National Capital Region and the Central Government may, by 
notification, after consultation with the  State Government, extend this Act to such other metropolitan area 
and metropolitan city, except the metropolitan city of Calcutta, and with effect from such date as may be 
specified in that notification and thereupon the provisions of this Act shall apply  to that metropolitan area 
or metropolitan city accordingly.]  
(3) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 29th day of October, 2002.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
3[(a) “Central Government ”, in relation to technical planning and safety of metro railways, means 
the Ministry of the Government of India dealing with Railways;  
(aa) “Claims Commissioner ” means a Claims Commissioner appointed under section 48;]  
(b) “Commissioner ” means the Commissioner of the Me tro Railway Safety  appointed under 
section 7;  
(c) “development ” with its grammatical variations means the carrying out of building, 
engineering, mining or other operations in, on, over or under land or the making of any material 
change on any building, or land, or planting of any tree on land and includes redevelopmen t; 
(d) “electric supply -line” shall have the meaning assigned to it under clause ( f) of section 2 of the 
Indian Electricity Act, 1910 (9 of 1910);  
(e) “fare” means the charge levied for the carriage of passengers;  
(f) “Government metro railway ” means a metro railway owned by the Central Government;  
(g) “land” includes any right or interest in any land;  
4[(h) “metropolitan area ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause (c) of article 243P of the 
Constitution;  
(ha) “metropolitan city ” means  the metropolitan city of Bombay, Calcutta, Delhi or Madras;]  
(i) “metro railway ” means rail -guided mass rapid transit system having dedicated right -of-way,  
with steel wheel or rubber -tyred wheel coaches, but excluding tramways, for carriage of passengers,  
and includes — 
(A) all land within the boundary marks indicating the limits of the land appurtenant to a metro 
railway,  
(B) all rail s tracks, sidings, yards or branches worked over for the purposes of, or  in 
connection with, a metro railway,  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 200 9, s. 5, for “ metropolitan city of Delhi” (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
2. Subs. by  s. 6, ibid., for sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for clause ( h) (w. e.f. 7-9-2009).  6 
 (C) all stations, offices, ventilation shafts and ducts, warehouses, workshops, manufactories, 
fixed plants and machineries, sheds, depots and other works constructed for the purpose of, or in 
connection with, a metro railway;  
(j) “metro railway administration ” in relati on to— 
(i) a Government metro railway means the General Manager of that railway; or  
(ii) anon -Government metro railway means the person who is the owner or lessee of that 
metro railway or the person working that metro railway under an arrangement with the owner 
or lessee of that metro railway;  
(k) “metro railway official ” means any person employed by the Central Government or by a 
metro railway administration in connection with the services of a metro railway;  
1[(ka) “National Capital Region ” means the National Capital Region as defined in clause ( f) of 
section 2 of the National Capital Region Planning Board Act, 1985 (2 of 1985);]  
(l) “non-Government metro railway ” means a metro railway other than G overnment metro 
railway;  
(m) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(n) “pass” means an authority given by the metro railway administration or by an officer 
appointed by that administration in this behalf, to a person allowing him to travel as a passenger on 
the metro  railway, but does not include a ticket;  
(o) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the Central Government under this Act;  
(p) “railway ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 31) of section 2 of the Railways 
Act, 1989 (24 of 1989);  
(q) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Government metro railway administration 
under this Act;  
(r) “rolling stock ” includes locomotives, engines, carriages (wheth er powered or not), wagons, 
trollies and vehicles of all kinds moving or intended to move on rails; and  
(s) “telegraph line ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( 4) of section 3 of the Indian 
Telegraph Act, 1885 (13 of 1885).  
(2) All other words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Metro Railways 
(Cons truction of Works) Act, 1978 (33 of 1978) shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them 
in that Act.  
CHAPTER II  
GOVERNMENT METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION  
 3. Constitution of Government metro railway .—(1) The Central Government may, for the purpose 
of efficient administration of a Government m etro railway, in the 2[National  Capital Region, metropolitan 
city and  metropolitan area], by notification, constitute such railways as it may deem fit.  
(2) A Government metro railway administration may, for ef ficient performance of its functions under 
this Act, appoint such officers and other employees as it considers necessary on such terms and conditions 
of service as may be determined by regulation.  
 4. Appointment of General Manager .—(1) The Central Governm ent shall, by notification, appoint 
a person to be the General Manager of a Government metro railway.  
(2) The general superintendence and control of a Government metro railway shall vest in the General 
Manager.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE METRO  RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION  
5. Functions of metro railway administration .—The functions of a metro r ailway administration 
shall be— 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 34 of 2009,  s. 7 (w.e. f. 7-9-2009) . 
2. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “metropolitan city of Delhi” (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  7 
 (a) to maintain and operate metro railway, for public carriage of passengers, constructed in, upon, 
across, under or over any la nd, building , street, road or passage in the 1[National Capital Region , 
metropol itan city and  metropolitan area ]; and 
(b) to engage in any such other activities or perform such other functions as may be considered 
necessary for the purpose of the operation  and mainten ance of the metro railway in the 1[National 
Capital Region , metropol itan city and  metropolitan area ]. 
6. Powers of metro railway administration .—(1) The metro railway administration shall have the 
power to do anything which may be necessary or expedient for the purpose of carrying out its functions 
under the Act.  
(2)Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, such po wer shall include the power 
to— 
(a) acquire, hold and dispose of all kinds of properties owned by it, both mova ble and 
immovable;  
(b) improve, develop or alter any property or asset held by it;  
2[(ba) develop any metro railway land for commercial use;  
(bb) provide for carriage of passengers by integrated transport services or any other mode of 
transport;]  
(c) center temporarily in or upon the lands adjoining the metro railway alignment in order to 
remove obstruction, or prevent imminent danger from any source, such as tree, post or structure, 
which may obstruct the movement of the rolling stock, or passengers, or the view of the signal 
provided for movement of the rolling stock;  
(d) execute  any lease or grant any licenc e in respect of the property held by it;  
(e) enter into, assign and rescind any contract or obligation;  
(f) employ an agent or contractor for discharging its functions;  
(g) obtain licenc e from the Central Government to establish and maintain telegraph lines;  
(h) lay down or place electric supply lines for conveyance and transmission of energy and to 
obtain license for that purpose; and  
(i) do all incidental acts as are necessary for discharge of any function conferred, or imposed, on 
it by this Act.  
CHAPTER IV  
COMMISSIONER OF METRO  RAILWAY  SAFE TY 
7. Appointment of Commissioner of Metro Railway Safety .—3[(1)] The Central Government may 
appoint one or more Commissioners of Metro Railway Safety.  
4[(2) The Commissioner shall function under the administrative control of the Chief Commissioner of 
Railway Safety appointed under section 5 of the Railways Act, 1989 (24 of 1989).]  
8. Duties of Commissioner .—The Commissioner shall — 
(a) inspect the metro railway with a view to determine whether it is fit to be opened for the 
public carriage of passengers and report thereon to the Central Government as required by or und er 
this Act;  
(b) make such periodical or other inspections of metro railway, its rolling stock used thereon 
and its other installations as the Central Government may direct;  
(c) make an inquiry under the provisions of this Act into the cause of any acciden t on the metro 
railway; and  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 2009, s.  5 for “ metropolitan city of Delhi” (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
2. Ins. by s. 8, ibid. (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
3. S. 7 renumbered as sub -section ( 1) thereof by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 7 -9-2009).  
4. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w. e. f. 7 -9-2009).  8 
 (d) discharge such other duties as are conferred on him by or under this Act.  
9. Powers of Commissioner .—Subject to the control of the Central Government, the Commissioner, 
whenever it is necessary so to do for any of  the purposes of this Act, may — 
(a) enter upon and inspect the metro railway or any rolling stock used thereon and its other 
installations;  
(b) by order in writing addressed to the metro railway administration, require the attendance 
before him of metro railway official and to requ ire answers or returns to such i nquiries as he thinks fit 
to make from such metro railway official or from the metro railway administration; and  
(c) require the production of any book, document or material object belonging to or  in the 
possession or control of any metro railway administration which appears to him to be necessary to 
inspect.  
10. Commissioner to be public servant .—The Commissioner shall be deemed to be a public servant 
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian  Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
11. Facilities to be provided to Commissioner .—The metro railway administration shall provide to 
the Commissioner all reasonable facilities for the discharge of the duties or for the exercise of the powers 
imposed or conferred on him by or under this Act.  
1[12. Annual report .—The Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety shall, for each financial year, 
prepare in such form, and within such time, as may be prescribed, an annual report giving a full account 
of the activities of the Commissioners during the financial year immediately preceding the financial year 
in which such report is prepared and forward copies the reof to the Central Government. ] 
13. Annual report to be laid before Parliament .—The Central Government shall cause the annual 
report of the 2[Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety] to be laid after its receipt before each House of 
Parli ament.  
CHAPTER V  
OPENING OF METRO RAILWAY  
14. Sanction of Central Government to the opening of metro railway .—The metro railway in the 
3[National Capital Region , metropol itan city and  metropolitan area ] shall not be opened for the public 
carriage of passengers except with the previous sanc tion of the Central Government.  
15. Formalities to be complied with before giving sanction to the opening of metro railway .—(1) 
The Central Government shall, before giving its sanction to the opening of the metro railway under 
section 14, obtain a rep ort from the Commissioner that — 
(a) he has made a careful inspection of the metro railway and the rolling stock that may be 
used thereon;  
(b) the moving and fixed dimensions as laid down by the Central Government have not been 
infringed;  
(c) the track structure, strength of bridges, standards of signa lling system, traction system, 
general structural ch aracter of civil works and the size of, and maximum gross load upon, the 
axles of any rolling stock, comply with the requirements laid down by the Central Government; 
and 
(d) in his opinion, metro railway can be opened for the public car riage of passengers  without 
any danger to the public using it.  
(2) If the Commissioner is of the opinion that the metro railway cannot be opened without any danger 
to the public using it, he shall, in his rep ort, state the grounds therefor , as also the requirements which, in  
his opinion, are to be complied with before sanction is given by the Central Government.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 2009, s. 10 , for section 12 (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “Commissioner” (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for “me tropolitan city of Delhi”  (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  9 
 (3) The Central Government, after considering the report of the Commissioner, may sanction the 
opening of the metro railway under section 14 as such or subject to such conditions as may be considered 
necessary by it for the safety of the public.  
16. Sections 14 and 15 to apply to the opening of certain works .—The provisions of sections 14 
and 15 shall apply to the opening of the following works if they form part of,  or are directly connected 
with, the metro railway used for the public carriage of passengers and have been constructed subsequent 
to the giving of a report by the Commissi oner under section 15, namely: — 
(a) opening of additional lines of metro railway;  
(b) opening of stations and junctions;  
(c) re-mode lling of yards and re -building of bridges; and  
(d) any alteration or reconstruction materially affecting the structural character of any work to 
which the provisions of sections 14 and 15 apply or are extende d by this section.  
17. Temporary suspension of traffic .—When an accident has occurred on the metro railway 
resulting in a temporary suspension of traffic, and either the original tracks and works have been restored 
to their original standard or a temporary  diversion has been laid for the purpose of restoring 
communication, the original tracks and works so restored, or the temporary diversion, as the case may be, 
may, without prior inspection by the Commissioner, be opened for the public carriage of passenge rs, 
subject to the f ollowing conditions, namely: — 
(a) the metro railway official in charge of the works undertaken by reasons of the accident has 
certified in writing that the opening of the restored tracks and works, or of the temporary diversion 
will not  in his opinion be attended with danger to the public; and  
(b) a notice of the opening of the tracks and works or the diversion shall be sent i mmediately to 
the Commissioner.  
18. Power to close metro railway opened for public carriage of passengers .—Where,  after the 
inspection of the metro railway opened and used for the public carriage of passengers or any rolling stock 
used thereon, the Commissioner is of the opinion that the use of the metro railway or of any rolling stock 
will be attended with danger to  the public using it, the Commissioner shall send a report to the Central 
Government  who may thereupon direct that — 
(i) the metro railway be closed for the public carriage of passengers; or  
(ii) the use of the rolling stock be discontinued; or  
(iii) the me tro railway or the rolling s tock may be used for the public  carriage of passengers 
subject to such conditions as it may consider necessar y for the safety of the public.  
19. Re-opening of closed metro railway .—When the Central Government has, under section 18 
directed the closure of the metro railway or the discontinuance o f the use of any rolling stock — 
(a) the metro railway shall not be re -opened for the public carriage of passengers until it has been 
inspected by the Commissioner and its re -opening is san ctioned in accordance with the provisions of 
this Chapter; and  
(b) the rolling stock shall not be used until it has been inspected by the Commissioner and its re -
use is sanctioned in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.  
20. Use of rolling stock .—The metro railway administration may use such rolling stock as it may 
consider necessary for operation and working of the metro railway:  
Provided that before using any rolling stock of a design or type different from that already running on 
any section of  the metro railway, the previous sanction of the Central Government shall be obtained for 
such use:  10 
 Provided further that before giving any such sanction, the Central Government shall obtain a report 
from the Commissioner that he has made a careful inspect ion of the rolling stock and, in his opinion, such 
rolling stock can be used.  
21. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any of its 
powers or functions under this Chapter, except power to make rule under section 22, shall, in relation to 
such matters and subject to such conditions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, be exercised or 
discharged also by the Commissioner.  
22. Power to make rules in respect of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the fol lowing matters, namely: — 
(a) the dut ies of a metro railway administration and the Commissioner in regard to the opening of 
a metro railway for the public carriage of passengers;  
(b) the arrangements to be made for and the formalities to be complied with before opening a 
metro railway for the  public carriage of passengers;  
(c) for regulating the mode in which, and the speed at which rolling stock used on metro railway 
is to be moved or propelled; and  
(d) the cases in which and the extent to which the procedure provided in this Chapter may be 
dispensed with.  
CHAPTER VI  
WORKING OF THE METRO RAILWAY  
23. Exhibition of fare tables at station and supply of tickets .—(1) The metro railway 
administration shall cause to be pasted in a conspicuous and accessible place at every station in 1[Hindi, 
English  and official language of the State in which such station is located] a table of the fare chargeable 
for traveling from the station to every place for which tickets are issued to passengers.  
(2) Any person desirous of trave lling on the metro railway shall,  upon payment of fare, be issued with 
a ticket by the metro railway administration or an agent authorised in this behalf.  
(3) The ticket issued under sub -section ( 2) shall indicate its value, period of validity and such other 
particulars as may be prescribed.  
24. Exhibition and surrender of pass and ticket .—Every passenger shall, on demand by any metro 
railway official authorised in this behalf, present his pass or ticket to such metro railway official for 
examination at the beginning, or during or at the end of the journey  and surrender such ticket, — 
(a) at the end of journey if the ticket is for a single journey, or  
(b) if such ticket is issued for a particular amount, on the exhaustion of the amount f or which the 
ticket was issued.  
25. Prohibition  against travelling without pass or ticket .—No person shall enter or remain in any 
carriage on the metro railway, for the purpose of travelling therein as a passenger, unless he has with him 
a proper pass or ticket.  
26. Carriage of goods .—(1) No person shall, while travelling in the metro railway, carry with him 
any goods other than 2*** baggage containing personal belongings not exceeding such volume and 
weight as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where any person travels on the metro railway in contravention of the provisions of                        
sub-section ( 1), he shall, notwithstanding that he holds a valid pass or ticket for any travel in such 
railway, be liable to be removed from the tr ain by any metro railway official authorised by the metro 
railway administration in this behalf or by any other person whom such metro railwa y official may call to 
his aid.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 2009, s. 12, for “Hindi and English”  (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
2. The words  “a small” omitted by s. 13, ibid.  (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  11 
 27. Prohibition against travelling of person suffering from infectious or contagiou s diseases and 
powers to remove them .—(1) No person suffering from infectious or contagious diseases as may be 
prescribed, shall travel by the metro railway.  
(2) Any person travelling in contravention of any rule made under sub -section ( 1) shall be liable to be 
removed from the metro railway.  
28. Communication between passengers and metro railway officials in charge of trains .—The 
metro railway administration shall provide and maintain in proper order, in any metro train, such efficient 
means of communicati on between the passengers and the metro railway official in charge of the train as 
may be approved by the Central Government . 
29. Right of metro railway administration to display commercial advertisements on metro 
railway or on the premises occupied by it .—The metro railway administration may use its premises, 
lands, buildings, posts, bridges, structures, vehicles, rolling stock and other property for displaying 
commercial advertisements and for that purpose may erect or construct or fix any hoardings, bill boards, 
show cases, and such other things for the display of poster s or other publicity materials.  
30. Carriage of dangerous or offensive material .—(1) No person shall take or cause to be taken on 
the metro railway such dangerous or offensive material as m ay be prescribed.  
(2) If any metro railway official has reason to believe that any person is carrying with him, in a 
container of any form, or otherwise, any dangerous or offensive material, he may cause such container to 
be opened by its carrier for the p urposes of ascertaining its contents.  
(3) Any metro railway official may remove from the metro railway any person taking with him any 
dangerous or offensive material.  
31. Power to remove persons from metro railway and its carriages .—Any person, entering up on 
or into any part of the metro railway without lawful authority, on being asked to leave the metro railway 
by any metro railway official, does not leave therefrom, may be removed from the metro railway by such 
metro railway official or by any other perso n whom such metro railwa y official may call to his aid.  
32. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the particulars of the ticket such as the value, the period of validity and other particulars under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 23;  
(b) the volume and weight of baggage under sub -sectio n (1) of section 26;  
(c) diseases which are infectious or contagious under sub -section ( 1) of section 27;  
(d) material which is dangerous or offensive under sub -section ( 1) of section 30; and  
(e) generally, for regulating the travelling upon, and the use, working and management of the 
metro railway.  
(3) Every metro railway administration shall keep at every station on its metro railway a copy of all 
the rules made under this section and shall also allow any perso n to inspect it free of charge.  
CHAPTER VII  
FARE FIXATION  
33. Fixation of fare for carriage of passengers .—The metro railway administration shall, from time 
to time, on the recommendations made to it by the Fare Fixation Committee constituted under                     
sub-section ( 1) of section 34, fix, for the carriage of passengers, fare for travelling from one station to 
another of the metro railway:  
Provided that the metro railway administration may fix the fare under this section without 
recommendations of the Fare Fixation Committee on the init ial opening of the metro railway.  12 
 34. Constitution of Fare Fixation Committee .—(1) The Central Government may, from time to 
time, constitute a Fare Fixation Committee for the purpose of recommending fare for the carriage of 
passengers by the metro railway.  
(2) The Fare Fixation Commi ttee shall consist of a Chairperson  and two other members.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as the Chairperson unless he is or has been a 
Judge of a High Court.  
1[(4) The Central Government and the State Gover nment shall nominate one member each to the Fare 
Fixation Committee:  
Provided that a person who is or has been an Additional Secretary to the Government of India or 
holds or has held an equivalent post in the Central Government or the State Government shal l be qualified 
to be nominated as a member.]  
(5) A sitting Judge of a High Court shall be appointed after consultation with the Chief Justice of that 
High Court.  
35. Other terms and conditions and procedure to be followed .—(1) The other terms and 
conditions of the Fare Fixation Committee, and the procedure to be followed by that committee shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(2) The metro railway administration shall provide to the Fare Fixation Committee all reasonable 
facility for the discharg e of its duties under this Act.  
36. Period for making recommendations .—The Fare Fixation Committee shall submit its report 
along with recommendations to the metro railway administration within such period, not exceeding three 
months, as may be specified by ord er made by the Central Government.  
 37. Recommendations to be binding on metro railway administration .—The recommendations 
made by the Fare Fixation Committee shall be binding on the metro railway administration.  
CHAPTER VIII  
ACCIDENTS  
38. Notice of metro railway accident .—(1) Where, in the course of work ing a metro railway, — 
(a) any accident attended with loss of any human life, or with grievous hurt, as defined in the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860); or  
(b) any collision between trains; or  
(c) the derailment of any train carrying passengers, or of any part of such train; or  
(d) any accident of a description usually attended with loss of human life or with such 
grievous hurt as aforesaid; or  
(e) any accident of any other description which the Central  Government may notify in this 
behalf,  
occurs, the metro railway official in charge of the section of the metro railway on which the accident 
occurs, shall, without delay, give notice of the accident in such form and containing such particulars as 
may be prescribed to the Deputy Commissioner and the Deputy Commissioner of Police, within whose 
jurisdiction the accident occurs, the officer in charge of the police station within the local limits of which 
the accident occurs and to such other Magistrate or pol ice officer as may be appointed in this behalf by 
the Central Government.  
(2) The metro railway administration, within whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, shall, without 
delay, give notice of the accident to the 2[State Government] and the Commissioner  having jurisdiction 
over the place of the accident.  
39. Inquiry by Commissioner .—(1) On the receipt of a notice under section 38 of the occurrence of 
an accident resulting in loss of human life or grievous hurt causing total or partial disablement of 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 2009, s. 14, for sub -section ( 4) (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi” (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  13 
 permanent nature to a passenger, the Commissioner shall, as soon as may be, notify the metro railway 
administration in whose jurisdiction the accident occurred of his intention to hold an inquiry into the 
causes that led to the accident and shall at the sa me time fix and communicate the date, time and place of 
inquiry:  
Provided that it shall be open to the Commissioner to hold an inquiry into any other accident which, 
in his opinion, requires the holding of such an inquiry.  
(2) If for any reason, the Commis sioner is not able to hold an inquiry as soon as may be after the 
occurrence of the accident, he shall notify the metro rail way administration accordingly.  
40. Inquiry by metro railway administration .—Where no inquiry is held by the Commissioner 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 39 or where the Commissioner has informed the metro railway 
administration under sub -section ( 2) of that section that he is not able to hold an inquiry, the metro 
railway administration within whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, shall cause an inquiry to be made in 
accordance wi th the prescribed procedure.  
41. Powers of Commissioner in relation to inquiries .—(1) For the purpose of conducting an 
inquiry under this Chapter into the causes of any accident, the Commissioner shall, in addition to the 
powers specified in section 9, have the powers as are vested in a Civil Court while trying a suit under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and examining them on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copies thereof from any court or office; and  
(e) any other matter which may be pre scribed.  
(2) The Commissioner while conducting an inquiry under this Chapter shall be deemed to be a Civil 
Court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973                      
(2 of 1974).  
42. Statement made before Commissioner .—No statement made by a person in the course of giving 
evidence in an inquiry before the Commissioner shall subject him to, or be used against him, in any civil 
or criminal proceeding, except in a prosecution for giving false evidence b y such person:  
Provided that the statement is — 
(a) made in reply to a question which is required by the Commissioner to answer; or  
(b) relevant to the  subject matter of the inquiry.  
43. Procedure for conducting inquiry .—The metro railway administration or the Commissioner 
conducting an inquiry under this Chapter may send notice of the inquiry to such persons, follow such 
procedure, and prepare the report in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
44. No inquiry, investigation, etc., to be made if the Commission o f Inquiry is appointed .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this Chapter, where a Commission of 
Inquiry is appointed under the Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952 (60 of 1952), to inquire into an 
accident, any inquiry, investigat ion or other proceeding pending in relation to that accident shall not be 
proceeded with, and all records or other documents relating to such inquiry shall be forwarded to such 
authority as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf.  
45. Inquiry into accident not covered by section 38 .—Where any accident of the nature not 
specified in section 38 occurs in the course of working the metro railway, the metro railway 
administration within whose jurisdiction the accident occurs, may cause such inquiry to be made into the 
causes of the accident, as may be prescribed.  14 
 46. Returns .—The metro railway administration shall  send to the Central Government  a return of 
accidents occurring on its railway, whether attended with injury to any person or not, in such form and 
manner and at such intervals as may be prescribed.  
47. Power to make rules in res pect of matters in this Chapter .—(1) The Central Government may, 
by notification, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, a nd without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the forms of notice of accidents to be given under section 38 and the particulars of the 
accident such notices shall  contain;  
(b) the persons to whom notices in respect of any inquiry under this Chapter are to be sent, the 
procedure to be followed in such inquiry and the manner in which a report of such inquiry shall be 
prepared;  
(c) the nature of inquiry to be made by the metro railway administration into the causes of an 
accident under section 40;  
(d) for conducting an inquiry under clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 41;  
(e) the procedure of conducting inquiry and preparation of the report under section 43;  
(f) the making of an inquiry into the causes of the accident under section 45; and  
(g) the form and manner of sending a return of accidents by the metro railway a dministration 
under section 46.  
CHAPTER IX  
CLAIMS COMMISSION ER 
48. Claims Commissioner .—The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a Claims 
Commissioner for the purpose of adjudicating upon claims for compensation in respect of accidents 
involving the death of, or bodily injury to person, or damage to any property arising out of the wor king of 
the m etro railway.  
49. Qualifications for appointment as Claims Commissioner .—A person shall not be qualified for 
appointment as  Claims Commissioner unless he — 
(a) is or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court; or  
(b) has been a Me mber of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that Service; 
or 
(c) has, for at least three years, held a civil judicial post carrying a scale of pay which is not less 
than that of a Joint Secret ary to the Government of India.  
50. Term of office .—The Claims Commissioner shall hold office as such for a term as may be 
speci fied by the Central Government.  
51. Resignation and removal .—(1) The Claims Commissioner may, by notice in writing under his 
hand addressed to the Central Government, resign his office.  
(2) The Claims Commissioner may be removed from his office by an order of the Central 
Government on the ground of proved misbehaviour or incapacity after an inquiry in which he had been 
informed of the charges aga inst him and given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those 
charges.  
(3) The procedure for the investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Claims Commissioner 
referred to in sub -section ( 2) be such as may be prescribed.  
52. Salary  and allowances and other conditions of service of Claims Commissioner .—The salary 
and allowances payable to, and the other terms and conditions of service of, the Claims Commissioner 
shall be such as may be prescribed:  
Provided that neither the salary and  allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Claims Commissioner shall be varied to his disadvantage after h is appointment.  15 
 53. Procedure and powers of Claims Commissioner .—(1) The Claims Commissioner shall have all 
the powers of a civi l court for the purpose of taking evidence on oath, enforcing attendance of witnesses 
and compelling the discovery or production of documents and material objects.  
(2) The Claims Commissioner shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of sect ion 195 
and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
(3) In enquiring into and determining any claims for payment of compensation, the Claims 
Commissioner may, subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, follow such summa ry procedure 
as he may deem fit.  
(4) Subject to any rules that may be made in this behalf, the Claims Commissioner may, for the 
purpose of determining any claim for compensation, choose one or more persons possessing special 
knowledge of any matter relevan t to the enquiry, to assist him in holding the enquiry.  
(5) The Claims Commissioner shall have powers to pass such interim and final order as the 
circumstance may require, including orders for payment of costs.  
54. Decision of Claims Commissioner .—(1) Any question as to the liability of the metro railway 
administration to pay compensation or as to the person to whom such compensation is payable, shall be 
determined by an order of the Claims Commissioner.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be final.  
55. Savings as to certain rights .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, where the death of, or bodily injury to, any person gives rise to a claim for 
compensation under this Act and also under any other  law in force, the person entitled to compensation 
may claim such compensation only once either under this Act or under any other law in force.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right of any person to claim compensation payable 
under any cont ract or scheme providing for compensation for death or personal injury or for damage to 
property or any sum payable under any policy of insurance.  
56. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry 
out the provisi ons of this Chapter.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing pow er, such rules may 
provide for — 
(i) the procedure for investigation of misbehaviour or incapacity of the Claims Commissioner 
under sub -section ( 3) of sectio n 51;  
(ii) the salary and allowances and the other terms and conditions of service of the Claims 
Commissioner under section 52; and  
(iii) any other purpose incidental to or connected wi th the objects of this Chapter.  
CHAPTER X  
LIABILITY OF METRO RAILWAY ADMINISTRATION DUE TO ACCIDENTS  
57. Extent of liability .—The metro railway administration shall, notwithstanding anything contained 
in any other law, be liable to pay compensation for loss occasioned by the death of, or bodily injury to any 
person to su ch extent as may be prescribed.  
58. Application for compensation .—An application for compensation arising out of an accident may 
be made to the Claims Commissioner by, — 
(a) the person who has sustained the injury or suffered any loss; or  
(b) all or any of the  dependants of the deceased where death has resulted from the accident; or  
(c) an agent duly authorised by the person injured or all or any of the dependants of th e deceased, 
as the case may be:  
Provided that where all the dependants of the deceased have n ot joined in any such application for 
compensation, the application shall be made on behalf of or for the benefit of all the dependants of the 
deceased and the dependants who have not so joined, shall be impleaded as respondents to the 
application.  16 
 Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, the word “dependant ” shall have the same 
meaning as given to it in clause ( b) of section 123 of the R ailways Act, 1989 (24 of 1989).  
CHAPTER XI  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
59. Drunkenness or nuisance on metro railway .—(1) If any person, in any carriage or upon any 
part of the metro railway, — 
(a) is in a state of intoxication; or  
(b) commits any nuisance or vandalism or act of indecency, or uses abusive or obscene 
language; or  
(c) wilfully or without excuse interferes in any way with the comfort of any passenger,  
he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees and shall also be liable to 
forfeiture of the fare which he may have paid or any pass or ticket which he may have obtained or 
purchased, or be removed from such carriage or part by any metro railway official authorised by the 
metro railway administration in this behalf.  
(2) If any metro railway official is in a state of intoxication while on duty, he  shall be punishable with 
fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees or, where the improper performance of the duty 
would be likely to endanger the safety of any passenger travelling or being upon the metro railway, with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both.  
60. Penalty for taking or causing to take offensive material upon metro railway .—(1) If, in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 30, a person takes or  causes to be taken any offensive material 
upon the metro railway, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five hundred rupees.  
(2) In addition to the penalties specified in sub -section ( 1), a person takes or causes to be taken any 
offensive m aterial upon the metro railway shall be responsible also for any loss, injury or damage which 
may be caused by reason of such material having been so brought upon the metro railway.  
61. Penalty for taking or causing to take dangerous material upon metro ra ilway .—(1) If, in 
contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 30, a person takes or causes to be taken any dangerous material 
upon the metro railway, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to four 
years and with fine which may  extend to five thousand rupees.  
(2) In addition to the penalties specified in sub -section ( 1), a person takes or causes to be taken any 
dangerous material upon the metro railway shall be responsible also for any loss, injury or damage which 
may be caused by reason of such material having been so brought upon the metro railway.  
62. Prohibition of demonstrations upon metro railway .—(1) No demonstration of any kind 
whatsoever shall be held on any part of the metro railway or other premises thereof and it shal l be open to 
the metro railway administration to exclude from such premises any person attending such 
demonstrations whether or not he is in possession of a pass or ticket entitling him to be in the said 
premises.  
(2) No person shall paste or put up any po ster or write or draw anything or matter in any compartment 
or carriage of the metro railway, or any premises thereof, without any lawful authority and any person 
found engaged in doing any such act may be removed from the compartment, carriage or premises  by any 
metro railway official authorised by the metro railway administration in this behalf.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any of the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), or on being 
asked by any metro railway official to leave any compartment, car riage or premises refuses to do so, shall 
be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may 
extend to one thousand rupees, or with both.  
63. Penalty for travelling on roof, etc., of a train .—If any passenger travels on the roof of a train or 
persists in travelling in any part of a train not intended for the use of passengers or projects any part of his 
body out of a train after being warned by any metro railway official to desist, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one month, or with fine which may extend to fifty rupees, 17 
 or with both, and shall also be liable to be removed from the train by any metro railway official authorised 
by the metro railway administration in this be half. 
64. Penalty for unlawfully entering or remaining upon metro railway or walking on metro 
track .—(1) If a person enters into or upon the metro railway without any lawful authority or having 
entered with lawful authority remains there unlawfully and refuses to leave on being requested to do so by 
any metro railway official, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
three months, or with fine which may extend to two hundred and fifty rupees, or with both.  
(2) If any person  walks on the metro track without any lawful authority, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to six months, or with fine which may extend to five hundred 
rupees, or with both.  
65. Endangering the safety of passengers by metr o railway official .—If any metro railway 
official, when on duty endanger s the safety of any passenger, — 
(a) by any rash or negligent act or omission; or  
(b) by disobeying any rule, regulation or order which such official was bound by the terms of his 
employment to o bey, and of which he had notice,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which 
may extend to six thousand rupees, or with both.  
66. Abandoning train, etc., without authority .—If any me tro railway official, when on duty, is 
entrusted with any responsibility connected with the running of a train, or any other rolling stock from 
one station or place to another station or place, and he abandons his duty before reaching such station or 
place , without authority or without properly handing over such train or rolling stock to another authorised 
metro railway official, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to four 
years, or with fine which may extend to five thousan d rupees, or with both.  
67. Obstructing running of train, etc.—If any person obstructs or causes to be obstructed or 
attempts to obstruct any train or rolling stock upon the metro railway by squatting, picketing or keeping 
without authority any rolling sto ck on the metro railway or tampering with any signalling installations or 
by interfering with the working mechanism thereof, or otherwise, he shall be liable to be removed by any 
metro railway official, authorised by the metro railway administration in thi s behalf and shall also be 
punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to four years, or with fine which may extend 
to five thousand rupees, or with both.  
68. Obstructing metro railway official in his duties .—If any person wilfully obstructs o r prevents 
any metro railway official in the discharge of his duties, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine which may extend to one  thousand rupees, or with both.  
69. Trave lling without proper p ass or ticket or beyond authorised distance .—(1) If any 
passenger — 
(a) travels in a train without having a proper pass or ticket with him; or  
(b) being in or having alighted from a train, fails or refuses to present for examination or to 
deliver up his pass or  ticket immediately on requisition being made therefor under section 24, or 
travels in a train in contravention of the provisions of section 25, he shall be liable to pay, on 
demand of any metro railway official appointed by the metro railway administratio n in this behalf, 
the excess charge mentioned in sub -section ( 3) in addition to the ordinary single fare for the 
distance which he has travelled or, where there is any doubt as to the station from which he started, 
the ordinary single fare from the station  from which the train originally started.  
(2) If any passenger travels or attempts to travel in a carriage or by a train or travels in or on a 
carriage beyond the place authorised by his pass or ticket, he shall be liable to pay, on demand of any 
person appointed by the metro railway administration in this behalf, the excess charge mentioned in                   
sub-section ( 3) in addition to any difference between any fare paid by him and the fare payable in respect 
of the journey he has made.  
(3) The excess charge referred to in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be fifty rupees.  18 
 (4) If any passenger liable to pay the excess charge and fare mentioned in sub -section ( 1), or the 
excess charge and any difference of fare mentioned in sub -section ( 2), fails or refuses to pay the same on 
a demand being made  therefor, any metro railway official authorised by the metro railway administration 
in this behalf may apply to any Metropolitan Magistrate for the recovery of the sum payable as if it were a 
fine, and the Magistrate if satisfied that the sum is payable s hall order it to be so recovered, and may order 
that the person liable for the payment shall in default of payment suffer imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to one month.  
(5) Any sum recovered under sub -section ( 4) shall, as and when it is recovered,  be paid to the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  
70. Needlessly interfering with means of communication in a train .—If any passenger or any 
other person without reasonable and sufficient cause, makes use of, or interferes with, any means 
provided by the metro r ailway administration in a train for communication between passengers and metro 
railway official in charge of the train, or misuses alarm bell of the train, he shall be punishable with 
imprisonment which may extend to one year, or with fine which may exten d to one thousand rupees, or 
with both.  
71. Altering or defacing or counterfeiting pass or ticket .—If any person wilfully breaks the 
security code of any pass or ticket, or defaces or alters or counterfeits or duplicates it or acts in any way to 
cause reve nue loss to metro railway, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to six months.  
72. Defacing public notices .—If any p erson without lawful authority — 
(a) in this behalf pulls down or wilfully damages any board or documents set  up or posted by the 
order of the metro railway administration on the metro railway, or any rolling stock, or  
(b) obliterates or alters any letters or figures upon any such board or document or upon any 
rolling stock,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment which may extend to two months or with fine up to two 
hundred and fifty rupees, or with both.  
73. Any sale of articles on metro railway .—If any person sells or exposes for sale, any article 
whatsoever in any metro r ailway carriage or upon any part of the metro premises not authorised by metro 
railway administration for such purpose, he shall be punishable with fine which may extend to five 
hundred rupees, and in default of payment of fine, he shall be punishable with  imprisonment which may 
extend to six months:  
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such fine shall not b e less than one hundred rupees.  
74. Maliciously wrecking a train or causing sabotage .—(1) If any per son— 
(a) loosens or displaces any rail or any other matter or thing belonging to the metro railway; or  
(b) turns, moves, unlocks or diverts any point or other machinery belonging to the metro railway; 
or 
(c) does or causes to be done any act of sabotage in relation to the metro railway with intent or 
with knowledge that it is likely to endanger safety of any person upon the metro railway,  
he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous i mprisonment for a term which may 
extend to ten yea rs: 
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, where a person is punished with rigorous imprisonment, such impri sonment shall  
not be less than — 
(i) three years in the case of a first conviction; and  
(ii) seven years in the case of conviction for the second or subsequent offence.  19 
 (2) If a person unlawfully does any act of sabotage or any other act referred to in sub -section ( 1) with 
intent to cause the death of any person, or with knowledge that such act is so imminently dangerous that it 
must in all probability cause the death of any person or such bodily injury to any person as is likely to 
cause the death of any person, he shal l be punishable with death or imprisonment for life.  
75. Penalty for unauthorised sale of tickets .—If any person not being a metro railway official, or an 
agent authorised in this behalf under sub -section ( 2) of section 23 sells or attempts to sell any ticket in 
order to enable any other person to travel therewith, he shall be punishable for a term which may extend 
to three months, or fine which may extend to five hundred rupees, or with both, and shall also forfeit the 
ticket whic h he sells or attempts to sell.  
76. Maliciously hurting or attempting to hurt persons travelling by metro railway .—If any 
person unlawfully throws or causes to fall or strike at, against, into or upon any rolling stock forming part 
of a train, any wood, stone or other matter or thing with intent, or with knowledge that it is likely to 
endanger the safety of any person being in or upon such rolling stock or in or upon any other rolling stock 
forming part of the same train, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for life or with imprisonment for 
a term which may extend to ten years.  
77. Endangering safety of persons travelling by metro railway by rash or negligent act or 
omission .—If any person in a rash or negligent manner does any act, or omits to do what he is legally 
bound to do, and the act or omission is likely to endanger the safety of any person travelling or being 
upon the metro railway, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to one 
year, or with fine, or with both.  
78.  Damage to or destructi on of certain metro railway properties .—(1) Whoever, with intent to 
cause or knowing that he is likely to cause damage to or destruction of any of the properties of the metro 
railway referred to in sub -section ( 2), causes by fire, explosive substance or ot herwise causes damage to 
such property, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years.  
(2) The properties of the metro railway referred to in sub -section ( 1) are the metro railway track, 
tunnels, sub -way, box -structures,  station buildings and installations, carriage and wagons, rolling stock, 
signalling, telecommunication, air -conditioning and ventilation equipments, electrical sub -station, 
drainage pump, escalators, lifts, lighting installations, ticket vending machine, ticket barriers, electric 
traction and block equipments, and such other properties as the Central Government may, by notification, 
specify.  
79. Endangering the safety of persons travelling by metro railway by wilful act or omission .—If 
any person by unlawf ul act or by any wilful omission or neglect or by tampering with safety devices, 
endangers or causes to be endangered the safety of any person travelling on or being upon any metro 
railway, or obstructs or causes to be obstructed or attempts to obstruct an y rolling stock upon any metro 
railway, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to seven years:  
Provided that, in the absence of special and adequate reasons to the contrary to be mentioned in the 
judgment of the court, such im prisonment shall not be less than — 
(i) six months in the case of first conviction; and  
(ii) two years in the case of conviction for the second or subsequent offence.  
80. Penalty for making a false claim for compensation .—If any person requiring compensation 
from the metro railway administration under Chapter X makes a claim which is false or which he knows 
or believes to be false or does not believe to be true, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term 
which may extend to three years, o r with fine, or with both.  
81. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company, for the conduct of th e business of the company, as well as the company, 
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished 
accordingly:  20 
 Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, m anager, secretary or other officer shall be deemed to be guilty of 
that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of 
individuals; and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
82. Power of arrest without warrant .—(1) If a person commits any offence mentioned in sections 
59, 61, 65 to 79, he may be arrested without warrant  or other written authority by any metro railway 
official or by a police officer not below the rank of a head constable or by any other person whom such 
metro railway official or police officer may call to his aid:  
Provided that where a person has been arr ested, by any person other than the police officer, he shall 
be made over to a police officer, or, in the absence of a police officer, take such person or cause him to be 
taken in custody to the nearest police station.  
(2) A person so arrested under sub -section ( 1) shall be produced before the nearest Magistrate, having 
authority to try him or commit him for trial, as early as possible but within a period not exceeding twenty -
four hours of such arrest exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the  place of arrest to the 
court of the Magistrate.  
83. Arrest of person likely to abscond, etc .—(1) If any person commits any offence under this Act, 
other than an offence mentioned in section 82 or fails or refuses to pay any excess charge or other sum 
dema nded under section 69 and there is reason to believe that he may abscond, or his name and address 
are unknown and he refuses on demand to give his name and address, or there is reason to believe that 
name and address given by him is incorrect, any metro ra ilway official or police officer not below the 
rank of head constable, or any other person whom such metro railway official may call to his aid, may, 
without warrant or written authority, arrest him.  
(2) A person so arrested shall be produced before the ne arest Magistrate, having authority to try him 
or commit him for trial, as early as possible but within a period not exceeding twenty -four hours, 
exclusive of the time necessary for the journey from the place of arrest to the court of the Magistrate.  
84. Magistrate having jurisdiction under the Act .—Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate shall 
try an offence under this Act.  
85. Place of trial .—(1) Any person committing an offence under this Act, or any rule or regulation 
made thereunder, shall be triable for such offence in any place in which he may be, or which the 1[State 
Government] may notify in this behalf, as well as any other place in which  he is liable to be tried under 
any law for the time being in force.  
(2) Every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall be published by the 2[State Government] and a copy 
thereof shall be exhibited for the information of the public in some conspicuous plac e at such metro 
railway stations  as that Government may direct.  
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 34 of 2009, s. 16, for “Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi” (w.e. f. 7-9-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 16, ibid., for “Government of the National Capital Territory of Delhi in the Delhi Gazette” (w.e.f. 7 -9-2009).  
 21 
 CHAPTER XII  
MISCELLA NEOUS  
86. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the metro railway administration in case of the non-Government metro railway 
shall, in the discharge of its duties and functions under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions 
of policy as the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the metro railway admin istration shall, as far as practicable, be given opportunity to 
express its views before any direction i s given under this section.  
87. Prohibition to work as non -Government metro railway .—No non -Government metro railway 
shall work without obtaining permis sion from the Central Government.  
88. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government, any metro railway administration, a metro railway official or against 
any other person , for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuance of this Act 
or any rules, regulations or orders made thereunder.  
89. Restriction on execution against metro railway property .—(1) No rolling stock, metro railway 
tracks, machine ry, plant, tools, fittings, materials or effects used or provided by a metro railway 
administration for the purpose of traffic on its railway, or its stations or workshops, or offices shall be 
liable to be taken in execution of any decree or order of any c ourt or of any local authority or person 
having by law the power to attach or distrain property or otherwise to cause the property to be taken in 
execution, without the previous sanction of the Central Government.  
(2) Nothing in sub -section ( 1) is to be co nstrued as affecting the authority of any court to attach the 
earnings of the metro railway administration in execution of a decree or order.  
90. Officials of metro railway administration to be public servants .—All persons in the 
employment of the metro ra ilway administration shall, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of 
the provisions of this Act, be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
91. Procedure for delivery to metro railway adm inistration of property detained by a metro 
railway official .—If a metro railway official is discharged from service or is suspended, or dies or 
absconds or absents himself, and he or his spouse or widow or any member of his family or his 
representative, r efuses or neglects, after notice in writing for that purpose , to deliver up to the metro 
railway administration or to a person appointed by the metro railway administration, in this behalf, any 
station, dwelling house, office or other building with its app urtenances, or any books, papers, keys, 
equipments or other matters, belonging to the metro railway administration and in the possession or 
custody of such metro railway official on the occurrence of any such event as aforesaid, any Metropolitan 
Magistrate  may, on application made by or on behalf of the metro railway administration, order any 
police officer, with proper assistance, to enter upon the station, office or other building and remove any 
person found therein and take possession thereof, or to take  possession of the books, papers and other 
matters, and to deliver the same to the metro railway administration or to a person appointed by the metro 
railway administration in that behalf.  
92. Proof of entries in records and documents .—(1) Entries made in the records or other 
documents of the metro railway administration shall be admitted in evidence in all proceedings by or 
against the metro railway administration, and all such entries may be proved either by the production of 
the records or other document s of the metro railway administration containing such entries or by the 
production of a copy of the entries certified by the officer having custody of the records or other 
documents under his signature and stating that it is a true copy of the original ent ries and that such 
original entries are contained in the records or other documents of the metro railway administration in his 
possession.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, a court shall presume that the entries in the 
records of the  metro railway administration admitted in evidence under sub -section ( 1) are true, unless 
there is evidence to the contrary.  22 
 93. Service of notice, etc., on metro railway administration .—Any notice or other document 
required or authorised by this Act to be  served on a metro railwa y administration may be served — 
(a) by leaving it at the office of the metro railway administration; or  
(b) by registered post to the office address of th e metro railway administration.  
94. Service of notice, etc., by metro railway  administration .—Any notice or other document 
required or authorised by this Act to be served on any person by the metro railway administra tion may be 
served by — 
(a) delivering it to the person; or  
(b) leaving it at the usual or the last known place of abode of the person; or  
(c) registered post addressed to the person at his usual or  the last known place of abode.  
95. Presumption where notice is served by registered post .—Where a notice or other document is 
served by registered post, it shall be deemed to have been served at the time when the letter containing it 
would be delivered in the ordinary course of post, and in proving such service, it shall be sufficient to 
prove that the letter containing the notice or other document was pro perly addressed and  registered.  
96. Representation of metro railway administration .—(1) The metro railway administration may, 
by order in writing, authorise any of its official or other person to act for, or represent it, as the case may 
be, in any proceeding before any civi l, criminal or other court.  
(2) A person authorised under sub -section ( 1) to conduct prosecution on its behalf shall, 
notwithstanding anything in section 302 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be entitled 
to conduct such prosecutions with out the permission of the Magistrate.  
97. Appointment of security staff .—The metro railway administration may constitute and maintain 
security staff for its railway, and the powers, duties and functions of such staff shall be such as may be 
prescribed.  
98. Delegation of powers .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that all or any 
of the powers under this Act or rules made thereunder, except sections 22, 32, 47, 56, 99 and 100, 
exercisable by it, shall, in relation to such matters and subj ect to such conditions, if any, as may be 
specified in the notification, be exercisable also by such officer or authority subordinate to the Central 
Government or by such officer of the metro railway administration.  
(2) The metro railway administration may , by general or special order in writing, delegate to any of 
its official subject to such conditions and limitations, if any, as may be specified in the order, such of its 
powers and functions under this Act, exce pt its power under section 101.  
99. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of t his Act, remove 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made af ter the expiry of a period of two years fro m the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid b efore each House of Parliame nt. 
100. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by 
notificatio n, make rules for carrying out  the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the form and time for preparing and sending annual report under section 12;  
(b) the terms and conditions of the Fare Fixation Committee under section 35;  
(c) the procedure to be followed by the Fare Fixation Committee under section 35;  
(d) the extent of compensation payable under section 57;  23 
 (e) the powers, duties and functions of the security staff of the Government metro railway under 
section 97; and  
(f) without prejudice to any power to make rules contained elsewhere in this Act, generally to 
carry out the purposes of this Act.  
101. Power of metro railway administration to make regulations .—The Government metro 
railway administration may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, make regulations not 
inconsistent with this Act and the rules made thereunder, to provide for all ma tters for which provisions 
are necessary or expedient for the purpose of giving effect  to the provisions of this Act.  
102. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament .—Every rule made by the Central 
Government and every regulation made by a Governme nt metro railway administration under this Act 
shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive 
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or both Houses 
agree that the rule or regulation should not be  made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or 
regulation.  
103. Effect of Act inconsistent with other enactments .—The provisions of this Act shall have 
effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or 
in any instrument having effect by virtue of any  enactment other than this Act.  
104. Application of other Acts .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act 
shall be in addition to and not in derogation of the Metro Railways (Construction of Works) Act, 1978 (33 
of 1978).  
105. Repeal and savings .—(1) The Delhi Metro Railway (Operation and Maintenance) Ordinance, 
2002 (Ord.  7 of 2002) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Multi-State Co-operative Societies Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE MULTI -STATE CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES ACT, 2002  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTI ONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Application . 
3. Definitions . 
 
CHAPTER II  
CENTRAL REGISTRAR AND REGISTR ATION OF MULTI -STATE CO-OPERATIVE  SOCIETIES  
4. Central Registrar . 
5. Multi -State  co-operative  societies which may be registered . 
6. Application for registration . 
7. Registration . 
8. Registration certificate . 
9. Multi -State co -operative society to be body corporate . 
10. Bye-laws of multi -State co -operative societies . 
11. Amendment of bye -laws of a multi -State co -operative society . 
12. When amendment of bye -laws comes into force . 
13. Change of name . 
14. Change of address . 
15. Publication of name by multi -State  co-operative society . 
16. Liability . 
17. Amalgamation or transfer of assets and liabilities, or division of multi -State  co-operative 
societies . 
18. Central Registrar to prepare scheme of amalgamation or reorganisation of a  co-operative bank in 
certain cases . 
19. Promotion of subsidiary institution . 
20. Liability of a co-operative bank to Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee  Corporation . 
21. Cancellation of registration certificate of multi -State  co-operative  societies in  certain cases . 
22. Conversion of a co-operative  society into a multi -State  co-operative society . 
 
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION AND FUNC TIONS OF FEDERAL CO-OPERATIVE S 
23. Registration of federal co-operative.  
24. Functions of federal co-operative.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
MEMBERS OF MULTI -STATE  CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AND THEIR DUTIES,  RIGHTS AND LIABILITI ES 
25. Persons who may become members . 
26. Nominal or associate member of society . 
27. Educational course for members . 
28. Members not to exercise rights till due payment made . 
29. Disqualification for member of a multi -State co -operative  society . 
30. Expulsion of members . 
31. Vote of members . 2 
 SECTIONS  
32. Manner of exercising vote . 
33. Restriction on holding of shares . 
34. Restriction on transfer of shares or interest . 
35. Redemption of shares . 
36. Transfer of interest on death of members . 
37. Liabilities of past member  and estate of deceased member . 
 
CHAPTER V  
DIRECTION AND MANAGEM ENT OF MULTI -STATE CO -OPERATIVE  SOCIETIES  
38. Constitution, powers and functions of general body . 
39. Annual general meeting of general body . 
40. Special general meeting of general body . 
41. Board of directors . 
42. Association of employees in management decision making process . 
43. Disqualifications for being a member of board . 
44. Prohibition to hold office of chairperson or president or vice -chairperson or  vice-president in 
certain cases . 
45. Elections of members of  board . 
46. Holding of office in co-operative society . 
47. Removal of elected members by general body . 
48. Nominee of Central Government or State Government on board . 
49. Powers and functions of board . 
50. Meeting of board . 
51. Chief Executive . 
52. Powers and functions of Chief Execu tive. 
53. Committees of board . 
54. Securing possession of records, etc . 
 
CHAPTER VI  
PRIVILEGES OF MULTI -STATE CO -OPERATIVE  SOCIETIES  
55. Charge and set -off in respect of share or contribution or interest of members . 
56. Share or contribution or interest not liable to attachment . 
57. Register of Members . 
58. Admissibility of copy of entry as evidence . 
59. Exemption from compulsory registration of instruments . 
60. Deduction from salary to meet multi -State co -operative society’s claim in  certain cases . 
61. Government aid to multi -State  co-operative societies . 
 
CHAPTER VII  
PROPERTIES AND FUNDS OF MULTI -STATE CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
62. Funds not to be divided by way of profit . 
63. Disposal of net profits . 
64. Investment of funds . 
65. Restriction on contribution . 
66. Restrictions on loans . 
67. Restriction on borro wings . 
68. Restrictions on other transactions with non -members . 
69. Contributory provident fund . 
  3 
 CHAPTER VIII  
AUDIT, ENQUIRY, INSPE CTION AND SURCHARGE  
SECTIONS  
70. Appointment and remuneration of auditors . 
71. Provision as to resolutions for appointing or removing auditors . 
72. Qualifications disqualifications of auditors . 
73. Powers and duties of auditors . 
74. Signature of audit report, etc . 
75. Reading and inspection of auditor’s report . 
76. Right of auditor to attend general meeting . 
77. Power of Central Government to direct special audit in certain cases . 
78. Inquiry by Central Registrar . 
79. Inspection of multi -State  co-operative  societies . 
80. Inspection of books of indebted multi -State co -operative  societies . 
81. Costs of inquiry and inspection . 
82. Recovery of costs . 
83. Repayment, etc . 
 
CHAPTER IX  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTES  
84. Reference of disputes . 
85. Limitation . 
 
CHAPTER X  
WINDING UP OF MULTI -STATE  CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY  
86. Winding up of multi -State co -operative  societies . 
87. Winding up of co-operative bank at the direction of Reserve Bank . 
88. Reimbursement to the Deposit  Insurance Corporation by liquidator . 
89. Liquidator . 
90. Powers of liquidator . 
91. Disposal of surplus assets . 
92. Priority of contributions assessed by liquidator . 
93. Power of Central Registrar to cancel registration of a multi -State co -operative society . 
 
CHAPTER XI  
EXECUTION OF DECREES,  ORDERS AND DECISIONS  
94. Execution of decisions, etc . 
95. Execution of orders of liquidator . 
96. Attachment before award . 
97. Central Registrar or arbitrator or person authorised to be civil court for certain  purposes . 
98. Recovery of sums due to Government . 
 
CHAPTER XII  
APPEALS AND REVIEW  
99. Appeals . 
100. No appeal in certain cases . 
101. Review . 
102. Interlocutory orders . 4 
 CHAPTER XIII  
SOCIETIES WHICH BECOM E MULTI -STATE CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  CONSEQUENT ON REORGA NISATION 
OF STATES  
SECTIONS  
103. Co-operative s societies functioning immediately before reorganisation of  States. 
 
CHAPTER XIV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIE S 
104. Offences and penalties . 
105. Cognizance of offences . 
 
CHAPTER XV  
MISCELLANEOUS  
106. Copies of bye -laws, etc ., to be open to inspection . 
107. Place of keeping and inspection of, registers and returns . 
108. Inspection of books of account, etc ., of multi -State co -operative society . 
109. Annual accounts and balance -sheet . 
110. Minutes of proceedings of general meetings and of board and other meetings . 
111. Minutes to be evidence . 
112. Presumptions to be drawn where minutes duly drawn and signed . 
113. Inspection of minutes book of general meetings . 
114. Liquidator to be public servant . 
115. Notice necessary in suits . 
116. Power to amend Second Schedule . 
117. Bar of jurisdiction of courts . 
118. Indemnity . 
119. Opening of b ranches . 
120. Filing of returns . 
121. Certain Acts not to apply . 
122. Central Government’s power to give directions to specified multi -State co -operative  societies in 
public interest . 
123. Super session of board of specified multi -State co -operative society . 
124. Power to make rule s. 
125. Power to remove difficulties . 
126. Repeal and saving . 
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE SECOND SCHEDULE . 
 
  5 
 THE MULTI -STATE CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 39 OF 2002  
[3rd July , 2002 .] 
An Act to consolidate and amend the law relating to co -operative societies,  with objects not 
confined to one State and serving the interests of members in  more than one State, to 
facilitate the voluntary formation and democratic  functioning of co-operative s as people’s 
institutions based on self -help and  mutual aid and  to enable them to promote their economic 
and social  betterment and to provide functional autonomy and for matters connected  
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the Republic of India as  follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Multi -State Co-operative 
Societies Act,  2002.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different  dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and any  
reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act  shall be construed as a reference to the 
coming into force of th at provision.  
2. Application .—This Act shall apply to — 
(a) all co -operative societies, with objects not confined to one State  which were incorporated 
before the commencement of this Act ,— 
(i) under the Co -operative Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912), or  
(ii) under any other law relating to co -operative societies in force in  any State or in pursuance 
of the Multi -unit Co -operative Societies  Act, 1942  (6 of 1942)  or the Multi -State Co-operative  
Societies Act, 1984  (51 of 1984) , 
and the registration of which has not been cancelled before such  commencement; and   
(b) all multi -State  co-operative societies.  
3. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “area of operation ” means the area from which the persons are  admitted as members;  
(b) “board ” means the board of directors or the governing body of a  multi -State co-operative  
society, by whatever name called, to which  the direction and control of the management of the affairs 
of the  society is entrusted;  
(c) “bye-laws” means the bye -laws for  the time being in force which  have been duly registered or 
deemed to have been registered  under this Act and includes amendments thereto which have been  
duly registered or deemed to have been registered under this Act;  
(d) “Central Registrar ” means the Ce ntral Registrar of Co -operative  Societies appointed under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 4 and includes  any officer empowered to exercise the powers of the Central  
Registrar under sub -section ( 2) of that section;  
(e) “Chief Executive ” means a Chief Executive o f a multi -State co-operative society appointed 
under section 51;  
(f) “co-operative bank ” means a multi -State co-operative society which  undertakes banking 
business;  
(g) “co-operative principles ” means the co -operative principles  specified in the First Schedule;  
                                                           
1. 19th August, 2002, vide notification No. G.S.R. 571(E), dated 16th August, 2002, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, 
Part II, sec. 3( i). 6 
 (h) “co-operative society ” means a society registered or deemed to be  registered under any law 
relating to co -operative societies for the  time being in force in any State;  
(i) “co-operative year ”, in relation to any multi -State co-operative  society or class of such 
societies, means the year ending on the  31st day of March of the year and where the accounts of such  
society or class of such societies are, with the previous sanction of  the Central Registrar, balanced on 
any other day, the year e nding  on such day;  
(j) “Deposit Insurance Corporation ” means the Deposit Insurance  and Credit Guarantee 
Corporation established under section 3 of  the Deposit Insurance Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961);  
(k) “federal co -operative ” means a federation of co -operative societies  registered under this Act 
and whose membership is available only  to a co -operative society or a multi -State co-operative 
society;  
(l) “general body ”, in relation to a multi -State  co-operative society,  means all the members of 
that society and in relation to a national  co-operative society or a federal co -operative means all the  
delegates of member co-operative  societies o r delegates of multistate  co-operative  societies and 
includes a body constituted under  the first proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 38;  
(m) “general meeting ” means a meeting of the general body of a multistate  co-operative  societies 
and includes special general meeting;  
(n) “member ” means a person joining in the application for the  registration of a multi -State  co-
operative society and includes a  person admitted to membership after such registration in  accordance 
with the provisions of this Act, the rules and the byelaws;  
(o) “member co-operative ” means a co-operative  society or a multistate  co-operative society 
which is member of a federal co-operative ; 
(p) “multi -State  co-operative society ” means a society registered or  deemed to be registered under 
this Act and includes a national  co-operative  society and a Federal co-operative ; 
(q) “multi -State co -operative society with limited liability ” means a  society having the liability of 
its members limited by its bye -laws to  the amount, if any, unpaid on the shares, respectively, held by 
them  or to such amount as they may, respectively, thereby undertake to  contribute to the assets of the 
society, in the event of its being  wound up;  
(r) “national co -operative society ” means a multi -State  co-operative  society specified in the 
Second Schedule;  
(s) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official Gazette;  
(t) “officer ” means a president, vice -president, chairperson, vice -chairperson,  managing director, 
secretary, manager, member of a  board, treasurer, liquidator, an administrator appointed under  section 
123 and includes any other person empowered u nder this  Act or the rules or the bye -laws to give 
directions in regard to the  business of a multi -State  co-operative  society;  
(u) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules;  
(v) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted  under the Reserve Ba nk of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(w) “rules ” means the rules made under  this Act.  
CHAPTER II  
CENTRAL REGISTRAR AND REGISTR ATION OF MULTI -STATE CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
4. Central Registrar .—(1) The Central Government may appoint a person to be the Central  Registrar 
of Co -operative Societies and may appoint such other  persons as it may think fit to assist the Central 
Registrar.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification, direct that any power  exercisable by the Central 
Registrar under this Act (other th an the  power of registration of a multi -State co-operative society) shall, 
in relation to such society, and such matters as may be specified in  the notification, be exercisable also by   7 
 any other officer of the  Central Government or of a State Government as may be  authorised by the 
Central Government subject to such conditions as  may be specified therein:  
Provided that no officer of a state government shall be empowered  to exercise such power in relation 
to a national co-operative society.  
5. Multi -State c o-operative  societies which may be registered .—(1) No multi -State co-operative 
society shall be registered under this  Act, unless, — 
(a) its main objects are to serve the interests of members in more  than one state; and  
(b) its bye -laws provide for social and economic betterment of its  members through self -help and 
mutual aid in accordance with  the co -operative principles.  
(2) The word “limited” or its equivalent in any Indian language shall be  suffixed to the name of every 
multi -State co-operative society  registered under this Act with limited liability.  
6. Application for registration .—(1) For the purposes of registration of a multi -State co-operative 
society  under this Act, an application shall be made to the Central Registrar  in such form and with such 
particulars as may be prescribed.  
(2) The application shall be signed ,— 
(a) in the case of a multi -State co -operative  society of which all the  members are individuals, by 
at least fifty persons from each of  the state concerned;  
(b) in the case of a multi -State co -operative society of which the  members are co-operative  
societies, by duly authorised  representatives on behalf of at least five such societies as are  not 
registered in the same state; and  
(c) in the case of a multi -State  co-operative  society o f which another  multi -State co -operative  
society and other co-operative  societies  are members, by duly authorised representatives of each of  
such societies:  
Provided that not less than two of the co-operative  societies  referred to in this clause, shall be 
such as are not registered in  the same state;  
(d) in the case of a multi -State co -operative society of which the  members are co-operative  
societies or multi -State co -operative societies and individuals, by at least — 
(i) fifty persons, being individuals , from each of the two states or  more; and  
(ii) one co-operative society each from two states or more or one  multi -State co -operative  
society.  
(3) The application shall be accompanied by four copies of the  proposed bye -laws of the multi -State 
co-operative  society and the  persons by whom or on whose behalf such application is made  shall furnish 
such information in regard to the society as the Central  Registrar may require.  
7. Registration .—(1) If the Central Registrar is satisfied — 
(a) that the application complies with the provisions of this Act and  the rules;  
(b) that the proposed multi -State  co-operative  society satisfies the  basic criterion that its objects 
are to serve the interests of  members in more than one state;  
(c) that its bye -laws provide for social and economic betterment of  its members through self -help 
and mutual aid in accordance  with the co-operative  principles;  
(d) that the proposed bye -laws are not contrary to the provision of  this Act and the rules,  
he may register the multi -State  co-operative  society and its bye -laws.  
(2) The application for registration shall be disposed of by the Central  Registrar within a period of 
four months from the date of receipt  thereof by him.  
(3) Where the Central Registrar refuses to register a multi -State co -operative  society,  he shall 
communicate, within a   period of four  month  from the  date of receipt of the  application for  registration,   8 
 the order of refusal together with the reasons theref or to the applicant or  applicants, as the case may be:  
Provided that no order or refusal shall be made unless the  applicants have been given a reasonable 
opportunity of being  heard:  
Provided further that if the application for registration is not  disposed of within a period of four 
months specified in sub -section (2) or the Central Registrar fails to communicate the order of refusal  
within that period, the application shall be deemed to have been  accepted for registration and the Central 
Registrar shall issue the  registration certificate in accordance with the provisions of this Act  and the rules 
made thereunder.  
8. Registration certificate .—Where a multi -State co -operative society is registered under this Act, 
the Central Registrar shall issue a certificate of registration signed by him,  which shall be conclusive 
evidence that the society therein mentioned is  duly registered under this Act, unless it is proved that the 
registration of  the society has been cancelled.  
9. Multi -State co -operative society to be body corporate .—(1) The registration of a multi -State co -
operative  society shall render it a  body corporate by the name under which it is registered having  
perpetual succession and a common seal, and with power to  acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and  immovable, enter into contract, institute and defend suits and other  legal proceedings and to 
do all things necessary for the purpose for  which it is constituted, and shall, by the said name, sue or be 
sued.  
(2) All transactions entered into in good faith prior to the registration of  a multi-State co -operative  
society shall be deemed to be its  transactions after registration for furtherance of the objects of its  
registration.  
10. Bye -laws of multi -State  co-operative  societies .—(1) Every multi -State  co-operative society may 
make its bye -laws consistent with the provisions of this Act and the rules made  thereunder.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, such bye -laws may 
provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the name, address and area of operation of the society;  
(b) the objects of the society;  
(c) the services to be provided to its members;  
(d) the eligibility for obtaining membership;  
(e) the procedure for obtaining membership;  
(f) the conditions for continuing as mem ber; 
(g) the procedure for withdrawal of membership;  
(h) the transfer of membership;  
(i) the procedure for expulsion from membership;  
(j) the rights and duties of the members;  
(k) the nature and amount of capital of the society;  
(l) the manner in which the  maximum capital to which a single  member can subscribe;  
(m) the sources from which the funds may be raised by the multistate  co-operative society;  
(n) the purpose for which the funds may be applied;  
(o) the manner of allocation or disbursement of net prof its of the  multi -State co -operative society;  
(p) the constitution of various reserves;  
(q) the manner of convening general meetings and quorum  thereof other than those provided 
under this Act;  
(r) the procedure for notice and manner of voting, in general and other meetings;  
(s) the procedure for amending the bye -laws;  9 
 (t) the number of members of the board not exceeding twenty -one; 
(u) the tenure , of directors , chairperson and other office bearers of  the society, not exceeding five 
years;  
(v) the procedure  for removal of members of the board and for  filling up of vacancies;  
(w) the manner of convening board meetings, its quorum, number  of meetings in a year and venue 
of such meetings;  
(x) the frequency of board meetings;  
(y) the powers and functions of the Chief Executive in addition to  those provided under section 
52; 
(z) the manner of imposing the penalty;  
(za) the appointment, rights and duties of auditors and procedure  for conduct of audit;  
(zb) the authorisation of officers to sign documents and to inst itute and defend suits and other 
legal proceedings on behalf of the  society;  
(zc) the terms on which a multi -State co -operative  society may deal  with persons other than 
members;  
(zd) the terms on which a multi -State co -operative  society may  associate wit h other co-operative 
societies;  
(ze) the terms on which a multi -State co -operative society may deal  with organisation other than 
co-operative societies;  
(zf) the rights, if any, which the multi -State  co-operative  society may  confer on any other multi -
State co -operative society or federal  co-operative and the circumstances under which such rights  may 
be exercised by the federal co-operative ; 
(zg) the procedure and manner for transfer of shares and interest in  the name of a nominee in case 
of death  of a member;  
(zh) the educational and training programmes to be conducted by  the multi -State co -operative 
society;  
(zi) the principal place and other places of business of multi -State co -operative society;  
(zj) the minimum level of services, to be used by  its members;  
(zk) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
11. Amendment of bye -laws of a multi -State co -operative society .—(1) No amendment of any 
bye-law of a multi -State co -operative society  shall be valid, unless such amendment has been registered 
under  this Act.  
(2) The amendment to the bye -laws of a multi -State co -operative society  shall be made by a 
resolution passed by a two -third majority of the  members present and voting at general meeting of the 
society.  
(3) No such resolution shall be valid unless fifteen clear days’ notice of  the proposed amendment has 
been given to the members.  
(4) In every case in which a multi -State co -operative society proposes to  amend its bye -laws, an 
application to register such amendments  shall be made to the Central  Registrar together with — 
(a) a copy of the resolution referred to in sub -section ( 2); 
(b) a statement contai ning the particulars indicating — 
(i) the date of the general meeting at which the amendments  to the bye -laws were made;  
(ii) the number of days’ no tice given to convene the general  meeting;  
(iii) the total number of members of the multi -State co -operative society;  
(iv) the quorum required for such meeting;  10 
 (v) the number of members present at the meeting;  
(vi) the number of members who voted in such meeting;  
(vii) the number of members who voted in favour of such  amendments to bye -laws;  
(c) a copy of the relevant bye -laws in force with the amendment  proposed to be made together 
with reasons justifying such  amendments;  
(d) four copies of the text of th e bye -laws incorporating therein the  proposed amendments signed 
by the officer duly authorised in  this behalf by the general body;  
(e) a copy of the notice given to the members and the proposal to  amend the bye -laws;  
(f) a certificate signed by the person who presided at the general  meeting certifying that the 
procedure specified in sub -sections  (2) and ( 3) and the bye -laws had been followed;  
(g) any other particular which may be required by the Central  Registrar in this behalf.  
(5) Every such application s hall be made within sixty days from the  date of the general meeting at 
which such amendment to the byelaws  was passed.  
(6) The procedure given in sub -sections ( 2) to ( 5) of this section shall  apply to the amendment of the 
bye-laws of a co-operative society  desiring to convert itself into a multi -State co -operative society as per  
the provisions of section 22.  
(7) If, on receipt of application under sub -section ( 5), the Central  Registrar is satisf ied that the 
proposed amendment — 
(a) is not contrary to the provisions of this Act or of the rules;  
(b) does not conflict with co-operative  principles; and  
(c) will promote the economic interests of the members of the multistate  co-operative society,  
he may register the amendment within a period of three months  from the date of receipt thereof by him.  
(8) The Central Registrar shall forward to the multi -State co -operative society a copy of the registered 
amendment together with a  certificate signed by him within a period of one month from the date  of 
registration thereof and such certificate shall be conclusive  evidence that the amendment has been duly 
registered.  
(9) Where the Central Registrar refuses to register an amendment of  the bye -laws of a multi -State  co-
operative society, he shall  communicate the order of  refusal together with the reasons therefor  to the 
Chief Executive of the society in the manner prescribed within  fifteen day s from the date of such refusal:  
Provided that if the application for registration is not disposed of  within a period of three mont hs 
specified in sub -section ( 7) or the  Central Registrar fails to communicate the order of refusal within  that 
period, the application shall be deemed to have been accepted  for registration and the Central Registrar 
shall issue registration  certificate in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
12. When amendment of bye -laws comes into force .—An amendment of the bye -laws of a multi -
State co -operative society shall,  unless it is expressed to come into operation on a particular day, come  
into force on the  day on which it is registered.  
13. Change of name .—(1) A multi -State co -operative society may, by an amendment of its byelaws,  
change its name but such change shall not affect any right or  obligation of the multi -State co -operative 
society or of any of it s members or past members, and any legal proceedings which might  have been 
continued or commenced by or against the multi -State co -operative society by its former name, may be 
continued or  commence by or against its new name.  
(2) Where a multi -State co -operative society changes its name, the  Central Registrar shall enter the 
new name on the register of multistate  co-operative society in place of former name and shall amend  the 
certificate of registration accordingly.  
14. Change of address .—Every multi -State  co-operative  society shall have principal place of  
business and an address registered in the manner prescribed to which  all notices and communications may 
be sent.  11 
 15. Publication of name by multi -State co-operative society .—Every multi -State co-operative 
society — 
(a) shall paint or affix its name and the address of its registered office  and keep the same painted 
or affixed, on the outside of every office  or place in which its business is carried on, in conspicuous 
position,  in letters easily l egible; and if the characters employed therefor are  not those of the 
language, or of one of the languages in general use  in that locality, also in the characters of that 
language or of one of  those languages;  
(b) shall have its name engraven in legible cha racters on its seal; and  
(c) shall have its name and the address of its registered office  mentioned in legible characters in 
all its business letters, in all its bill  heads and letter paper, and in all its notices and other official  
publications; and also have its name so mentioned in all bills of  exchange, hundies, promissory notes, 
endorsements, cheques and  orders for money or goods purporting to be signed by or on behalf  of the 
multi -State  co-operative  society, and in all bills of parcels,  invoices, re ceipts and letters of credit of 
the multi -State  co-operative society.  
16. Liability .—(1) No multi -State  co-operative society with unlimited liability shall be  registered 
after the commencement of this Act:  
Provided that where a multi -State  co-operative society with unlimited  liability was functioning before 
the commencement of this Act, such  a society shall exercise the option within a period of one year from  
such commencement either to continue to function as such or to  convert itself into a multi -State  co-
operative  society with limited  liability by following the procedure specified in sub -sections ( 2) to (4). 
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules, a multi -State co -operative  society may, by an 
amendment of its bye -laws, change  the extent of its liability.  
(3) When a multi -State co -operative  society has passed a resolution to  change the extent of its 
liability, it shall give notice thereof in writing  to all its members and creditors, and, notwithstanding 
anything  contained in the bye -laws o r contract to the contrary, any member  or creditor shall, during the 
period of one month from the date of  service of the notice upon him, have the option of withdrawing his  
shares, deposits or loans, as the case may be.  
(4) Any member or creditor who does not exercise his option within the  period specified in sub -
section ( 3) shall be deemed to have  assented to the change.  
(5) An amendment of a bye -law of a multi -State  co-operative society  changing the extent of its 
liability shall not be registered or shall  not take effect until either — 
(a) the assent thereto of all members and creditors has been  obtained; or  
(b) all claims of members and creditors who exercise the option  referred to in sub -section ( 3) 
within the period specified therein  have been met in full or otherwise satisfied.  
17. Amalgamation or transfer of assets and liabilities, or division of  multi -State  co-operative 
societies .—(1) A multi -State  co-operative  society may, by a resolution passed by a  majority of not less 
than two -thirds of the memb ers, present and  voting at a general meeting of th e society held for the 
purpose, — 
(a) transfer its assets and liabilities in whole or in part to any other  multi -State co -operative 
society or co-operative  society;  
(b) divide itself into two or more multi -State co -operative  societies;  
(c) divide itself into two or more co-operative societies.  
(2) Any two or more multi -State  co-operative  societies may, by a  resolution passed by a majority of 
not less than two -thirds of the  members present and voting at  a general meeting of each such  society, 
amalgamate themselves and form a new multi -State co -operative society.  
(3) The resolution of a multi -State  co-operative society under sub -section  (1) or sub -section ( 2) shall 
contain all particulars of the  transfer or division or amalgamation, as the case may be.  
(4) When a multi -State  co-operative  society has passed a resolution  under sub -section ( 1) or sub -
section ( 2), it shall give notice thereof  in writing to all the members and creditors, and, notwithstanding  12 
 anything contained in the bye -laws or contract to the contrary, any  member or creditor shall, during the 
period of one month of the date  of service of the notice upon him, have the option of withdrawing his  
share, deposits or loans, as the case may be.  
(5) Any member or creditor who does not exercise his option within the  period specified in sub -
section ( 4) shall be deemed to have  assented to the proposals contained in the resolution.  
(6) (a) A resolution passed by a multi -State  co-operative  society under  this section shall not take 
effect until the assent thereto of all  the members and creditors has been obtained.  
(b) The multi -State  co-operative society shall make arrangements  for meeting in full or otherwise 
satisfying all claims of the  members and credi tors who exercise the option within the  period specified in 
sub-section ( 4). 
(7) On receipt of an application for the registration of new societies  formed by division in accordance 
with the resolution passed under  sub-section ( 1) or of a new society formed  by amalgamation in  
accordance with the resolution passed under sub -section ( 2), the  Central Registrar, on being satisfied that 
the resolution has become  effective under sub -section ( 6) shall, unless for reasons to be  recorded in 
writing he thinks fit to r efuse so to do, Register the new  society or societies, as the case may be, and the 
bye-laws thereof.  
(8) On the issue of an order under sub -section ( 7), the provisions of  section 21 shall, so far as may be, 
apply to the multi -State co -operative  society so divided or the multi -State  co-operative societies so 
amalgamated.  
(9) Where a resolution passed by a multi -State co -operative  society  under this section involves the 
transfer of any assets and liabilities,  the resolution shall, notwithstanding anything contained in any other  
law for the time being in force, be a sufficient conveyance to vest  the assets and liabilities in the 
transferee without any further  assurance.  
18. Central Registrar to prepare scheme of amalgamation or  reorganisation of a co-operati ve 
bank in certain cases .—When an order of moratorium has been made by the Central  Government under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 45 of the Banking  Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) in respect of a co-
operative bank, the  Central Registrar, with the previous a pproval of the Reserve Bank in  writing, may, 
during the period  of moratorium prepare a scheme — 
(a) for the amalgamation of the co-operative bank with any other  co-operative  bank; or  
(b) for the reorganisation of the co-operative bank.  
19. Promotion of subsidiary institution .—(1) Any multi -State  co-operative society may, by a 
resolution passed at  general meeting by a majority of members present and voting,  promote one or more 
subsidiary institutions, which may be  registered under any law for the time bei ng in force, for the  
furtherance of its stated objects.  
(2) Any subsidiary institution promoted under sub -section ( 1) shall exist  only as long as general body 
of the multi -State  co-operative society  deems its existence necessary:  
Provided that a multi -State co-operative society while promoting  such a subsidiary institution, shall 
not transfer or assign its  substantive part of business or activities undertaken in furtherance  of its stated 
objects.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) an institution shall be deemed to be a subsidiary institution if  the multi -State co -operative  
society — 
(i) controls the management or board of directors or  members of governing body of such 
institution; or  
(ii) holds more than half in nominal value of equity shares of  such institutions; or  
(iii) if one or more members of such multi -State co -operative society, hold whether by 
themselves or together with  subsidiary institution or their relatives, as the case may  be, the 
majority of equity shares in th at institut ion; 
(b) a subsidiary institution shall not include a partnership firm.  13 
 (3) The annual reports and accounts of any such subsidiary institution  shall be placed each year 
before general meeting of the promoting  multi -State co -operative  society.  
20. Liability of a co-operative bank to deposit insurance and credit  guarantee corporation .—
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 17 or any other provision  of this Act, where a co-operative  
bank, being an insured bank within the  meaning of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee 
Corporation Act,  1961  (47 of 1961) , is amalgamated or reorganised and the Deposit Insurance  
Corporation has become liable to pay to the depositors of the insured  bank under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 16 of that Act, t he bank with which  such insured bank is amalgamated or the new co-operative 
bank formed  after such amalgamation, or, as the case may be, the insured bank or  transferee bank shall be 
under an obligation to repay to the Deposit  Insurance Corporation in the c ircumstances, to the extent and 
in the  manner referred to in section 21 of the Deposit Insurance and Credit  Guarantee Corporation Act, 
1961.  
21. Cancellation of registration certificate of multi -State co -operative societies in certain 
cases .—(1) Where the whole of the assets and liabilities of a multi -State co -operative society are 
transferred to another multi -State co -operative society or to a co-operative  society in accordance with  the 
provisions of section 17, the registration of the first mentioned  multi -State  co-operative  society shall stand 
cancelled and the society  shall be deemed to have been dissolved and shall cease to exist as  a corporate 
body.  
(2) Where two or more multi -State  co-operative  societies are  amalgamated into a new multi -State co -
operative  society in  accordance with the provisions of section 17, the registration of  each of the 
amalgamating societies shall stand cancelled on the  registration of the new society, and each of the 
amalgamating  societies shall be deemed to have been disso lved and shall cease  to exist as a corporate 
body.  
(3) Where a multi -State  co-operative  society divides itself into two or  more multi -State  co-operative  
societies or two or more co-operative societies in accordance with the provisions of section 17, the  
registration of that society shall stand cancelled on the registration  of the new societies and that society 
shall be deemed to have been  dissolved and shall cease to exist as a corporate body.  
(4) The amalgamation or division of multi -State  co-operative societies  shall not in any manner 
whatsoever affect any right or obligation of  the resulting multi -State  co-operative society or societies or 
render  defective any legal proceedings by or against the multi -State co -operative society or societies, and 
any legal proceedings that  might have been continued or commenced by or against the multistate  co-
operative  society or societies, as the case may be, before  the amalgamation or division, may be continued 
or commenced by  or against the resulting multi -State  co-operative  society or societies.  
22. Conversion of a co-operative society into a multi -State  co-operative society .—(1) A co-
operative  society may, by an amendment of its bye -laws,  extend its jurisdiction and convert itself into a 
multi -State co -operative society:  
Provided that no such amendment of bye -laws of a co-operative society shall be valid unless it has 
been registered by the Central  Registrar.  
(2) (a) Every proposal for such amendment of bye -laws shall be  forwarded to the Central Registrar in 
accordance with the  provisions contained in sub -section ( 4) of section 11.  
(b) If the Central Registrar, after consulting the Registrars of  Co-operative Societies of the States 
concerned, has satisfied  himself that such amendment — 
(i) fulfils the requireme nts of the members being from more  than one state;  
(ii) is in accordance with the provisions contained in sub -section  (4) of section 11,  
he may register the amendment within a period of six months  from the  date of receipt thereof by him:  
Provided that no co-operative  society shall be deemed to have  been converted into a multi -State co -
operative  society on any  ground whatsoever unless such society is registered as a  multi -State co -operative 
society.  
(3) The Central Registrar shall forward to the co-operative society a  copy of the registered 
amendment together with a certificate signed  by him and such certificate shall be conclusive evidence that 
the amendment has been registered.  14 
 (4) Where the Central Registrar refuses to register an amendment of  the bye -laws or a co-operative 
society, he shall communicate the  order of refusal together with the reasons therefor to the society in  the 
manner prescribed within seven days from the date of refusal.  
(5)(a) Once the amendment of bye -laws has been register ed by the  Central Registrar, the co-operative  
society shall, as from the  date of registration of amendment, become a multi -State co -operative society.  
(b) The Central Registrar shall forward to the co-operative society  a certificate signed by him to the 
effect that such society has  been registered as a multi -State co -operative  society under this  Act and also 
forward a copy of the same to the Registrar of  Co-operative  Societies of the State concerned.  
(c) The Registrar of Co-operative Societies referred to i n clause ( b) shall thereupon make an order 
directing that the society had,  as from the date of registration by the Central Registrar,  ceased to be a 
society under the law relating to co-operative societies in force in that state.  
CHAPTER III  
REGISTRATION AND FUNC TIONS OF FEDERAL CO-OPERATIVE S 
23. Registration of federal co-operative .—(1) Every federal co-operative  shall obtain registration 
certification in  accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Every federal co-operative  shall in its general meeting be  represented by its member co-operative.  
(3) The classification of federal co-operative  and other terms and  conditions applicable to it shall be 
such as may be prescribed.  
(4) All provisions of this Act, applicable to a multi-State  co-operative society shall, as far as may be, 
apply to a federal co-operative . 
24. Functions of federal co-operative .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and any other law 
for the time  being in force, a federal co-operative may discharge the functions to  facilitate the voluntary 
formation and democratic functioning of  co-operative societies as federal co-operative  or multi -State co -
operative s based on self -help and mutual aid.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the provisions containe d in sub-section (1), the federal co-
operative may— 
(a) ensure compliance of the co-operative  principles;  
(b) make model bye -laws and policies for consideration of its  member co-operative ; 
(c) provide specialised training, education and data -base information;  
(d) undertake research, evaluation and assist in preparation of  perspective development plans for 
its member co-operative ; 
(e) promote harmonious relations amongst member co-operative ; 
(f) help member co-operative  to settle disputes among  them selves;  
(g) undertake business services on behalf of its member  co-operative , if specifically required by 
or under the resolution  of the general body or the board, or bye -laws of a member of  co-operative ; 
(h) provide management development services to a member  co-operative ; 
(i) evolve code of conduct for observance by a member  co-operative ; 
(j) evolve viability norms for a member co-operative ; 
(k) provide legal aid and advice to a member co-operative ; 
(l) assist member co-operative  in organising self -help; 
(m) develop market information system logo brand promotion,  quality control and technology 
upgradation.  
  15 
 CHAPTER IV  
MEMBERS OF MULTI -STATE  CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES AND THEIR DUTIES,  RIGHTS AND LIABILITI ES 
25. Persons who may become members .—(1) No person shall be admitted as a member of a multi -
State co-operative  socie ty except the following, namely :— 
(a) an individual, competent to contract under section 11 of the  Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 
1872);  
(b) any multi -State  co-operative  society or any co-operative society;  
(c) the Central Government;  
(d) a State Government;  
(e) the National Co-operative  Development Corporation  established under the National Co-
operative  Development  Corporation Act, 1962 (26 of 1962);  
(f) any other corporation own ed or controlled by the Government;  
(g) any Government company as defined in section 617 of the  Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(h) such class or classes or persons or association of persons as  may be permitted by the Central 
Registrar having regard to th e nature and activities of a multi -State  co-operative  society.  
(2) No individual person shall be eligible for admission as a member of  a national co-operative 
society or a federal co-operative . 
(3) Any person eligible for membership of a multi -State  co-operative society may, on his application, 
be admitted as a member by such  society.  
(4) Every application for admission as a member of a multi -State co -operative  society shall be 
disposed of by such society within a  period of four months from the date o f receipt of the application, and  
the decision of such society on the application shall be  communicated to the applicant within fifteen days 
from the date of  such decision:  
Provided that if the application is not disposed of within the period  aforesaid, or  the decision is not 
communicated within a period of  fifteen days of the expiry of the aforesaid period of four months, the  
multi -State co -operative society shall be deemed to have made a  decision, on the date of expiry of such 
period, refusing admission t o the applicant.  
(5) It shall be the duty of every member of a multi -State  co-operative society to promote and protect 
the interests and objects of such  society.  
26. Nominal or associate member of society .—A multi -State  co-operative  society may, if provided 
in its bye -laws, admit a  person as nominal or associate member:  
Provided that no such nominal or associate member shall be entitled to  subscribe the shares of such 
society or have any interest in the  management thereof including r ight to vote, elect as a director of the  
board or participate in the general body meetings.  
27. Educational course for members .—(1) Every multi -State  co-operative  society shall organise co-
operative education programmes for its members, directors and emplo yees.  
(2) Every multi -State co -operative  society may provide funds for such  co-operative  education 
programmes.  
28. Members not to exercise rights till due payment made .—No member of a multi -State  co-
operative  society shall exercise the rights  of a member, unless he has made the payment to the society in 
respect  of membership, or has acquired such interest in the society, as may be  specified in the bye -laws.  
29. Disqualification for member of a multi -State  co-operative  society .—No person shall be 
eligible for being a member of a multi -State co -operative  society if — 
(a) his business is in conflict or competitive with the business of such  multi -State  co-operative 
society; or  
(b) he used for two consecutive years the services below the minimum  level specified in the bye -
laws; or  16 
 (c) he has not attended three consecutive general meetings o f the multi -State co -operative  society 
and such absence has not been  condoned by the members in the general meeting; or  
(d) he has made any default in payment of any amount to be paid to  the multi -State co -operative  
society under the bye -laws of such  society.  
30. Expulsion of members .—(1) A multi -State  co-operative  society may, by resolution passed by a  
majority of not less than two -thirds of the members present and  voting at a general meeting of members 
held for the purpose, expel  a member for acts which are detrimental to the proper working of  the society:  
Provided that the member concerned shall not be expelled unless  he has been given a reasona ble 
opportunity of making  representation in the matter.  
(2) No member of the multi -State  co-operative  society, who has been  expelled under sub -section ( 1), 
shall be eligible for re -admission as  a member of that society, for a period of one year from the da te of 
such expulsion.  
31. Vote of members .—Every member of a multi -State co -operative society, including a member  
who is an employee of such society, shall have one vote in the affairs of  the society:  
Provided that — 
(a) a member who is an employee of such society shall not be entitled  to vote — 
(i) at the election of a member of the board of such society;  
(ii) in any general meeting convened for framing the bye -laws of  such so ciety or any 
amendments thereto;  
(b) in the case of an equality of votes, the chair person shall have a  casting vote;  
(c) where any of the authorities, multi -State co -operative  society or a  co-operative  society 
referred to in clauses ( b) to ( g) of sub -section  (1) of section 25 is a member of a multi -State co -
operative  society,  each person  nominated by such authority or society, on the board in  accordance 
with the provisions contained in this Act and the rules , shall,  have one vote;  
(d) a multi -State  co-operative  society, the membership of which include  co-operative  societies or 
other multi -State  co-operative  society, may  provide in its bye -laws for an equitable system of voting 
having  regard to the membership of, and the extent of business carried on  by such co-operative  
societies or multi -State  co-operative  societies.  
32. Manner of  exercising vote.—Every member of a multi -State co -operative  society shall exercise 
his vote  in person and no member shall be permitted to vote by proxy:  
Provided that a multi -State co -operative  society or a co-operative  society  or any other institution 
which is a member of any other multi -State co -operative society may, subject to the provisions of sub -
section ( 3) of section 38 and the rules, appoint its representative to vote on its behalf in  the affairs of such 
multi -State co -operative society.  
33. Restriction on holding of shares .—No member, other than the authorities referred to in clauses 
(c) to ( g) of sub-section ( 1) of section 25 or  a multi -State  co-operative society or a  co-operative society, 
shall hold more than such port ion of the total share  capital of the society (in no case exceeding one -fifth 
thereof) as may be  prescribed in the rules or bye -laws of such multi -State  co-operative society.  
34. Restriction on transfer of shares or interest .—The transfer of share or interest of a member in 
the capital of a multi -State co-operative  society shall be subject to such conditions as to  maximum 
holding as specified in section 33.  
35. Redemption of shares .—(1) Shares held in a multi -State co -operative  society by any of the  
authorities referred to in clauses ( c) to ( g) of sub -section ( 1) of section 25 shall be redeemable in 
accordance with the bye -laws of  such multi -State  co-operative  society and in a case where the byelaws  do 
not contain any provision in this regard, in such m anner as  may be agreed upon between the multi -State 
co-operative  society  and such authority.  
(2) The redemption of shares referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be on  the face value of the shares.  
36. Transfer of interest on death of members .—(1) On the death of a member, a multi -State  co-
operative  society may  transfer the share or interest of the deceased member to the person  nominated in 17 
 accordance with the bye -law made in this behalf or, if  there is no person nominated, to such person as 
may appear to the  board to be the heir or legal representative of the deceased  member, or pay to such 
nominee, heir or legal representative, as  the case may be, a sum representing the value of such member’s  
share or interest as ascertained in accordance with t he rules:  
Provided that no such transfer or payment shall be made except  with the consent of the nominee, heir 
or legal representative, as the  case may be.  
(2) A multi -State  co-operative  society shall, unless within six months of  the death of the member 
prevented by an order of a competent  court, pay to such nominee, heir or legal representative, as the case  
may be, all other moneys due to the deceased member from the  society.  
(3) All transfers and payments made by a multi -State  co-operative society in acco rdance with the 
provisions of this section shall be  valid and effectual against any demand made upon the society by  any 
other person.  
37. Liabilities of past member and estate of deceased member .—(1) Subject to the provisions of 
sub-section ( 2), the liability of a past  member or of the estate of a deceased member of a multi -State co -
operative  society for the debts  of the society as they existed ,— 
(a) in the case of a past member, on the date on which he ceased  to be a member;  
(b) in the case of a dece ased member,  on the date of his death,  
shall continue for a period of two years from such date.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a  multi -State  co-operative society is 
ordered to be wound up under  section 86, the liability of  a past member who ceased to be a  member or of 
the estate of a deceased member who died within two  years immediately preceding the date of the order 
of winding up,  shall continue until the entire liquidation proceedings are completed,  but such liability 
shall extend only to the debts of the society as they  existed on the date of cessation of membership or 
death, as the  case may be.  
CHAPTER V  
DIRECTION AND MANAGEM ENT OF MULTI -STATE CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
38. Constitution, powers and functions of general body .—(1) The general body of a multi -State 
co-operative society shall consist  of all the members of such society:  
Provided that where the bye -laws of a multi -State co -operative society provide for the constitution of 
a smaller body consisting of  delegates of members of the society elected or selected in  accordance with 
such bye -laws, that smaller body shall exercise  such powers of the general body as may be prescribed or 
as may  be specified in the bye -laws of the society.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the rules and the bye -laws, the  ultimate authority of a multi -
State  co-operative  society shall vest in  the general body of its members:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall affect the  exercise by the board or any 
officer of a multi-State  co-operative society of any power conferred on such board or such officer by this  
Act or the rules or the bye -laws.  
(3) Where in any meeting of the general body or the board of a multistate  co-operative society, a co-
operative society or another mu lti-State co-operative  society is to be represented, such co-operative  
society or other multi -State  co-operative  society shall be represented  in such meeting only through the 
Chairperson or the president or  the Chief Executive or a member of the board of s uch co-operative society 
or other multi -State co -operative society, as the case may be,  if such member is so authorised by the board 
and where there is no  board of such co-operative  society or other multi -State  co-operative society, for 
whatever reasons, through the administrator, by  whatever name called, of such co-operative society or 
other multistate  co-operative  society:  
Provided that where the bye -laws of a multi -State  co-operative society provide for representation of 
other institutions in any  meeting of general body or the board of such multi -State co -operative society, 
such institutions shall be represented through  its nominee.  18 
 39. Annual general meeting of general body .—(1) The board of every multi -State  co-operative 
society shall, within suc h period as may be prescribed, and not later than six months after  the close of the 
corresponding year, call the annual general meeting  in the manne r prescribed for the purpose of — 
(a) consideration of the audited statement of accounts;  
(b) consideration o f the audit report and annual report;  
(c) consideration of audit compliance report;  
(d) disposal of net profits;  
(e) review of operational deficit, if any;  
(f) creation of specific reserves and other funds;  
(g) approval of the annual budget;  
(h) review of actual utilisation of reserve and other funds;  
(i) approval of the long -term perspective plan and the annual  operational plan;  
(j) review of annual report and accounts of subsidiary institution, if  any; 
(k) expulsion of members;  
(l) list of employees who a re relatives of members of the board or  of the Chief Executive;  
(m) amendment of bye -laws, if any;  
(n) formulation of code of conduct for the members of the board  and officers;  
(o) election of members of the board, if any.  
(2) Where the board of a multi -State co -operative society fails to  convene the annual general meeting 
within the period specified in  sub-section ( 1), the Central Registrar or the person authorised by  him in this 
behalf shall be competent to convene such annual  general meeting within a per iod of ninety days from the 
date of  expiry of the period mentioned in that sub -section and the  expenditure incurred on such meeting 
shall be borne by the society.  
(3) At every annual general meeting of a multi -State co -operative  society, the board shall lay before 
the society a statement showing the  details of the loans or goods on credit, if any, given to any of the  
members of the board or to the spouse or a son or daughter of a  member of the board during the preceding 
year or outstanding  against him or against such spouse or son or daughter of the  member of the board.  
40. Special general meeting of general body .—(1) The Chief Executive may, at any time, on the 
direction of the board,  call a special general meeting of the society and shall call such  meeti ng within one 
month after the receipt of a requisition in writing  from the Central Registrar or from such member or 
members or a  proportion of the total number of members, as may be provided in  the bye -laws.  
(2) If a special general meeting of a multi -State co-operative society is  not called in accordance with 
the requisition referred to in subsection  (1), the Central Registrar or any person authorised by him in  this 
behalf shall have the power to call such meeting and that  meeting shall be deemed to be a m eeting called 
by the Chief  Executive in accordance with the provisions of that sub -section and  the Central Registrar 
may order that the expenditure incurred in  calling such meeting shall be paid out of the funds of the 
society or  by such person or persons who, in the opinion of the Central  Registrar, was or were responsible 
for the refusal or failure to  convene the special general meeting.  
41. Board of directors .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and rules, there shall be a  board of 
directors for every multi -State  co-operative  society  consisting of such number of members as specified in 
sub-section  (3). 
(2) The members of a multi -State  co-operative society, by a resolution in  a general meeting, shall 
elect directors who shall  be members of  board.  
(3) The board shall consist of such number of directors as may be  specified in the bye -laws:  
Provided that the maximum number of directors in no case shall  exceed twenty -one: 19 
 Provided further that the board may co -opt two directors in  addition  to twenty -one directors specified 
in the first proviso:  
Provided also that the functional directors in the national  co-operative societies shall also be the 
members of the board and  such members shall be excluded for the purpose of counting the  total number 
of directors specified in the first proviso.  
42. Association of employees in management decision making process .—Every multi -State  co-
operative  society shall devise such procedure, as  may be specified in the bye -laws or in the administrative 
instructions of  such society, for the association of the representatives of employees of  such multi -State  co-
operative societies at such level or bodies as may be  specified in the bye -laws or the instructions issued in 
this regard, in the  management decisi on making process.  
43. Disqualifications for being a member of board .—(1) No member of any multi -State co -
operative  society or nominee of a  member, society or a national co-operative  society shall be eligible  for 
being chosen as, or for being, a member of the board of such  multi -State  co-operative  society or a national 
co-operative  society, or  of any other co-operative society to which the multi -State co-operative s societ y is 
affiliated, if such member — 
(a) has been adjudged by a competent court to be insolvent or of  unsound mind;  
(b) is concerned or participates in the profits of any contract with  the society;  
(c) has been convicted for an offence involving moral turpitude;  
(d) holds any office or place of profit under the society:  
Provided that the Ch ief Executive or such full time employee of the  society as may be notified by the 
Central Government from time to  time or a person elected by the employees of such society to  represent 
them on the board of such society shall be eligible for  being chosen as , or fo r being, a member of such 
board;  
(e) has been a member of the society for less than twelve months  immediately preceding the date 
of such election or  appointment;  
(f) has interest in any business of the kind carried on by the  society of which he is a  member;  
(g) has taken loan or goods on credit from the society of which he  is a member, or is otherwise 
indebted to such society and after  the receipt of a notice of default issued to him by such society,  has 
defaulted — 
(i) in repayment of such loan or de bt or in payment of the  price of the goods taken on credit, 
as the case may be,  within the date fixed for such repayment or payment or  where such date is 
extended, which in no case shall  exceed six months, within the date so extended, or  
(ii) when such loan or debt or the price of goods taken on  credit is to be paid in instalments, 
in payment of any  instalment, and the amount in default or any part thereof  has remained unpaid 
on the expiry of six months from the  date of such default:  
Provided that a memb er of the board who has ceased to hold  office as such under this clause shall not 
be eligible, for a period  of one year, from the date on which he ceased to hold office, for  re-election as a 
member of the board of the multi -State co -operative  society of wh ich he was a member or for the  election 
to the board of any other multi -State co -operative society;  
(h) is a person against whom any amount due under a decree,  decision or order is pending 
recovery under this Act;  
(i) is retained or employed as a legal pra ctitioner on behalf of or  against the multi -State  co-
operative  society, or on behalf of or  against any other multi -State co -operative  society which is a  
member of the former society.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “legal practitioner”  has th e same meaning as in clause 
(i) of sub -section ( 1) of section  2 of the A dvocates Act, 1961 (25 of 1961);  
(j) has been convicted for any offence under this Act;  
(k) is disqualified for being a member under section 29;  20 
 (l) has been expelled as a member under  section 30;  
(m) absents himself from three consecutive board meetings and  such absence has not been 
condoned to by the board;  
(n) absents himself from three consecutive general body meetings  and such absence has not been 
condoned by the members in  the gen eral body.  
(2) A person shall not be eligible for being elected as member of board  of a multi -State co -operative 
society for a period of five years if the  board of such multi -State  co-operative  society fails — 
(a) to conduct elections of the board under section 45; or  
(b) to call the annual general meeting under section 39; or  
(c) to prepare the financial statement and present the same in the  annual general meeting.  
44. Prohibition to hold office of chairperson or president or vice -chairperson  or vice president 
in certain cases .—(1) No member of a board shall be eligible to be elected as the  chairperson or 
president or vice -chairperson or vice -president of a  multi -State  co-operative society if such member is a 
Minister in the  Central Government or a Sta te Government.  
(2) No member of a board shall be eligible to be elected as the  chairperson or president of a multi -
State  co-operative society, after  he has held the office as such during two consecutive terms,  whether full 
or part:  
Provided that a member w ho has ceased to hold the office of the  chairperson or president 
continuously for one full term shall again  be eligible for election to the office as such.  
Explanation .—where any member holding the office of the  chairperson or president at the 
commencement  of this Act is  again elected to that office after such commencement, he shall for  the 
purpose of this section, be deemed to have held office for one  term before such election.  
45. Elections of members of board .—(1) The conduct of elections to the board of  a multi -State  co-
operative society shall be the responsibility of the existing board.  
(2) The election of members of board shall be held by secret ballot in  the manner as may be 
prescribed.  
(3) The election of the members of the board shall be held in the  general meeting of the members of 
the multi -State co -operative society.  
(4) The elected members of the board shall, if the bye -laws of such  society permit, be eligible for re -
election.  
(5) The term of office of the elected members of the board shall be  such, not exceeding five years 
from the date of elections, as may  be specified in the bye -laws of a multi -State  co-operative society:  
Provided that elected members shall continue to hold office till their  successors are elected or 
nominated under the provisi ons of this  Act or the rules or bye -laws and assume charge of their office.  
(6) Where the board fails to conduct election of the members of board,  the Central Registrar shall 
hold the election within a period of ninety  days from the date when such election  became due.  
(7) No person shall be eligible to be elected as a member of the board  of a multi -State  co-operative 
society unless he is a member of the  general body of that society.  
(8) The expenses for holding election by the Central Registrar shall be  borne by the multi -State co -
operative  society.  
(9) The Central Government may make rules generally to provide for or  to regulate matters in respect 
of election of members of the board.  
46. Holding of office in co-operative society .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, no 
person shall be  eligible to hold, at the same time, office of a president or chairperson or  vice-president or 
vice-chairperson on the board of more than two multistate  co-operative societies.  
47. Removal of elected members by gene ral body .—An elected member of a board, who has acted 
adversely to the interests  of multi -State  co-operative society, may on the basis of a report of the  Central 21 
 Registrar or otherwise be removed from the board upon a  resolution of the general body passed at its 
meeting by a majority of not  less than two -third of the members present and voting at the meeting:  
Provided that the member concerned shall not be removed unless he  has been given a reasonable 
opportunity of making a representation in  the matter.  
48. Nominee of Central Government or State Government on board .—(1) Where the Central 
Government or a State Government has  subscribed to the share capital of a multi -State  co-operative 
society,  the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may  be, or any person authorised 
by the Central Government or the  State Government shall have right to nominate on the board such  
number of persons as its members on the following basis, namely: — 
(a) where the total amount of issued equity share capital held b y the Central Government or the 
State Government is less than  twenty six per cent . of the total issued equity share capital, one  member 
of the board;  
(b) where the total amount of issued equity share capital held by  the Central Government or the 
State Gove rnment is twenty -six per cent . or more but less than fifty -one per cent . of the total  issued 
equity share capital, two members of the board;  
(c) where the total amount of issued equity share capital held by  the Central Government or the 
State Government is  fifty-one per cent . or more of the total issued share capital, three  members of the 
board:  
Provided that the number of such nominated persons shall not  exceed one third of the total number of 
members of the board:  
Provided further that where the Central Government or a State  Government has guaranteed the 
repayment of principal and  payment of interest on debentures issued by a multi -State co -operative society 
or has guaranteed the repayment of  principal and payment of interest on loans and advances to a  multi -
State co -operative  society or has given any assistance by  way of grants or otherwise to a multi -State  co-
operative society,  the Central Government or the State Government in this  behalf, as the case may be, or 
any person authorised by the  Central Gov ernment, shall have the right to nominate person  on the board of 
such a society in the manner as may be  prescribed.  
(2) A person nominated under this section shall hold office during the  pleasure of the Government by 
which he has been so nominated.  
49. Pow ers and functions of board .—(1) The board may exercise all such powers as may be 
necessary or  expedient for the purpose of carrying out its functions under this  Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powers, such  powers shall include  the 
power — 
(a) to admit members;  
(b) to interpret the organisational objectives and set up specific  goals to be achieved towards 
these objectives;  
(c) to make periodic appraisal of operations;  
(d) to appoint and remove a Chief Executive and such other  employees of the society as are not 
required to be appointed by  the Chief Executive;  
(e) to make provisions for regulating the appointment of employees  of the multi -State  co-
operative  society and the scales of pay,  allowances and other conditions of servic e of, including  
disciplinary action against such employees;  
(f) to place the annual report, annual financial statements, annual  plan and budget for the approval 
of the general body;  
(g) to consider audit and compliance report and place the same  before the general body;  
(h) to acquire or dispose of immovable property;  
(i) to review membership in other co-operative s; 
(j) to approv e annual and supplementary budget;  22 
 (k) to raise funds;  
(l) to sanction loans to the members; and  
(m) to take such other measures or  to do such other acts as may be  prescribed or required under 
this Act or the bye -laws or as may  be delegated by the general body.  
50. Meeting of board .—(1) The Chief Executive shall convene the meetings of the board at the  
instance of the chairperson or p resident of the multi -State co -operative society.  
(2) The total number of meetings of the board in a year and the venue  of meetings as may be specified 
in the bye -laws:  
Provided that the board shall meet at least once in every quarter:  
Provided further tha t not more than two persons may be invited by  the board in its meetings.  
(3) The Chairperson, or if for any reason, he is unable to attend a  meeting of the board, any other 
member of the board chosen by the  members of the board present from amongst themsel ves at the  
meeting, shall preside at the meeting.  
51. Chief Executive .—(1) There shall be a Chief Executive, by whatever designation called, of  every 
multi -State co -operative society to be appointed by the board  and he shall be a full -time employee of such 
multi -State co -operative society.  
(2) The Chief Executive shall be a member of the board and of the  Executive Committee and such 
other committees or subcommittees  as may be constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section  53. 
(3) Where the Central Government or the State Government holds fifty -one per cent . or more of the 
equity share capital or of total shares of  the multi -State co -operative society, the salary and allowances  
payable to and other terms and conditio ns of service including  pension, gratuity and other retirement 
benefits of the Chief  Executive shall be such as may be prescribed.  
52. Powers and functions of Chief Executive .—The Chief Executive shall under the general 
superintendence, direction  and contr ol of the board, exercise the powers and discharge the  functions 
specified below, namely: — 
(a) day -to-day management of the business of the multi -State co -operative society;  
(b) operating the account of the multi -State co -operative society and be  responsible for making 
arrangements for safe custody of cash;  
(c) signing on the documents for and on behalf of the multi -State co -operative  society;  
(d) making arrangements for the proper maintenance of various books  and records of the multi -
State  co-operative  society and for the  correct preparation, timely submission of periodical statements 
and returns in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the rules and  the bye -laws;  
(e) convening meetings of the general body of the multi -State co -operative  society, the board and 
the Executive Committee and  other committees or sub -committees constituted under sub -section  (1) 
of section 53 and maintaining proper records for such meetings;  
(f) making appointments to the posts in the multi -State co -operative society  in accordance with 
the bye -laws;  
(g) assisting the board in the formulation of policies, objectives and  planning;  
(h) furnishing to the board periodical information necessary for  appraising the operations and 
functions of the multi -State co -operative society; 
(i) appoint the person to sue or be sued on behalf of the multi -State co -operative society;  
(j) present the draft annual report and financial statement for the  approval of the board within 
thirty days of closure of the financial  year;  
(k) performing such other duties, and exercising such other powers, as  may be specified in the 
bye-laws of the multi -State co -operative society.  23 
 53. Committees of board .—(1) The board may, subject to such conditions as may be prescribed,  
constitute an Executive Committee  and other committees or subcommittees  as may be considered 
necessary:  
Provided that other committees or sub -committees, other than the  Executive Committee shall not 
exceed three.  
(2) The Executive Committee or other committee or sub -committee  referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall 
perform such functions as are  assigned to it in accordance with the bye -laws of the multi -State co -
operative  society.  
54. Securing possession of records, etc .—(1) If— 
(a) the records, including registers and books of account of a multi -State co-operative  society are 
likely to be tampered with or  destroyed or the funds or other property of such society are  likely to be 
mis-appropriated; or  
(b) the board of a multi -State  co-operative society is reconstituted at  a general meeting of t he 
society; or  
(c) a multi -State co -operative  society is ordered to be wound up  under section 86 and the 
outgoing members of the board refuse  to handover charge of the records and property of the society to  
those having or entitled to receive such charge,  
the Chief Executive may apply to the magistrate within whose  jurisdiction the multi -State  co-operative  
society functions for securing  the records and property of the society.  
(2) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 1), the magistrate  may, by a warrant, authorise any 
police officer not below the rank of  a sub -inspector to enter and search any place where such records  and 
property are kept or are believed to be kept and to seize such  records and property; and the records and 
property so seized s hall be handed over to the new board or the liquidator, as the case may  be. 
(3) Every such search and seizure shall be made in accordance with  the provisions of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
CHAPTER VI  
PRIVILEGES OF MULTI -STATE CO-OPERATIVE  SOCIETIES  
55. Charge and set -off in respect of share or contribution or interest of  members .—A multi -State  
co-operative  society shall have a charge on the share or  contribution or interest in the capital and on the 
deposits of a member or  past or deceased member and on any dividend, bonus or profits payable  to a 
member or past member or the estate of a deceased member in  respect of any debt due from such member 
or past member or the estate  of such deceased member to the society and may set -off any sum  credited or 
payable to a member or past member or the estate of  deceased member in or towards payment of any such 
debt.  
56. Share of contribution or interest not liable to attachment .—(1) Subject to the provisions of 
section 55, the share or contri bution or  interest of a member or past or deceased member in the capital of 
a multi -State  co-operative  society shall not be liable to attachment or  sale under any decree or order of 
any court in respect of any debt  or liability incurred by such member, and  an official assignee or a  
receiver under any law relating to insolvency shall not be entitled to,  or have any claim on, such share or 
contribution or interest.  
(2) The reserve fund, or the bad debt reserves, or the provident fund of  the employees, of a multi-
State co -operative society invested by  such society in accordance with the provision of this Act and the  
bye-laws shall not be liable to attachment under any decree or  order of a court in respect of any debt or 
liability incurred by the  society.  
57. Register of members .—Any register or list of members or shares kept by any multi -State co -
operative society shall be prima facie evidence of any of the following  particulars entered therein, 
namely: — 
(a) the date on which any person entered in such registe r or list  became a member; or  
(b) the date on which any such person ceased to be a member.  24 
 58. Admissibility of copy of entry as evidence .—(1) A copy of any entry in a book of a multi -State 
co-operative  society  regularly kept in the course of its business shall, if certified in such  manner as may 
be prescribed, be received in any suit or legal  proceedings as prima facie evidence of the existence of 
such entry  and shall be admitted as evidence of the matters, transactions and  accounts therein recorded in 
every case where, and to the same  extent, as the original entry itself if admissible.  
(2) No officer of a multi -State co -operative  society and no officer in  whose office the books of a 
multi -State  co-operative  society are  deposited after liquidation shall, in any legal proceedings to which  
the society or the liquidator is not a party, be compelled to produce  any of the society’s books or 
documents the contents of which can  be proved under this section, or to appear as a witness to prove the  
matters, transact ions and accounts therein recorded, except under  an order of a court or an arbitrator made 
for a special cause.  
59. Exemption from compulsory registration of instruments .—Nothing in clauses ( b) and ( c) of 
sub-section ( 1) of section 17 of the  Registration A ct, 19 08 (16 of 1908) shall apply to — 
(a) any instrument relating to shares in a multi -State  co-operative society notwithstanding that the 
assets of the society consist in  whole or in part of immovable property; or  
(b) any debenture issued by any such soci ety and not creating,  declaring, assigning, limiting or 
extinguishing any right, title or  interest to or in immovable property, except in so far as it entitles  the 
holder thereof to the security afforded by a registered  instrument whereby the society has m ortgaged, 
conveyed or  otherwise transferred the whole or part of its immovable property or  any interest therein 
to trustees upon trust for the benefit of the  holders of such debentures; or  
(c) an endorsement upon transfer of any debenture issued by any such society.  
60. Deduction from salary to meet multi -State  co-operative society’s  claim in certain cases .—(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any law for the time being in  force, a member of a multi -State co -
operative  society may execute  an agreemen t in favour of that society providing that his employer  
disbursing his salary or wages shall be competent to deduct every  month from the salary or wages payable 
to him, such amount as  may be specified in the agreement and to pay the amount so  deducted to t he 
society in satisfaction of any debt or other demand  the member owes to the society.  
(2) On the execution of such agreement, the employer disbursing the  salary or wages of the members 
shall, if so required by the multi -State co-operative  society, by a requisition in writing and so long as  the 
society does not intimate that the whole of such debt or other  demand has been paid, make the deduction 
in accordance with the  agreement and pay the amount so deducted to the society within a  period of 
fourteen days of the date on which deduction has been  made, as if it were a part of the salary or wages 
payable on the day  as required under the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 (4 of 1936), and  such payment 
shall be valid discharge of the employer for his  liability to pay the amount deducted.  
(3) If after the receipt of a requisition made under sub -section ( 2), the  employer disbursing the salary 
or wages of the member at any time  fails to deduct the amount specified in the requisition from the  salary 
or wages  payable to the member concerned or makes  default in remitting the amount deducted to the 
multi -State co -operative  society, the society shall be entitled to recover any  such amount from such 
employer as arrears of land revenue and  the amount so due from su ch employer shall rank in priority in  
respect of the liability of such employer equal to that of the salary or  wages in arrears.  
61. Government aid to multi -State co -operative  societies .—Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any law for the time being in force,  the Central Government or a State Government, on receipt of request  
from a multi -State  co-operative  society and with a view to promoting  co-operative movement, may, — 
(a) subscribe to the share capital of a multi -State co -operative society;  
(b) give loans or make advances to a multi -State  co-operative society;  
(c) guarantee the repayment of principal and payment of interest on  debentures issued by a multi -
State  co-operative society;  
(d) guarantee the repayment of share capital of a multi -State co -operative  society and dividends 
thereon at such rates as may be  specified by the Central Government or the State Government;  
(e) guarantee the repayment of principal and payment of interest on  loans and advances to a 
multi -State  co-operative society;  25 
 (f) give financial assistance in any other form, including subsidies, to  any multi -State  co-operative  
society; and  
(g) provide aid to any other multi -State co -operative society on such  terms and conditions as may 
be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VII  
PROPERTIES AND FUNDS OF MULTI -STATE CO -OPERATIVE  SOCIETIES  
62. Funds not to be divided by way of profit .—(1) No part of the funds, other than net profits, of a 
multi -State co -operative  society shall be divided by way of bonus or dividend or  otherwise distributed 
among its members.  
(2) The net profits of a multi -State  co-operative society referred to in  sub-section ( 1) in respect of a 
society earning profits shall be  calculated by deducting from the gross profit for the year, all interest  
accrued and accruing in relation to amounts which are overdue,  establishment charges, interest payable on 
loans and deposits,  audit fees, working expenses including repairs, rent, taxes and  depreciation, bonus 
payable to employees under the law relating to  payment of bonus for the time being  in force, and 
equalisation fund  for such bonus, provision for payment of income -tax and making  approved donations 
under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961),  development rebate, provision for development fund, bad 
debt fund,  price fluctuation fund, divid end equalisation fund, share capital  redemption fund, investment 
fluctuation fund, provision for  retirement benefits to employees, and after providing for or writing  off bad 
debts and losses not adjusted against any fund created out  of profit:  
Provided tha t such society may add to the net profits for the year  interest accrued in the preceding 
years, but actually recovered  during the year:  
Provided further that in the case of such multi -State co -operative societies as do not have share 
capital, the surplus o f income over  expenditure shall not be treated as net profits and such surplus  shall be 
dealt with in accordance with the bye -laws.  
63. Disposal of net profits .—(1) A multi -State  co-operative  society shall, out of its net profits in any  
year,— 
(a) transfer  an amount not less than twenty -five per cent . to the  reserve fund;  
(b) credit  one per cent.  to co-operative  education fund maintained,  by the National Co-operative 
Union of India Limited, New Delhi,  in the manner as may be prescribed;  
(c) transfer an amou nt not less than ten per cent . to a reserve fund  for meeting unforeseen losses.  
(2) Subject to such conditions as may be prescribed, the balance of the  net profits may be utilised for 
all or any of the following purposes,  namely: — 
(a) payment of dividend to the members on their paid -up share  capital at a rate not exceeding the 
prescribed limit;  
(b) constitution of, or contribution to, such special funds including  education funds, as may be 
specified in the bye -laws;  
(c) donation of amou nts not exceeding fi ve per cent.  of the net  profits for any purpose connected 
with the development of  co-operative  movement or charitable purpose as defined in  section 2 of the 
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890 (6 of 1890);  
(d) payment of ex gratia amount to employees of the multi-State co -operative  society to the 
extent and in the manner specified in  the bye -laws.  
64. Investment of funds .—A multi -State co -operative society may invest or deposit its funds — 
(a) in a co-operative  bank, state co-operative  bank, co-operative  land development bank or central 
co-operative  bank; or  
(b) in any of the securities specified in section 20 of the Indian Trust  Act, 1882 (2 of 1882); or  
(c) in the shares or securities of any other multi -State co -operative society or any co-operative 
society; or 
(d) in the shares, securities or assets of a subsidiary institution or any  other institution; or  26 
 (e) with any other bank; or  
(f) in such other mode as may be provided in the bye -laws.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of clause ( e), “bank” means any banking  company as defined in 
clause ( c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation  Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) , and includes — 
(i) the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India  Act, 1955 (23 of 1955);  
(ii) a subsidiary bank as defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of the State  Bank of India (Subsidiary 
Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959);  
(iii) a corresponding new bank constituted under section 3 of the  Banking Companies 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Undertakings) Act,  1970 (5 of 1970) or a corresponding new bank  
constituted under  section 3 of the Banking Companies (Acquisition and Transfer of  Undertakings) 
Act, 1980 (40 of 1980).  
65. Restriction on contribution .—No multi -State  co-operative  society shall make a contribution, 
either in  money or in kind, whether dir ectly or indirectly, to an institution which has  an object of 
furtherance of the interest of a political party.  
66. Restriction on loans .—(1) A multi -State  co-operative  society, other than a co-operative bank,  
shall not make a loan to a member on the security of his share or  on the security of a non -member.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), a multi -State co -operative society may 
make a loan to a depositor on the security  of his deposit.  
67. Restrictions on borrowing .—(1) A multi-State  co-operative  society may receive deposits, raise 
loans  and receive grants from external sources to such extent and under  such conditions as may be 
specified in the bye -laws:  
Provided that the total amount of deposits and loans received  during any f inancial year shall not 
exceed ten times of the sum of  subscribed share capital and accumulated reserves:  
Provided further that while calculating the total sum of subscribed  share capital and accumulated 
reserves, the accumulated losses  shall be deducted.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), a multi -State co -operative society may accept funds 
or borrow funds for the fulfilment of its  objects on such terms and conditions as are mutually contracted  
upon.  
(3) A multi -State  co-operative society may  issue non -convertible  debentures or other instruments 
subject to the provisions of any law  for the time being in force to raise resources for the fulfilment of its  
objects to the extent of twenty -five per cent . of its paid -up share  capital.  
68. Restrictio ns on other transactions with non -members .—Save as provided in sections 66 and 
67, the transaction of a multi -State co -operative society with any person other than a member, shall be  
subject to such prohibitions and restrictions, if any, as may be specifie d in the bye -laws.  
69. Contributory provident fund .—(1) Subject to the provisions of the Employees’ Provident Fund 
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), a multi -State co -operative  society having such 
number or class of employees as  may be prescribed, may establish a contributory provident fund for  the 
benefit of its employees to which shall be credited all  contributions made by the employees and the 
society in accordance  with the bye -laws of the society.  
(2) Monies standing to the credit of  any contributory provident fund  established by a multi -State co -
operative  society under sub -section  (1) shall not — 
(a) be used in the business of the society;  
(b) form part of the assets of the society;  
(c) be liable to attachment or be subject to any other process of any  court or other authority.  
  27 
 CHAPTER  VIII 
AUDIT , INQUIRY , INSPECTION  AND SURCHARGE  
70. Appointment and remuneration of auditors .—(1) Every multi -State co -operative society shall 
cause to be audited by  an auditor referred to in sub-section ( 2), its accounts at least once  in each year.  
 (2) Every multi -State  co-operative  society shall, at each annual general  meeting, appoint an auditor 
or auditors to hold office from the  conclusion of that meeting until the conclusion of the next annual  
general meeting and shall, within seven days of the appointment,  give intimation thereo f to every auditor 
so appointed:  
Provided that such auditor or auditors may be appointed from a  panel of auditors approved by the 
Central Registrar or from a pane l of auditors, if any, prepared by the multi -State  co-operative society.  
(3) Every auditor appointed under sub -section ( 1) shall, within thirty  days of the receipt from the 
multi -State  co-operative  society of the  intimation of his appointment, inform the C entral Registrar in 
writing  that he has acce pted, or refused to accept, the appointment.  
(4) A retiring auditor shall be re -appointed unless — 
(a) he is not qualified for re -appointment;  
(b) he has given the multi -State  co-operative  society a notice in  writing of his unwillingness to 
be re -appointed;   
(c) a resolution has been passed at the general meeting of  members appointing some body instead 
of him or providing  expressly that he shall not be re -appointed; or  
(d) where notice has been given of an inte nded resolution to  appoint some person or persons in 
the place of a retiring  auditor, and by reason of the death, incapacity or  disqualification of that person 
or all those persons, as the case  may be, the resolution cannot be proceeded with.  
(5) Where at an annual general meeting no auditors are appointed or  re-appointed, the Central 
Registrar may appoint a person to fill the  vacancy.  
(6) First auditor or auditors of a multi -State co -operative society shall be  appointed by the board 
within one month of the  date of registration  of such society and the auditor or auditors so appointed shall 
hold office until the conclusion of the first annual general meeting:  
Provided that — 
(a) the multi -State co -operative  society may, at a general meeting,  remove any such auditor or all 
or any of such auditors and  appoint in his or their places any other person or persons who  have been 
nominated for appointment by any member of the  multi -State  co-operative  society and of whose 
nomination notice  has been given to the members  of the multi -State co -operative  society not less than 
fourteen days before the date of the  meeting; and  
(b) if the board fails to exercise its powers under this sub -section,  the multi -State  co-operative  
society in the general meeting may  appoint the fir st auditor or auditors.  
(7) (a) The multi -State  co-operative  society may fill any causal vacancy  in the office of an auditor; 
but while any such vacancy  continues, the remaining auditor or auditors, if any, may act:  
Provided that where such vacancy is caused by the resignation  of an auditor, the vacancy shall only 
be filed by the multi -State co -operative society in general meeting.  
(b) Any auditor appointed in a causal vacancy shall hold office until  the conclusion of the next annual 
general meeting.  
(8) Any auditor appointed under this section may be removed from  office before the expiry of his 
term by the multi -State  co-operative society in general meeting.  
(9) The remuneration of the auditors of a multi -State co -operative society — 
(a) in the case of a n auditor appointed by the board or the Central  Registrar may be fixed by the 
board or the Central Registrar, as  the case may be; and  28 
 (b) subject to clause ( a), shall be fixed by the multi -State  co-operative society in general meeting 
or in such manner as the multi -State  co-operative  society in general meeting may  determine.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, any sums paid  by the multi -State co -operative  
society in respect of the auditors’  expenses shall be deemed to be included in the expre ssion  
“remuneration” . 
71. Provision as to resolutions for appointing or removing auditors .—(1) A special notice shall be 
required for a resolution at an annual  general meeting appointing as auditor a person other than a retiring  
auditor, or providing expressly that a retiring auditor shall not be reappointed.  
(2) On receipt of notice of such a resolution, the multi -State  co-operative society shall forthwith send 
a copy thereof to the retiring auditor.  
(3) Where notice is given of such a resolution and the retiring auditor  makes with respect thereto 
representations in writing to the multistate  co-operative  society (not exceeding a reasonable length) and  
requests their notification to members of the multi -State co-operative society, the multi -State  co-operative  
shall, unless the representations  are received by it too late for it to do so, — 
 (a) in any notice of the resolution given to members of the multi -State co-operative society, state 
the fact of the representations  having been made; and  
(b) send a copy of the representation to every member of the multi -State co-operative society to 
whom notice of the meeting is sent,  whether before or after the receipt of the representations by the  
multi -State  co-operative  society,  
and if a copy of the representatio ns is not sent as aforesaid  because they were received too late or because 
of the multi -State co -operative  society’s default, the auditor may (without prejudice to  his right to be 
heard orally) require that the representations shall be  read out at the meet ing. 
72. Qualifications and disqualifications of auditors .—(1) A person shall not be qualified for 
appointment as an auditor of a  multi -State co -operative society unless he is a chartered accountant  within 
the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act , 1949 (38 of  1949).  
(2) None of the following persons shall be qualified for appointment as  auditor of a multi -State co -
operative society — 
(a) a body corporate;  
(b) an officer or employee of the multi -State co -operative  society;  
(c) a person who is a membe r, or who is in the employment, of an  officer or employee or the 
multi -State co -operative society;  
(d) a person who is indebted to the multi -State co -operative society  or who has given any 
guarantee or provided any security in  connection with the indebtedness of any third person to the  
multi -State co -operative society for an amount exceeding one  thousand rupees.  
(3) A person shall also not be qualified for appointment as an auditor of  a multi -State co -operative  
society if he is, by virtue of sub -section ( 2), disqualified for appointment as an auditor of any other body  
corporate or multi -State  co-operative  society or co-operative  society.  
(4) If an auditor becomes subject, after his appointment, to any of the  disqualifications specified in 
sub-sectio ns (2) and ( 3), he shall be  deemed to have vacated his office as such.  
73. Powers and duties of auditors .—(1) Every auditor of a multi -State  co-operative society shall 
have a right  of access at all times to the books, accounts and vouchers of the  multi -State  co-operative  
society, whether kept at the head office of  the multi -State  co-operative  society or elsewhere, and shall be  
entitled to require from the officers o r other employees of the multi -State co-operative society such 
information and ex planations as the  auditor may think necessary for the performance of his duties as an  
auditor.  
(2) Without prejudice to provisions of sub -section ( 1), the auditor shall  inquire, — 
(a) whether loans and advances made by the multi -State co -operative  society on the basis of 
security have been  properly secured and whether the terms on which they have  been made are not 
prejudicial to the interests of the multi -State co -operative society or its members;  29 
 (b) whether transactions of the multi -State  co-operative  society  which are represented merely by 
book entries are not  prejudicial to the interests of the multi -State  co-operative society;  
(c) whether personal expenses have been charged to revenue  account; and  
(d) where it is stated in the books and papers of the multi -State co -operative  society that any 
shares have been allotted for  cash, whether case has actually been received in respect of  such 
allotment, and if no cash has actually been so received,  whether the position as stated in the account 
books and  the balance -sheet is correct, regular and not misleading.  
(3) The auditor shall make a report to the members of the multi -State  co-operative  society on the 
accounts examined by him and on every  balance -sheet and profit and loss account and on every other  
document required to be part or annexed to the balance -sheet or  profit and loss account, which are laid 
before the multi -State co -operative  society in general meeting during his tenure of office,  and the report 
shall state whether, in his opinion and to th e best of  his information and according to the explanations 
given to him, the  said accounts give the information required by this Act in the  manner so required and 
give a true and fair view ,— 
(a) in the case of the balance -sheet, of the state of the multi -State  co-operative society’s affairs as 
at the end of its financial year;  and 
(b) in the case of the profit and loss account, of the profit or loss for  its financial year.  
(4) The auditor’s report shall also state — 
(a) whether he has obtained all the infor mation and explanations  which to the best of his 
knowledge and belief were necessary  for the purposes of his audit;  
(b) whether, in his opinion, proper books of account have been  kept by the multi -State  co-
operative society so far as appears  from his examination of those books, and proper returns  adequate 
for the purposes of his audit have been received  from branches or offices of the multi -State  co-
operative society  not visited by him;  
(c) whether the report on the accounts of any branch office  audite d by a person other than the 
multi -State  co-operative society’s auditor has been forwarded to him and how he has  dealt with the 
same in preparing the auditor’s report;  
(d) whether the multi -State  co-operative  society’s balance -sheet  and profit and loss acc ount dealt 
with by the report are in  agreement with the books of account and returns.  
(5) Where any of the matters referred to in clauses ( a) and ( b) of sub -section  (3) or in clauses ( a), (b), 
(c) and ( d) of sub -section ( 4) is answered in the negative or with a qualification, the auditor’s report  shall 
state the reason for the answer.  
74. Signature of audit report , etc.—Only the person appointed as an auditor of the multi -State co -
operative society shall sign the auditor’s report, or sign or authenticate a ny other  document of the multi -
State co -operative  society required by law to be  signed or authenticated by the auditor.  
75. Reading and inspection of auditor’s report .—The auditor’s report shall be read before the 
multi -State  co-operative  society in the general meeting and shall be open to inspection by any  member 
of the multi -State  co-operative  society.  
76. Right of auditor to attend general meeting .—All notices of, and other communications relating 
to, any general meeting  of a multi -State  co-operativ e  society, which any member of the multi -State co -
operative  society is entitled to have sent to him, shall also be  forwarded to the auditor of the multi -State  
co-operative  society; and the  auditor shall be entitled to attend any general meeting and to be heard at  any 
general meeting which he attends on any part of the business which  concerns him as auditor.  
77. Power of Central Government to direct special audit in certain  cases .—(1) Where the Centr al 
Government is of the opinion — 
(a) that the affairs of any multi -State  co-operative  society are not  being managed in accordance 
with self -help and mutual aid  and co-operative  principles or prudent commercial practices; or  with 
sound business principles; or  
(b) that any multi -State  co-operative society is being managed in a  manner likely to cause serious 
injury or damage to the interest  of the trade, industry or business to which it pertains; or  30 
 (c) that the financial position of any multi -State  co-operative  society  is such as to endanger i ts 
solvency,   
the Central Government may at any time by order direct that a  special audit of the multi -State  co-
operative  society’s accounts for  such period or periods as may be specified in the order, shall be  
conducted and may by the same or a different order appoint either  a chartered accountant as defined in 
clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949) or  the 
multi -State co -operative  society’s auditor himself to conduct with  special audit:  
Provided that the Central Government shall not order for special  audit of a multi -State  co-operative  
society’s accounts if that  Government or the State Government either by itself or both hold  less than fifty -
one per cent . of the paid up share capital or of the  shares i n such multi -State  co-operative  society.  
(2) The chartered accountant or the multi -State  co-operative  society’s  auditor appointed under sub -
section ( 1) to conduct a special audit  as aforesaid is hereafter in this section referred to as the special  
auditor.  
(3) The special auditor shall have the same powers and duties in  relation to the special audit as an 
auditor of a multi -State co -operative  society has under section 73:  
Provided that the special auditor shall, instead of making his report  to the members o f the multi -State  
co-operative  society, make the  same to the Central Government.  
(4) The report of the special auditor shall, as far as may be, include all  the matters required to be 
included in the auditors’ report under  section 73 and, if the Central Government so directs, shall also  
include a statement on any other matter which may be referred to  him by that Government.  
(5) The Central Government may by order direct any person specified  in the order to furnish to the 
special auditor within such time a s may  be specified therein such information or additional information as  
may be required by the special auditor in connection with the  special audit.  
(6) On receipt of the report of the special auditor, the Central  Government may take such action on 
the re port as it considers  necessary in accordance with the provisions of this Act or any other  law for the 
time being in force:  
Provided that if the Central Government does not take any action  on the report within four months 
from the date of its receipt, that  Government shall send to the multi -State  co-operative  society either  a 
copy of, or relevant extract from, the report with its comments  thereon and require the multi -State  co-
operative  society either to  circulate that copy or those extracts to the members o r to have such  copy or 
extracts read before the multi -State  co-operative  society at  its next general meeting.  
(7) The expenses of, and incidental to, any special audit under this  section (including the 
remuneration of the special auditor) shall be  determin ed by the Central Government which determination 
shall  be final and paid by the multi -State  co-operative  society and in  default of such payment, shall be 
recoverable from the multi -State  co-operative  society as an arrear of land revenue.  
78. Inquiry by Central Registrar .—(1) The Central Registrar may, on a request from a federal co-
operative  to which a multi -State  co-operative  society is affiliated or a creditor or  not less than one -third of 
the members of the board or not less than  one-fifth of the tota l number of members of a multi -State  co-
operative  society hold an inquiry or direct some person authorised by him by  order in writing in this 
behalf to hold an inquiry into the constitution,  working and financial condition of a multi -State  co-
operative  society: 
Provided that no inquiry under this sub -section shall be held unless  a notice of not less than fifteen 
days has been given to the multi -State co-operative  society.  
(2) The Central Registrar or the person authorised by him under sub -section  (1) shall have the 
following powers, namely :— 
(a) he shall at all reasonable times have free access to the books,  accounts, documents, securities, 
cash and other properties  belonging to or in the custody of the multi -State  co-operative society and 
may summon any per son in possession or  responsible for the custody of any such books, accounts , 
documents, securities, cash or other properties to produce the  same, at any place specified by him;  
(b) he may, notwithstanding any bye -law specifying the period of  notice for a general meeting of 
the multi -State co -operative society, require the officers of the society to call a general  meeting of the 31 
 society by giving notice of not less than seven  days at such time and place at the headquarters of the 
society  to consider such matters,  as may be directed by him; and  where the officers of the society 
refuse or fail to call such a  meeting, he shall have power to call it himself;  
(c) he may summon any person who is reasonably believed by  him to have any knowledge of the 
affairs of the multi -State co -operative  society to appear before him at any place at the  headquarters of 
the society or any branch thereof and may  examine such person on oath.  
(3) Any meeting called under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) shall have all  the powers of a general 
meeting of the society called under the byelaws  of the society and its proceedings shall be regulated by 
such bye-laws.  
(4) The Central Registrar shall, within a period of three months of the  date of receipt of the report, 
communicate the report of  inquiry to  the multi -State  co-operative  society, the financial institutions, if any,  
to which the society is affiliated, and to the person or authority, if  any, at whose instance the inquiry is 
made.  
79. Inspection of multi -State  co-operative  societies .—(1) The Central Registrar may, on a request 
from a federal co-operative to which a multi -State  co-operative  society is affiliated or a creditor or  not 
less than one -third of the members of the board or not less than  one-fifth of the total number of members 
of a multi -State  co-operative  society by general or special order in writing in this behalf, inspect  or direct 
any person authorised by him by order in writing in this  behalf to make an inspection into the 
constitution, working and  financial condition of a  multi -State co -operative  society:  
Provided that no inspection under this sub -section shall be made  unless a notice of not less than 
fifteen days has been given to the  multi -State  co-operative society.  
(2) (a) For the purpose of inspection under sub-section ( 1), the Central  Registrar or the person 
authorised by him under that subsection  shall at all times have access to all books, accounts,  papers, 
vouchers, securities, stock and other property of that  society and may, in the event of serious irre gularities  
discovered during inspection, take them into custody and shall  have power to verify the cash balance of 
the society and  subject to the general or special order of the Central Registrar  to call a meeting of the 
board and also a general meeting of  the society where such general meeting is, in his opinion,  necessary.  
(b) Every officer or member of a multi -State co -operative society  shall furnish such information with 
regard to the working of the  society as the Central Registrar or the person making such inspection may 
require.  
(3) A copy of the report of inspection under this section shall be  communicated to the multi -State co -
operative  society within a period  of three months from the date of completion of such inspection.  
80. Inspection of books of indebted multi -State co -operative  societies .—(1) The Central Registrar 
shall, on the application of a creditor of a  multi -State  co-operative  society, inspect, or direct some person  
authorised by him by order in writing in this behalf to inspect, the  books of the society:  
Provided that no such inspection shall be made unless the  applicant — 
(a) satisfies the Central Registrar that the debt is a sum then due,  and that he has demanded 
payment thereof and has not  received satisfaction within a reasonable time;  
(b) deposits with the Central Registrar such sum as security for the  costs of the proposed 
inspection as the Central Registrar may  require.  
(2) The Central Registrar shall communicate the result of any such  inspection to the creditor.  
81. Costs of inquiry a nd inspection .—Where an inquiry is held under section 78 or an inspection is 
made under  section 79, the Central Registrar may apportion the costs, or such part of  the costs, as he may 
think fit, between the multi -State co -operative society, the members or creditors demanding an inquiry or 
inspection,  and the officers or former officers and the members or past members of  that society:  
Provided that — 
(a) no order of apportionment of the costs shall be made under this  section unless the society or 
the person l iable to pay the costs  thereunder has had a reasonable opportunity of being heard;  
(b) the Central Registrar shall state in writing under his own hand the  grounds on which the costs 
are apportioned.  32 
 82. Recovery of costs .—Any sum awarded by way of costs un der section 81 may be recovered,  on 
application to a magistrate having jurisdiction in the place where the  person, from whom the money is 
claimable, actually and voluntarily  resides or carries on business, and such magistrate shall recover the  
same as if i t were a fine imposed by himself.  
83. Repayment, etc .—(1) If in the course of an audit, inquiry, inspection or the winding up of a  
multi -State  co-operative  society, it is found that any person, who is or  was entrusted with the organisation 
or management of  such society  or who is or has at any time been an officer or an employee of the  society, 
has made any payment contrary to this Act, or the bye -laws or has caused any deficiency in the assets of 
the society by breach  of trust or wilful negligence or has mi sappropriated or fraudulently  retained any 
money or other property belonging to such society, the  Central Registrar may, of his own motion or on 
the application of  the board, liquidator or any creditor inquire himself or direct any  person authorised by 
him, by an order in writing in this behalf, to  inquire into the conduct of such person within a period of two 
years  from the date of the report of the audit, inspection or inquiry or the  date of the order of winding up, 
as the case may be:  
Provided that where  the Central Registrar is satisfied that such  inquiry could not be commenced 
during the period of two years  aforesaid on account of fraud or concealment of facts, he may  make or 
direct the inquiry to be made within such period not  exceeding six years from the date of the report of the 
audit,  inspection or inquiry or the date of the order of winding up, as he  thinks fit.  
(2) Where an inquiry is made under sub -section ( 1), the Central  Registrar may, after giving the person 
concerned a reasonable  opportunity o f being heard, make an order requiring him to repay o r restore the 
money or property or any part thereof, with interest at  such rate, or to pay contribution and costs or 
compensation to such  extent, as the Central Registrar may consider just and equitable.  
CHAPTER IX  
SETTLEMENT OF DISPUTE S 
84. Reference of disputes .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time  
being in force, if any dispute [other than a dispute regarding  disciplinary action taken by a multi -State co -
operative  society against  its paid employee or an industrial dispute as defined in clause ( k) of section 2 of 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947)] touching  the constitution, management or business of a 
multi -State co -operative  society arises — 
(a) among members, past members and persons claiming through  members, past members and 
deceased members, or  
(b) between a member, past members and persons claiming  through a member, past member or 
deceased member and the  multi -State co -operative  society, its board o r any officer, agent or  employee 
of the multi -State  co-operative  society or liquidator,  past or present, or  
(c) between the multi -State  co-operative  society or its board and any  past board, any officer, 
agent or employee, or any past officer,  past agent or past employee, heirs or legal representatives of  
any deceased officer, deceased agent or deceased employee  of the multi -State  co-operative  society, or  
(d) between the multi -State  co-operative society and any other multi -State co-operative society, 
betwe en a multi -State  co-operative society and liquidator of another multi -State co -operative society  
or between the liquidator of one multi -State  co-operative society  and the liquidator of another multi -
State  co-operative  society,  
such dispute shall be referred to arbitration.  
(2) For the purposes of sub -section ( 1), the following shall be deemed  to be disputes touching the 
constitution, management or business  of a multi -State  co-operative  society, namely: — 
(a) a claim by the multi -State  co-operative  society for any debt or  demand due to it from a 
member or the nominee, heirs or legal  representatives of a deceased member, whether such debt or  
demand be admitted or not;  
(b) a claim by a surety against the principal debtor where the multi -State co-operative  society has 
recovered from the surety any  amount in respect of any debt or demand due to it from the  principal 
debtor as a result of the default of the principal debtor,  whether such debt or demand is admitted or 
not; 33 
 (c) any dispute arising in connection  with the election of any officer  of a multi -State  co-operative  
society.  
(3) If any question arises whether a dispute referred to arbitration under  this section is or is not a 
dispute touching the constitution,  management or business of a multi -State co -operative society, the  
decision thereon of the arbitrator shall be final and shall not be  called in question in any court.  
(4) Where a dispute has been referred to arbitration under sub -section  (1), the same shall be settled or 
decided by th e arbitrator to be  appointed by the Central Registrar.  
(5) Save as otherwise provided under this Act, the provisions of the  Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 
1996 (26 of 1996) shall apply to all  arbitration under this Act as if the proceedings for arbitrat ion were  
referred for settlement or decision under the provisions of the  Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996.  
85. Limitation .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Limitation Act, 1963  (36 of 1963) , 
but subject to the specific provisions made in  this Act, the period of  limitation in the case of a dispute 
referred to arbitration shall, — 
(a) when the dispute relates to the recovery of any sum including  interest thereon due to a multi -
State  co-operative society by a  member thereof, be computed from the date on which such  member 
dies or ceases to be a member of the society;  
(b) save as otherwise provided in clause ( c), when the dispute  relates to any act or omission on 
the part of any of the parties  referred to in clause ( b) or clause ( c) or clause ( d) of subsection  (1) of 
section 84, be six years from the date on which  the act or omission, with reference to which the 
dispute arose,  took place;  
(c) when the dispute is in respect of an election of an officer of a  multi -State  co-operative  society, 
be one  month from the date of  the declaration of the result of the election.  
(2) The period of limitation in the case of any dispute, except those  mentioned in sub -section ( 1), 
which are required to be referred to  arbitration shall be regulated by the provisions  of the Limitation Act,  
1963 (36 of 1963), as if the dispute were a suit and the arbitrator a  civil court.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2), the  arbitrator may admit a dispute 
after the expiry of the period of  limitation, if the applicant satisfies the arbitrator that he had  sufficient 
cause for not referring the dispute within such period.  
CHAPTER X  
WINDING UP OF MULTI -STATE CO -OPERATIVE SOCIETY  
86. Winding up of multi -State  co-operative  societies .—(1) If the Central Registrar, after audit has 
been conducted under  section 70 or special audit has been conducted under section 77 or  an inquiry has 
been held under section 78 or an inspection has  been made under section 79, is of opinion that the society 
ought to  be wound u p, he may, after giving the society a reasonable  opportunity of making its 
representations by order, direct it to be  wound up.  
(2) The Central Registrar may, of his own motion and after giving the  multi -State  co-operative 
society a reasonable opportunity o f making  its representation, make an order directing the winding up of 
the multi -State co -operative society, — 
(a) where it is a condition of the registration of the society that the  society shall consist of at least 
fifty members and the number of  members has been reduced to less than fifty; or  
(b) where the multi -State co -operative society has not commenced  working within a period of six 
months of the date of its  registration or such extended period as the Central Registrar  may allow in 
this behalf or has ceased to function in  accordance with co-operative  principles.  
(3) The Central Registrar may cancel an order for the winding up of a  multi -State  co-operative 
society, at any time, in any case where, in  his opinion, the society should continue to exist.  
(4) A copy of such order shall be communicated by registered post to  the multi -State  co-operative 
society and to the financial institutions, if  any, of which the society is a member.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no co-operative bank shall be wound up 
except with the previous sanction, in writing  of the Reserve Bank.  34 
 (6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Central  Registrar shall make an order for 
the winding up of a multi -State co -operative  society, if the societ y, by a resolution passed by two -third  
majority of members present and voting in a general meeting  decides for winding up of that society.  
87. Winding up of co-operative bank at the direction of Reserve Bank .—Notwithstanding 
anything to the contrary contained elsewhere in this Act,  the Central Registrar shall make an order for the 
winding up of a  co-operative  bank, if so required by the Reserve Bank in the  circumstances mentioned in 
section 13D of the Deposit Insurance and  Credit Guarantee Corporation  Act, 1961 (47 of 1961).  
88. Reimbursement to the Deposit Insurance Corporation by liquidator .—Where a co-operative 
bank, being an insured bank within the meaning of  the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee 
Corporation Act, 1961, is  wound up and the Depo sit Insurance Corporation has become liable to  the 
depositors of the insured bank under sub -section ( 1) of section 16 of  that Act, the Deposit Insurance 
Corporation shall be reimbursed by the  liquidator or such other person in the circumstances, to the ext ent 
and in  the manner provided in section 21 of that Act.  
89. Liquidator .—(1) Where the Central Registrar has made an order under section 86  for the winding 
up of multi -State co -operative  society, the Central  Registrar may appoint a liquidator for the purp ose and 
fix his  remuneration.  
(2) A liquidator shall, on appointment, take into his custody or under his  control all the property, 
effects and actionable claims to which the  multi -State  co-operative  society is or appears to be entitled and 
shall  take such steps as he may deem necessary or expedient to prevent  loss or deterioration of, or damage 
to, such property, effects and  claims and he may carry on the business of the multi -State co -operative 
society so far as may be necessary with the previous  approval of the Central Registrar.  
(3) Where an appeal is preferred under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 1) of section 99, an order for the 
winding up of a multi -State co -operative society made under section 86 shall not operate thereafter until 
the order is confirmed in appeal:  
Provided that the liquidator shall continue to have custody or control  of the property, effects and 
actionable claims mentioned in subsection  (2) and have authority to take the steps referred to in that  sub-
section.  
(4) Where an order for the wi nding up of a multi -State co -operative society is set aside in appeal, the 
property, effects and actionable  claims of the society shall re -vest in the society.  
90. Powers of liquidator .—(1) Subject to any rules made in this behalf, the whole of the assets of a 
multi -State co -operative  society in respect of which an order for  winding up has been made, shall vest in 
the liquidator appointed  under section 89 from the date on which the order takes effect and  the liquidator 
shall have power to realise such asset s by sale or  otherwise.  
(2) Such liquidator shall also have power, subject to the control of the  Central Registrar — 
(a) to institute and defend suits and other legal proceedings on  behalf of the multi -State  co-
operative  society by the name of his  office;  
(b) to determine from time to time the contribution (including debts  due and costs of liquidation) 
to be made or remaining to be  made by the members or past members or by the estates or  nominees, 
heirs or legal representatives of the deceased  members or b y any officers or former officers, to the 
assets of  the multi -State  co-operative  society;  
(c) to investigate all claims against the multi -State co -operative society and subject to the 
provisions of this Act, to decide  questions of priority arising between claimants;  
(d) to pay claims against the multi -State  co-operative society,  including interest up to the date of 
winding up according to  their respective priorities, if any, in full or rateably, as the  assets of the 
society may permit; and the surplus, if a ny, remaining after payment of the claims being applied in  
payment of interest from the date of such order or winding up  at a rate fixed by him but not exceeding 
the contract rate in any  case;  
(e) to determine by what persons and in what proportions the  costs of the liquidation are to be 
borne;  
(f) to determine whether any person is a member, past member or  nominee of a deceased 
member;  35 
 (g) to give such directions in regard to the collection and  distribution of the assets of the multi -
State co -operative  society as may appear to him to be necessary for winding up the  affairs of that 
society;  
(h) to carry on the business of the multi -State  co-operative  society  so far as may be necessary for 
the beneficial winding up of the  same;  
(i) to make any compromise or arrangement with creditors or  persons claiming to be creditors or 
having or alleging to have  any claim, present or future, whereby the multi -State co -operative  society 
may be rendered liable;  
(j) to make any compromise or arrangement with any person  betwee n whom and the multi -State  
co-operative society there  exists any dispute and to refer any such dispute for decision;  
(k) after consulting the members of the multi -State co -operative society, to dispose of the surplus, 
if any, remaining after paying  the cla ims against the society, in such manner as may be  prescribed;  
(l) to compromise all calls or liabilities to calls and debts and  liabilities capable of resulting in 
debts, and all claims, present  or future, certain or contingent, subsisting or alleged to be  subsisting 
between the multi -State  co-operative  society and a  contributory or other debtor or person 
apprehending liability to  the multi -State  co-operative  society and all questions in any way  relating to 
or affecting the assets or the winding up of the  society on such terms as may be agreed and take any 
security  for the discharge of any such call, liability, debt or claim and  give a complete discharge in 
respect thereof.  
(3) When the affairs of a multi -State  co-operative society have been  wound up, the li quidator shall 
make a report to the Central Registrar  and deposit the records of the society in such place as the Central  
Registrar may direct.  
91. Disposal of surplus assets .—The surplus assets, as shown in the report of a liquidator of a multi -
State co -operative society which is wound u p,— 
(a) may, if the bye -laws of the multi -State  co-operative  society specify  the purpose for which 
surplus shall be utilised, be utilised by the  Central Registrar for the said purpose, and  
(b) if the bye -laws aforesaid do not specify the purpose, be divided by  the Central Registrar with 
the previous sanction of the Central  Government, amongst the members of such multi -State co-
operative society in such manner as may be prescribed.  
92. Priority of contribution s assessed by liquidator .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any 
law relating to insolvency, the  contribution assessed by a liquidator shall rank next to debts due to the  
Central Government or a State Government or a local authority in  accordance with the order of priority in 
insolvency proceedings.  
93. Power of Central Registrar to cancel registration of a multi -State co -operative society .—(1) 
The Central Registrar may, after considering the report of the  liquidator made to him under sub -section 
(3) of section 90, order the  registration of the multi -State co-operative society to be cancelled  and on such 
cancellation, that society shall stand dissolved.  
(2) An order passed under sub -section ( 1) shall be communicated by  registered post to the president 
or the chairperson as the case may  be, of the multi -State  co-operative society and to the financial  
institutions, if any, of which the society was a member.  
CHAPTER XI  
EXECUTION OF DECREES,  ORDERS AND DECISIONS  
94. Execution of decisions, etc .—Every decision  or order made under section 39 or section 40 or 
section  83 or section 99 or section  101 shall, if not carried out, — 
(a) on a certificate signed by the Central Registrar or any person  authorised by him in writing in 
this behalf, be deemed to be a  decree of  a civil court and shall be executed in the same manner as  if it 
were a decree of such court and such decree shall be executed  by the Central Registrar or any person 
authorised by him or it in  writing in this behalf, by attachment and sale or sale without  attachment of 
any property of the person or a multi -State co -operative society against whom the decision or order 
has been  made; or  36 
 (b) where the decision or order provides for the recovery of money, by  executed according to law 
for the time being in force  for the  recovery of arrears of land revenue:  
Provided that any application for the recovery of any sum shall be  made in such manner — 
(i) to the Collector and shall be accompanied by a certificate  signed by the Central Registrar 
or by any person authorised  by him in writing in this behalf;  
(ii) within twelve years from the date fixed in the decision or order  and if no such date is 
fixed, from the date of decision or order,  as the case may be; or  
(c) be executed by the Central Registrar or any person authori sed by  him in writing in this behalf, 
by attachment and sale or sale without  attachment of any property of the person or a multi -State co -
operative  society against whom the decision or order has been  made.  
95. Execution of orders of liquidators .—Every order made by the liquidator under section 90 shall 
be executed  according to the law for the time being in force for the recovery of arrears  of land revenue.  
96. Attachment before award .—(1) Where the arbitrator is satisfied that a party to any reference 
made to him under section 84 with intent to defeat or delay the execution  of any decision that ma y be 
passed thereon is about to — 
(a) dispose of the whole or any part of the property; or  
(b) remove the whole or any part of the property from its existing  precincts,  
the arbitrator may, unless adequate security is furnished, direct  conditional attachment of the said property 
or such part thereof as  he deems necessary.  
(2) The attachment under sub -section ( 1) shall be executed by a civil  court having jurisdictio n in the 
same way as an attachment order  passed by itself and shall have the same effect as such order.  
97. Central Registrar or arbitrator or person authorised to be civil court  for certain 
purposes .—The Central Registrar or the arbitrator or any person authorised by him in  writing in this 
behalf shall be deemed, when exercising any powers under  this Act for the recovery of any amount by the 
attachment and sale or by  sale without attachment of any property, or when passing any orders o n any 
application ma de to him for such recovery or for taking a step -in-aid of such recovery, to be a civil court 
for the purposes of article 136 of the  Schedule to the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
98. Recovery of sums due to Government .—(1) All sums due from a multi -State co-operative  
society, or from an  officer or member or past member of a multi -State co -operative society, to the Central 
Government or a State Government,  including any cost awarded to the Central Government or the State  
Government, as the case may be, under any provision of this Act,  may, on a certificate issued by the 
Central Registrar in this behalf,  be recovered in the same manner as arrears of land revenue as  first charge 
on the assets of such society or officer or member, as  the case may be.  
(2) Sums due from a multi -State  co-operative  society to the Central  Government or a State 
Government and recoverable under sub -section  (1) may be recovered firstly from the property of the 
society  and secondly from the members, past members or the estates of  deceased members, subject to the 
limit of their liability:  
Provided that the liability of past members and the estate of  deceased members shall in all cases be 
subject to the provisions of  section 37.  
CHAPTER XII  
APPEALS AND REVIEW  
99. Appeals .—(1) Subject to the provisions of section 100, an appeal shall lie under  this section 
against — 
(a) an order made by the Central Registrar under sub -section ( 3) of section 7 refusing to register a 
multi -State co -operative society;  
(b) an order made by the Central Registrar under sub -section ( 9) of section 11 refusing to register 
an amendment of the bye -laws of  a multi -State  co-operative  society;  37 
 (c) a decision of a multi -State co -operative society refusing or  deemed to be refusing under sub -
section ( 4) of s ection 25 to  admit any person as a member of the society who is otherwise  duly 
qualified for membership under the bye -laws of the society;  
(d) an order made by the Central Registrar under section 81  apportioning the costs of an inquiry 
held under section 7 8 or an  inspection made under section 80;  
(e) an order made by the Central Registrar under sub -section ( 2) of section 83;  
(f) an order made by the Central Registrar under section 86  directing the winding up of a multi -
State  co-operative  society;  
(g) an order made by the liquidator of a multi -State co -operative society under section 90.  
(2) An appeal against any decision or order under sub -section ( 1) shall  be made within sixty days 
from the date of such decision or order to  the prescribed appellate authority.  
(3) The appellate authority may, if satisfied that the appellant was  prevented by sufficient cause from 
preferring the appeal within the  period of sixty days, admit the appeal within such further period as  that 
authority may deem fit.  
(4) In dis posing of an appeal under this section, the appellate authority  may, after giving the parties a 
reasonable opportunity of making  their representation, pass such order thereon as that authority may  deem 
fit. 
(5) The decision or order of the appellate author ity on appeal shall be  final.  
100. No appeal in certain cases .—Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, where, with the 
previous  sanction in writing of, or on requisition by, the Reserve Bank, a  co-operative bank — 
(a) is being wound up; or  
(b) in respect of which a scheme of amalgamation or reorganisation is  given effect to,  
no appeal there against shall lie or be permissible, and the sanction or  requisition of the Reserve Bank 
shall not be liable to be called in  question . 
101. Review .—(1) The appellate authority referred to in section 99, may, on the  application of any 
party, review its own order in any case and pass  in reference thereto such orders as it thinks fit:  
Provided that no such application shall be entertained unless the  appell ate authority is satisfied that 
there has been a discovery of  new and important matter or evidence which after exercise of due  diligence 
was not within the knowledge of the applicant or could not  be produced by him at the time when the order 
was made or th at there has been some mistake or error apparent on the face of the  record or for any other 
sufficient reason:  
Provided further that no such order shall be made under this sub -section  unless notice has been given 
to all interested parties and  they have bee n afforded a reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(2) An application for review under sub -section ( 1) by any party shall be  made within thirty days 
from the date of communication of the order  of the appellate authority sought to be reviewed.  
102. Interlo cutory orders .—Where an appeal is made under section 99, the appellate authority may  
in order to prevent the ends of justice being defeated, make such  interlocutory orders, including an order 
of stay pending the decision of  the appeal as such authority may  deem fit.  
CHAPTER XIII  
SOCIETIES WHICH BECOM E MULTI -STATE  CO-OPERATIVE  SOCIETIES  CONSEQUENT ON REORGA NISATION 
OF STATES  
103. Co-operative  societies functioning immediately before  reorganisation of States .—(1) Where, 
by virtue of the provisions of Part II of the State  Reorganisation Act, 1956 (37 of 1956) or any other 
enactment  relating to reorganisation of states, any co-operative  society which  immediately before the day 
on which the reorganisation takes  place, had its objects confined to one state become s, as from that  day, a 
multi -State co -operative society, it shall be deemed to be a  multi -State co -operative  society registered 
under the corresponding  provisions of this Act and the bye -laws of such society shall, in so  far as they are 
not inconsistent wi th the provisions of this Act,  continue to be in force until altered or rescinded.  38 
 (2) If it appears to the Central Registrar or any officer authorised in this  behalf by the Central 
Government (hereafter in this section referred  to as the authorised office r) that it is necessary or expedient 
to reconstitute or reorganise any society referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Central Registrar or the 
authorised officer, as the case may be,  may, with the previous approval of the Central Government, places  
before a m eeting of the general body of that society, held in such  manner as may be prescribed, a scheme 
for the reconstitution or  reorganisation, including proposals  regarding — 
(a) the formation of new multi -State  co-operative  societies and the  transfer thereto in whole or in 
part, of the assets and liabilities  of that society; or  
(b) the transfer, in whole or in part, of the assets and liabilities of  that society to any other multi -
State  co-operative society in  existence immediately before the date of that meeting of the  general 
body (hereafter in this section referred to as the  existing multi -State  co-operative  society).  
(3) If the scheme is sanctioned by a resolution passed by a majority of  the members present at the said 
meeting, either without  modifications or w ith modifications to which the Central Registrar or  the 
authorised officer agrees, he shall certify the scheme and upon  such certification, the scheme shall, 
notwithstanding anything to the  contrary contained in any law, regulation or bye -laws for the time  being 
in force, be binding on all the societies affected by the  scheme, as well as the shareholders and creditors 
of all such  societies.  
(4) If the scheme is not sanctioned under sub -section ( 3), the Central  Registrar or the authorised 
officer may refer t he scheme to such  judge of the appropriate High Court, as may be nominated in this  
behalf by the Chief Justice thereof, and the decision of that judge in  regard to the scheme shall be final 
and shall be binding on all the  societies affected by the scheme a s well as the shareholders and  creditors 
of all such societies.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “appropriate High  Court” means the High Court 
within the local limits of whose  jurisdiction the principal place of business of the multi -State co -operative  
society is situated.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where a scheme  under sub -section ( 2) 
includes any proposal regarding the transfer  of the assets and liabilities of any multi -State  co-operative 
society  referred to in clause ( b) thereof, the scheme shall not be binding on  such multi -State co -operative 
society or the shareholders and  creditors thereof, unless the proposal regarding such transfer is  accepted 
by that multi -State  co-operative  society by a resol ution  passed by a majority of the members present at a 
meeting of its  general body.  
CHAPTER XIV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIE S 
104. Offences and penalties .—(1) A multi -State  co-operative  society or an officer or member thereof  
wilfully making a false return or furnishing false information, or any  person wilfully or without any 
reasonable excuse disobeying any  summons, requisition or lawful written order issued under the  
provisions of this Act, or wilfully not furnishing any information  required from him by a per son 
authorised in this behalf under the  provisions of this Act, shall be punishable with fine which shall not  be 
less than two thousand rupees and which may extend to ten  thousand rupees.  
(2) Any employer who, without sufficient cause, fails to pay to a multi -State co-operative  society the 
amount deducted by him under  section 60 within a period of fourteen days from the date on which  such 
deduction is made shall, without prejudice to any action that  may be taken against him under any other 
law for the tim e being in  force, be punishable with fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees.  
(3) Any officer or custodian who wilfully fails to hand over custody of  books, accounts, documents, 
records, cash, security and other  property belonging to a multi -State  co-operative  society of which he  is 
an officer or custodian, to a person entitled under section 54, or  section 70, or section 78, or section 79, or 
section 89 shall be  punishable with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and  in the case of a 
contin uing breach, with a further fine which may  extend to five thousand rupees for every day during 
which the  breach is continued after conviction for the first such breach.  
(4) Whoever, before, during or after the election of delegates under the  proviso to sub -section ( 1) of 
section 38 or election of members of  the board, — 
(a) fraudulently defaces or fraudulently destroys any nomination  paper; or  39 
 (b) fraudulently defaces, destroys or removes any list, notice or  other document affixed by or 
under the authority of a returning  officer; or  
(c) fraudulently defaces or fraudulently destroys any ballot paper  or the official mark on any 
ballot paper or any declaration of  identity; or  
(d) without due authority supplies any ballot paper to any person  or received any ball ot paper 
from any person or is in  possession of any ballot papers; or  
(e) fraudulently puts into any ballot box anything other than the  ballot paper which he is 
authorised by law to put in; or  
(f) without due authority destroys, takes, opens or otherwise  interferes, with any ballot box or 
ballot papers then in use for  the purposes of the election; or  
(g) fraudulently or without due authority, as the case may be,  attempts to do any of the foregoing 
acts or wilfully aids or abets  the doing of any such acts;  
(h) offers any gift or promises to offer any gratification to any  person with the object, direc tly or 
indirectly, of including — 
(i) a person to stand or not to stand as, or to withdraw or not  to withdraw from, being a 
candidate at an election; or  
(ii) a me mber to vote or refrain from voting at an election, or  as a reward to a person for 
having so stood or not stood  or for having withdrawn or not having withdrawn his  candidature; or  
(iii) a member for having voted or refrained from voting,  
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may  extend to six months or with fine or with 
both.  
105. Cognizance of offences .—(1) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial  
Magistrate of the first class shall try any offence unde r this Act.  
(2) No prosecution for offences under section 104 shall be instituted  except on a complaint filed in 
writing by a member of a multi -State co -operative  society or by the Central Registrar in the competent  
court.  
CHAPTER  XIV 
MISCELLANEOUS  
106. Copies of bye -laws, etc ., to be open to inspection .—Every multi -State co -operative  society 
shall keep a copy of the rules and  its bye -laws and also a list of its members , open to inspection free of  
charge at all reasonable times, at the registered address of the society.  
107. Place of keeping and inspection of, registers and returns .—(1) The register of members 
commencing from the date of the  registration of multi -State co -operative society, the index of  members, 
the register of debenture holders, and copie s of all  annual returns prepared together with the copies of 
certificates and  documents, shall be kept at the registered office of the multi -State co -operative  society.  
(2) The registers, indexes, returns and copies of certificates and other  documents refe rred to in sub -
section ( 1) shall be open during  business hours (subject to such reasonable restrictions, as the  multi -State  
co-operative  society may impose, so that not less than  two hours in each day are allowed fo r inspection) 
to the inspection — 
(a) of any member or debenture holder, without fee; and  
(b) of any other person, on payment of such sum as may be  prescribed for each inspection.  
108. Inspection of books of account, etc., of multi -State  co-operative society .—(1) The books of 
account and other books and papers of every multi -State co-operative  society shall be open to inspection 
during  business hours — 
(i) by the Central Registrar, or  
(ii) by such officer of the Government as may be authorised by the  Central Government in this 
behalf:  40 
 Provided that such inspection may be made without giving any  previous notice to that society or 
any officer thereof;  
(iii) by the members of the multi -State  co-operative  society.  
(2) It shall be the duty of every director, other officer or employee of the  multi -State co-operative  
society to produce to the person making  inspection under sub -section ( 1), all such books of account and  
other books and papers of the multi -State co -operative  society in his  custody or control and to furnish him 
with any statement,  informat ion or explanation relating to the affairs of such society as  the said person 
may require of him within such time and at such  place as he may specify.  
(3) It shall also be the duty of every director, other officer or employee  of the multi -State  co-operativ e 
society to give to the person making  inspection under this section all assistance in connection with the  
inspection which the multi -State  co-operative society may be  reasonably expected to give.  
(4) The person making the inspection under this section may , during  the course of inspection, — 
(i) make or cause to be made copies of books of account and  other books and papers , or 
(ii) place or cause to be placed any marks or identification thereon  in token of the inspection 
having been made.  
(5) Notwithstanding  anything contained in any other law for the time  being in force or any contract to 
the contrary, the Central Registrar  or an officer authorised under clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1), making  an 
inspection under this section shall have the same powers as are  vested in a civil court under the Code of 
Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of  1908) while trying a suit, in respect o f the following matters, namely :— 
(i) the discovery and production of books of account and other  documents, at such place and such 
time as may be specified  by such person;  
(ii) summoning and enforcing the attendance of persons and  examining them on oath;  
(iii) inspection of any books, register and other documents of the  multi -State co -operative society 
at any place.  
(6) Where an inspection of the books of account and other books and  papers of the multi -State co -
operative  society has been made under  this section, the Central Registrar or an officer authorised under  
clause ( ii) of sub -section ( 1), making the inspection shall make a  report to the Cent ral Government . 
109 Annual accounts and balance -sheet .—At every annual general meeting of a multi -State  co-
operative  society, the  board shall lay before the multi -State  co-operative  society — 
(a) a balance -sheet as at the end of every co-operative  year; and  
(b) a profit and loss account for that year.  
110. Minutes of proceedings of general meetings and of board and other  meetings .—(1) Every 
multi -State  co-operative  society shall cause minutes of all  proceedings of every general meeting and of all 
proceedings  of every meeting of its board or of every committee of the board, to be  kept by making 
within thirty days of the conclusion of every such  meeting concerned, entries thereof in books kept for 
that purpose  with their pages consecutively numbered.  
(2) Each p age of every such book shall be initia led or signed and the  last page of the record of 
proceedings of each meeting in such  books shall be dated  and signed — 
(a) in the case of minutes of proceedings of a meeting of the board  or of a committee thereof, by 
the chairperson of the said  meeting or the chairperson of the next succeeding meeting;  
(b) in the case of minutes of proceedings of a general meeting, by  the chairperson of the same 
meeting within the aforesaid period  of thirty days or in the event of the death or inability of that  
chairperson within that period, by a member of the board duly  authorised by the board for the 
purpose.  
(3) In no case the minutes of proceedings of a meeting shall be  attached to any such books as 
aforesaid by pasting or otherwis e. 
(4) The minutes of each meeting shall contain a fair and correct  summary of the proceedings thereat.  41 
 (5) All appointments of officers made at any of the meetings aforesaid  shall be included in the 
minutes of the meeting.  
(6) In the case of a meeting of the board or of a committee of the  board,  the minutes shall also 
contain — 
(a) the names of the members of the board present at the meeting;  and 
(b) in the case of each resolution passed at the meeting, the names  of the members of the board, if 
any, dissent ing from, or not  concurring in, the resolution.  
(7) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) to ( 6) shall be deemed to  require the inclusion in any such 
minutes of any matter which, in the  opinion of  the chairperson of the meeting — 
(a) is, or could reasonably be regarded as, defamatory of any  person;  
(b) is irrelevant or immaterial to the proceedings; or  
(c) is detrimental to the interests of the multi -State  co-operative society.  
Explanation .—The chairperson shall exercise an absolute discretion  in regard to th e inclusion or non -
inclusion of any matter in the  minutes on the grounds specified in this sub -section.  
111. Minutes to be evidence .—Minutes of meetings kept in accordance with the provision of section 
110 shall be evidence of the proceedings recorded therein.  
112. Presumptions to be drawn where minutes duly and signed .—Where minutes of the 
proceedings of any general meeting of the multi -State co-operative  society or of any meeting of its board 
or a committee of  the board have been kept in accordance wi th the provisions of section  110, then, until 
the contrary is proved, the meeting shall be deemed to  have been duly called and held, and all proceedings 
thereat to have duly  taken place, and in particular, all appointments of directors or liquidators  made at the 
meeting shall be deemed to be valid.  
113. Inspection of minutes book of general meetings .—The books containing the minutes of the 
proceedings of any general  meeting o f a multi -State  co-operative society shall — 
(a) be kept at the registered office of  that society, and  
(b) be open, during business hours, to the inspection of any member of  that society.  
114. Liquidator to be public servant .—Any person appointed as liquidator under the provisions of 
this Act shall  be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the  Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860).  
115. Notice necessary in suits .—No suit shall be instituted against a multi -State co -operative  society 
or any  of its officers in respect of any act touching the constitution, management  or th e business of the 
society until the expiration of ninety days next after  notice in writing has been delivered to the Central 
Registrar or left at his  office, stating the cause of action, the name, description and place of  residence of 
the plaintiff and the  relief which he claims, and the plaint  shall contain a statement that such notice has 
been so delivered or left.  
116. Power to amend Second Schedule .—(1) If the Central Government is satisfied that any multi -
State co -operative  society should be designate as a national co-operative society or any national co-
operative  society specified in the Second  Schedule should be omitted from the said Schedule, it may, by  
notification, amend the said Schedule so at to include therein such  multi -State co -operative  society or 
exclude therefrom such national  co-operative society, and thereupon the said Schedule shall be  deemed to 
have been amended accordingly.  
(2) A copy of every notification under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid  before each House of Parliament 
as soon  as may be after it is  made.  
117. Bar of jurisdiction of courts .—(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no court shall have  
jurisdiction in respect of — 
(a) the registration of a multi -State  co-operative  society or its byelaws  or of an amendment of the  
bye-laws;  42 
 (b) any matter concerning the winding up and the dissolution of a  multi -State  co-operative 
society.  
(2) While a multi -State  co-operative society is being wound up, no suit or  other legal proceedings 
relating to the business of such society  shall  be proceeded with or instituted against the liquidator or  
against the society or any member thereof, except by leave of the  Central Registrar and subject to such 
terms and conditions as he  may impose.  
(3) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, no decisio n or order made  under this Act shall be 
questioned in any court.  
118. Indemnity .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall lie against the  Central 
Registrar or, any person subordinate to him or acting on his  authority or against any other perso n, in 
respect of anything in good faith  done or purporting to have been done under this Act.  
119. Opening of branches .—Notwithstanding anything contained to the contrary in any law relating  
to co-operative  societies in force in a state, a multi -State co -operative society,  not being a co-operative  
bank, may open branches or places of business  in any place in India.  
120. Filing of returns .—Every year within six months of the closure of the accounting year every  
multi -State  co-operative  society shall file the following returns with the  Central Registrar, namely :— 
(a) annual report of the activities ; 
(b) audited statements of accounts;  
(c) plan for surplus disposal as approved by the general body;  
(d) list of amendments to the bye -laws of  the multi -State  co-operative society;  
(e) declaration regarding date of holding of general body meeting and  conduct of elections where 
due; 
(f) any other information required by the Central Registrar in pursuance  of any of the provisions 
of this Act.  
121. Certain Acts not to apply .—(1) The provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and the  
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (54 of 1969)  shall not apply to the multi -State co -
operative societies . 
(2) The multi -State  Co-operative  societies registered or deemed to be  registered under the provisions 
of this Act shall not indulge in  monopolistic and restrictive trade practices as defined in the  Monopolies 
and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (54 of 1969).  
122. Central Government’s po wer to give directions to specified multi -State co-operative  
societies in public interest .—If the Central Government is satisfied that in the public interest or for the  
purposes of securing proper implementation of co-operative  production  and other developmental 
programmes approved or undertaken by the  Central Government or to secure proper management of the 
business of  the specified multi -State  co-operative  societies generally or for preventing  the affairs of such 
society being conducted in a mann er detrimental to  the interests of the members, any depositors or 
creditors thereof, it is  necessary to issue directions to any class of specified multi -State co -operative  
societies generally or to any specified multi -State co -operative  society or societie s in particular, the 
Central Government  may issue directions to it or to them, from time to time, and all such  specified multi -
State co -operative  society or the societies concerned, as  the case may be, shall be bound to comply with 
such directions.  
123. Su persession of board of specified multi -State co -operative  society .—(1) If in the opinion of 
the Central Government, the board of any  specified multi -State co -operative society is persistently 
making  default or is negligent in the performance of the duties imposed on it  by this Act or the rules or 
the bye -laws or has committed any act  which is prejudicial to the interests of the society or its members, 
or has omitted or failed to comply with any directions given to it under  section 122 or that there is a 
stalema te in the  constitution or functions of the board, the Central Government may,  after giving the 
board an opportunity to state its objections, if any,  and considering the objections, if received, by order in 
writing,  remove the board and appoint one or m ore administrators, who  need not be members of the 
society, to manage the affairs of the  society for such period not exceeding six months, as may be   43 
 specified in the order which period may, at the discretion of the  Central Government, be extended from 
time to time ; so, however,  that the aggregate period does not exceed one year:  
Provided that in the case of a co-operative  bank, the provisions of  this sub -section shall have effect as 
if for the words “one year”, the  words “two years” had been substituted.  
(2) The Central Government may fix such remuneration for the  administrators, as it may think fit and 
the remuneration shall be  paid out of the funds of the specified multi -State  co-operative  society.  
(3) The administrator shall, subject to the control of th e Central  Government and to such instructions 
as it may from time to time  give, have power to exercise all or any of the functions of the board  or of any 
officer of the specified multi -State  co-operative  society and  take all such actions as may be required  in the 
interests of the  society.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 5), the administrator  shall, before the expiry of his 
term of office, arrange for the  constitution of a new board in accordance with the bye -laws of the  
specified multi -State  co-operative society.  
(5) If, at any time during the period the administrator is in office, the  Central Government considers it 
necessary or expedient so to do, it  may, by order in writing giving reasons therefor, direct the  
administrator to arrange for th e constitution of a new board for such  specified multi -State co -operative 
society in accordance with the  bye-laws of such society and immediately on the constitution of  such 
board, the administrator shall hand over the management of  such society to such ne wly constituted board 
and cease to function.  
(6) Where a specified multi -State  co-operative  society is indebted to any  financial institution, the 
Central Government shall, before taking any  action, under sub -section ( 1) in respect of that society, 
consult the financial institution.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of sections 122 and 123, “specified  multi -State co -operative society” 
means any multi -State co -operative society in which not less than fifty -one per cent . of the paid -up share 
capital or , of total shares, is held by the Central Government.  
124. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry  
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the form to be used, the particulars to be given and the  conditions to be complied with in the 
making of applications  under section 6 for the registration of a multi -State co-operative society and 
the procedure in the matter of such applications;  
(b) the matters in respect of which a multi -State co -operative society may make bye -laws under 
sub-section ( 2) of section  10; 
(c) the manner in which the order of refusal to register any  amendment of the bye -laws shall be 
communicated under  sub-section (9) of section 11;  
(d) the manner in which a multi -State co -operative society shall  have a principal place of business 
and registered address  under section 14;  
(e) the procedure  and conditions for change in the extent of the  liability of a multi -State  co-
operative  society under section 16;  
(f) the manner in which order of refusal to register an amendment  of bye -laws shall be 
communicated under sub -section ( 4) of section 22;  
(g) the classification of federal co-operative  and other terms and  conditions applicable to in under 
sub-section ( 3) of section 23;  
(h) the restriction on holding the share capital of the society other  than a member referred to in 
section 33;  
(i) the constituti on and powers of smaller body representing the  general body under the proviso to 
sub-section ( 1) of section  38; 44 
 (j) the period within which annual general meeting be called and  the procedure at such meetings 
and the powers to be  exercised by such meeting under section 39;  
(k) the election of members of the board under sub -section ( 2) of section 45 through secret ballot;  
(l) the nomination of members under the second proviso to sub -section  (1) of section 48;  
(m) the additional measures and acts which may be  taken or, as  the case may be, done by the 
board under section 49;  
(n) the salary and allowances payable to and other terms and  conditions of the Chief Executive 
under sub -section ( 3) of section 51;  
(o) the conditions subject to which the board may constit ute an  Executive Committee and other 
committees or  sub-committees under  sub-section ( 1) of section 53;  
(p) the persons by whom and the form in which copies of entries  in books of multi -State  co-
operative  societies may be certified  under section 58 and the charges to be levied for the supply of  
such copies;  
(q) providing aid to multi -State  co-operative societies on certain  terms and conditions under 
clause ( g) of section 61;  
(r) the conditions under which profits may be distributed to the  members of a multi -State co -
operative  society and the  maximum rate of dividend which may be paid by the multi -State co-
operative  societies under section 63;  
(s) establishment of contributory provident fund under sub -section  (1) of section 69;  
(t) the manner of disposin g of the surplus under clause ( k) of sub -section  (2) of section 90;  
(u) the manner in which surplus assets be divided by the Central  Registrar with the previous 
sanction of the Central  Government under clause ( b) of section 91;  
(v) the appellate authority to be specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 99;  
(w) the procedure under section 103 for reconstitution and  reorganisation of societies which 
became the multi -State co -operative  societies consequent on reorganisation of states;  
(x) the inspection of records of the society on payment of fees  under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 107;  
(y) any other matter which is required to be , or may be , prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, bef ore each 
House of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in  
one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before  the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successiv e sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree that the rule  should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in  such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so,  however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without  prejudi ce to the validity of 
anything previously done under that rule.  
125. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act,  the Central Government may, by order published in the Official  Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions  of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the  difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the  expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
126. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Multi -State  Co-operative Societies Act, 1984 (51 of 1984)  is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Without prejudice to the pro visions contained in the General  Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with 
respect to repeals, any  notifications, rule, order, requirement, registration, certificate,  notice, decision, 
direction, approval, authorisation, consent,  application, request or thing ma de, issued given or done under 
the Multi -State  Co-operative Societies Act, 1984 (51 of 1984) shall, if in  force at the commencement of 45 
 this Act, continue to be in force and  have effect as if made, issued given or done under the  corresponding 
provisions of this Act.  
(3) Every multi -State  co-operative society existing immediately before  the commencement of this Act 
which has been registered under the  Co-operative  Societies Act, 1912 (2 of 1912) or under any other Act  
relating to co-operative societies in forc e, in any State or in  pursuance of the provisions of the Multi -unit 
Co-operative  Societies  Act, 1942 (6 of 1942), or the Multi -State  Co-operative  Societies Act,  1984 (51 of 
1984) shall be deemed to be registered under the  corresponding provisions of this A ct, and the bye -laws 
of such  society shall, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the  provisions of this Act, or the rules, 
continue to be in force until  altered or rescinded.  
(4) All appointments, rules and orders made, all notifications and  notices  issued and all suits and 
other proceedings instituted under  any of the Acts referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall, in so far as they  are 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to  have been respectively made, issued and 
instituted under  this Act,  save that an order made cancelling the registration of a multi -State co -operative  
society shall be deemed, unless the society has  already been finally liquidated, to be an order made under 
section  86 for its being wound up.  
(5) The provis ions of  this Act shall apply to — 
(a) any application for registration of a multi -State co -operative society;  
(b) any application for registration of amendment of bye -laws of a  multi -State  co-operative  
society,  pending at the commencement of this Act and to the pr oceedings  consequent thereon and to 
any registration granted in pursuance  thereof.  
(6) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, any legal proceeding  pending in any court or before the 
Central Registrar or any other  authority at the commencement of this Act shall be continued to be  in that 
court or before the Central Registrar or that authority as if this  Act had not been passed.  
  46 
 THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 3( g)] 
CO-OPERATIVE PRINCIPLES  
1. Voluntary and Open Membership .—Co-operative s are voluntary organisations, open to all 
persons capable of using  their services and willing to accept the responsibilities of membership, without  
discrimination on bases of gender, social inequality, racial, political ideologies  or religious consideration.  
2. Democrati c Member Control .—Co-operative s are democratic organisations controlled by their 
members, who  actively participate in setting their policies and decision making. Elected  representatives of 
these co-operative s are responsible and accountable to their  member s. 
3. Member’s Economic Participation .—Members contribute equitable and control the capital of 
their Co-operative democratically. At least a part of the surplus arising out of the economic results  would 
be the common property of the co-operative s. The rema ining surplus could  be utilised benefiting the 
members in proportion to their share in the  Co-operative . 
4. Autonomy and Independence .—Co-operative s are autonomous, self -help organisations 
controlled by their  members. If co-operative s enter into agreement with other organisations  including 
Government or raise capital from external sources, they do so on  terms that ensure their democratic 
control by members and maintenance of  Co-operative  autonomy.  
5. Education, Training and Information .—Co-operative s provide education and training to their 
members, elected  representatives and employees so that they can contribute effectively to the  
development of their Co-operative s. They also make the general public,  particularly young people and 
leaders aware of the  nature and benefits of  co-operation.  
6. Co -operation among Co-operative s.—Co-operative s serve their members most effectively and 
strengthen the  co-operative movement, by working together through available local, regional,  national 
and international struct ures.  
7. Concern for Community .—While focusing on the needs of their members, co-operative s work for 
the sustainable development of communities through policies accepted by their  members.  
  47 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section s 3(r) and 116]  
LIST OF NATIONAL CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES  
1. National Co-operative  Land Development Banks Federation Limited, Mumbai . 
2. National Federation of State Co-operative  Banks Limited, Mumbai . 
3. National Co-operative Union of India Limited, New Delhi . 
4. National Agricultural Co-operative  Marketing Federation of India Limited, New  Delhi . 
5. National Co-operative  Consumer’s Federation of India Limited, New Delhi . 
6. National Federation of Co-operative Sugar Factories Limited, New Delhi . 
7. National Federation of Industrial Co-operative  Limited, New Delhi . 
8. National Co-operative  Housing Federation Limited, New Delhi . 
9. Indian Farmer’s Fertiliser Co-operative  Limited, New Delhi . 
10. All India Federation of Co-operative Spinning Mills Limited, Mumbai . 
11. All India Industrial Co-operative  Banks Federation Limited,  Bangalore . 
12. National Co-operative  Dairy Federation of India Limited, Anand . 
13. Petrofils Co-operative Limited, Vadodara . 
14. National Heavy Engineering Co-operative  Limited, Pune . 
15. All India Handloom Fabrics Marketing Co-operative  Society Limited, New Delhi . 
16. National Federation of Urban Co-operative Banks and Credit Societies Limited,  New Delhi . 
17. Krishak Bharati Co-operative  Limited, New Delhi . 
18. National Federation of Fishermen’s Co-operative Limited, New Delhi . 
19. National Federation of Labour Co-operative Limited , New Delhi . 
20. National Co-operative Tobacco Grower’s Federation, Anand . 
21. Tribal Co-operative Marketing Development Federation of India Limited, New  Delhi . 
--------------------------The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE SECURITISATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF FINANCIAL ASSETS AND 
ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST ACT, 2002  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF SECURITISATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF FINANCIAL ASSETS OF BANKS AND 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  
3. Registratio n of asset reconstruction companies . 
4. Cancellation of certificate of registration.  
5. Acquisition of rights or interest in financial assets.  
5A. Transfer of pending applications to any one of Debts Recovery Tribunals in certain cases.  
6. Notice to obligor and discharge  of obligation of such obligor.  
7. Issue of security by raising of receipts or funds by asset reconstruction company . 
8. Exemption from registration of security receipt.  
9. Measures for assets reconstruction.  
10. Other functions of asset reconstruction company . 
11. Resolution of disputes.  
12. Power of Reserve B ank to determine policy and issue directions.  
12A. Power of Reserve Bank to call  for statements and information.  
12B. Power of Reserve Bank to carry out audit and inspection.  
 
CHAPTER III  
ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST  
13. Enforcement of security interest.  
14. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate to assist secured creditor in  taking 
possession of secured asset.  
15. Manner and effect of take over of management.  
16. No compensation to directors for loss of office.  
17. Application against measures to recover secured debts . 
17A. Making of application to Court of District Judge in certain case s. 
18. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.  
18A. Validation of fees levied.  
18B. Appeal to High Court in certain cases.  
18C. Right to lodge a caveat.  2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Right of borrower to receive compensation and costs in certain cases.  
CHAPTER IV  
CENTRAL  REGISTRY  
20. Central Registry.  
20A. Integration of registration systems with Central Registry.  
20B. Delegation of powers.  
21. Central Registrar.  
22. Register of securitisation, reconstruction and security interest transactions.  
23. Filing of transactions of securitisation, reconstruction and creation of security interest.  
24. Modification of security interest registered under this Act.  
25. Asset reconstruction company or secured creditors to report satisfaction of security interest.  
26. Right to inspect particulars of securitisation, reconstruction and  security interest transactions.  
26A.Rectification by Central Government in matters of registration, modification and satisfaction, 
etc. 
CHAPTER IVA  
REGISTRATION BY SECURED CREDITORS AND OTHER CREDITORS  
26B.  Registration by secured creditors and other creditors.  
26C. Effect of the registration of transactions , etc. 
26D. Right of enforcement of securities.  
26E. Priority to secured creditors.  
 
CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
27. Penalties.  
28. [Omitted .] 
29. Offences.  
30. Cognizance of offence.  
30A. Power of adjudicating authority to impose penalty.  
30B.  Appeal against penalties.  
30C. Appellate Authority.  
30D. Recovery of penalties.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases.  
31A. Power to exempt a class or classes of banks or financial institutions.  
32. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
33. Offences by companies.  
34. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.  
35. The provisions of this Act to override other laws.  
36. Limitation.  
37. Application of other laws  not barred.  3 
 SECTIONS  
38. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
39. Certain provisions of this Act to apply after Central Registry is set up or cause to be set up.  
40. Power to remove difficulties.  
41. Amendments to certain enactments.  
42. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  4 
 THE SECURITISATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF FINANCIAL ASSETS  
AND  ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY INTEREST ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 54 OF 2002  
 [17th December , 2002.]  
1[An Act to regulate securitisation and reconstruction of financial assets and enforcement of 
security  interest and to provide for a Central database of security interests created on property 
rights, and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.]  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Securitisation and 
Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall be deemed to have  come into force on the 21st day of June, 2002.  
2. Definitions .—(1) In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Appellate Tribunal ” means a Debts Recovery Appellate Tribunal established under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 8 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Insti tutions Act, 
1993 (51 of 1993);  
(b) “asset reconstruction ” means acquisition by any 2[asset reconstruction company ]of any right 
or interest of any bank or financial institution in any financial assistance for the purpo se of realisatio n 
of such financial assistance;  
3[(ba) “asset reconstruction company ” means a company registered with Reserve Bank under 
section 3 for the purposes of carrying on the business of asset reconstruction or securitisation, or 
both;]  
(c) “bank ” means— 
(i) a banking company; or  
(ii) a corresponding new bank; or  
(iii) the State Bank of India; or  
(iv) a subsidiary bank; or  
4[(iva) a multi -State co -operative bank; or]  
(v) such other bank which the Central Government may, by notification, specif y for  the 
purposes of this Act;  
(d) “banking company ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( c) of section 5 of the 
Banking Reg ulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 2, for the long title (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Ins. by Act 1 of 2013, s. 2 (w. e.f. 15 -1-2013).  5 
 (e) “Board ” means the Securities and Exchange Board of India established under section 3 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board o f India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992);  
(f) “borrower ” means any person who has been granted financial assistance by any bank or 
financial instituti on or who has given any guarantee or created any mortgage or pledge as security for 
the financial assistance grante d by any bank or financial insti tution and includes a person who 
becomes borrower of a 1[asset reconstruction company ]consequent upon acquisi tion by it of any 
rights or interest of any bank or financial institution in relatio n to such financial assistance2[or who 
has raised funds through issue of debt securities] ; 
(g) “Central Registry ” means the registry set up or cause to be set up under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 20;  
2[(ga) “company ” means a company as defined in clause ( 20) of section 2 of the Companies  
Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) ;] 
(h) “corresponding new bank ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( da) of section 5 of 
the Banking  Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949);  
3[(ha) “debt” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( g) of section 2 of the Recovery of 
Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993  (51 of 1993)  and includes — 
(i) unpaid portion of the purchase price of any tangible asset given on hire or financial lease 
or conditional sa le or under any other contract;  
(ii) any right, title or interest on any intangible asset or licence or assignment of such 
intangible asset, which secures the obligation to pay a ny unpaid portion of the purchase price of 
such intangible asset or an obligation incurred or credit otherwise extended to enable any 
borrower to acquire the intangible asset or  obtain licence of such asset;]  
(i) “Debts Recovery Tribunal ” means the Tribuna l established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 
of the Recovery of Debts due to Banks and Financial Insti tutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993);  
2[(ia) “debt securities ” means debt securities listed in accordance with the regulations made by 
the Board under the S ecurities and Exchange Board of India Act,1992  (15 of 1992) ;] 
4[(j) “default ” means — 
(i) non -payment of any debt or any other amount payable by the borrower to any secured 
creditor consequent upon which the account of such borrower is classified as non-performing 
asset in the books of acco unt of the secured creditor; or  
(ii) non -payment of any debt or any other amount payable by the borrower with respect to 
debt securities after notice of ninety days demanding payment of dues served upon such borrowe r 
by the debenture trustee or any other authority in whose favour security interest is created for the 
benefit of holders of such debt securities;]  
(k) “financial assistance ” means any loan or advance granted or any debentures or bonds 
subscribed or any gu arantees given or letters of credit established or any other credit facility extended 
by any  bank or financial institution2[including funds provided for the purpose of acquisition of any 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3 , for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Ins. by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( ha) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  6 
 tangible asset on hire or financial lease or conditional sale or unde r any other contract or obtaining 
assignment or licence of any intangible asset o r purchase of debt securities;]  
(l) “financial asset ” means de bt or receivables and includes — 
(i) a claim to any debt or receivables or part thereof, w hether secured or unsecured; or  
(ii) any debt or receivables secured by, mortgage of, or charge on, immovable property; or  
(iii) a mortgage, charge, hypothecation or  pledge of movable property; or  
(iv) any right or interest in the security, whether full or part underlyi ng s uch debt or 
receivables; or  
(v) any beneficial interest in property, whether movable or immovable, or in such debt, 
receivables, whether such interest is existing, future, accruing , conditional or contingent; or  
1[(va) any beneficial right, title or interest in any tangible asset given on hire or financial lease 
or conditional sale or under any other contract which secures the obligation to pay any unpaid 
portion of the purchase price of such asset or an obligation inc urred or credit otherwise provided 
to enable the borrower to acquire such tangible asset; or  
(vb) any right, title or interest on any intangible asset or licence or assignment of such 
intangible asset, which secures the obligation to pay any unpaid portion  of the purchase price of 
such intangible asset or an obligation incurred or credit otherwise extended to enable the 
borrower to acquire such intangible asset or obtain licence of the intangible asset; or ] 
(vi) any financial assistance;  
(m)“financial insti tution ” means— 
(i) a public financial institution within the meaning of section 4A of the C ompanies Act, 1956 
(1 of 1956);  
(ii) any institution specified by the Central Government under sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( h) of 
section 2 of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993  
(51 of 1993);  
(iii) the International Finance Corporation established under the International Finance 
Corporation (Status, Immunities and Privi leges ) Act, 1958 (42 of 1958);  
1[(iiia) a debenture trustee registered with the Board and appointed for secured debt 
securities;  
(iiib) asset reconstruction company, whether acting as such or managing a trust created for 
the purpose of securitisation or asset reconstruction, a s the case may be;]  
(iv) any other institution or non -banking financial company as defined in clause ( f) of section 
45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934), which the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify as financial institutio n for the purposes of this Act;  
1[(ma) “financial lease ” means a lease under any lease agreement of tangible asset, other than 
negotiable instrument or negotiable document, for transfer of lessor's right therein to the lessee for a 
certain time in consideration of payment of agreed amount periodically and where  the lessee becomes 
the owner of the such assets at the expiry of the term of lease or on payment of the agreed residual 
amount, as the case may be ;] 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  7 
 (n) “hypothecation ” means a charge in or upon any movable property, existing or future, created 
by a borro wer in favour of a secured creditor without delivery of possession of the movable property 
to such creditor, as a security for financial assistance and includes floating charge and crystallization 
of such charge into fixe d charge on movable property;  
1[(na) “negotiable document ” means a document, which embodies a right to delivery of tangible 
assets and satisfies the requirements for negotiability under any law for the time being in force 
including warehou se receipt and bill of lading;]  
(o) “non-performing asset ” means an asset or account of a borrower, which has been classified by 
a bank or financial institution as sub -standard, 2[doubtful or loss asset, — 
(a) in case such bank or financial institution is administered or regulated by any authority or 
body established, constituted or appointed by any law for the time being in force, in accordance 
with the directions or guidelines relating to assets classifications issued by such authority or body;  
(b) in any other case, in accordance with the directions or g uidelines relating to assets 
classificatio ns issued by the Reserve Bank ]; 
(p) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(q) “obligor ” means a person liable to the originator, whether under a contract or otherwise, to 
pay a financial asset or to discharge any obligation in respect of a financial asset, whether existing, 
future, conditional or contin gent and includes the bor rower;  
(r) “originator ” means the owner of a financi al asset which is acquired by a 3[asset reconstruction 
company ]for the purpose of securiti sation or asset reconstruction;  
(s) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(t) “property ” means— 
(i) immo vable property;  
(ii) movable property;  
(iii) any debt or any right to receive payment of money , whether secured or unsecured;  
(iv) receivabl es, whether existing or future;  
(v) intangible assets, being know -how, patent, copyright, trade mark, licence, franchise or any 
other business or comm ercial right of similar nature1[as may be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with Reserve Bank] ; 
(u) “4[qualified buyer ]” means a financial institution, insurance company, bank, state 
financial corporation, state industrial development corporation, 2[trustee or 3[asset reconstruction 
company ]which has been granted a certificate of registration under sub -section ( 4) of sectio n 3 or 
any asset management company making investment on behalf of mutual fund] or a foreign 
institutional investor registered under the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992  
(15 of 1992) or regulations made thereunder,1[any category of non-institutional investors as may 
be specified by the Reserve Bank under sub -section ( 1) of section 7]  or any other body corporate 
as may be specified by the Board;  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 2, for certain words (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
3. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisati on company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “qualified institutional buyer” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  8 
 1*   *   *  *  * 
(w) “Registrar of Companies ” means the Registrar defined in clause ( 40) of section 2 of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(x) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the Reserve 
Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(y) “scheme ” means a scheme inviting subscription to security receipts proposed to be issued by a 
2[asset reconstruction company ]under that scheme;  
(z) “securitisation ” means acquisition of financial assets by any 2[asset reconstruction 
company ]from any originator, whether by raising of funds by such 2[asset reconstruction 
company ]from 3[qualified buyers ]by issue of security receipts representing undivided interest in such  
financial assets or otherwise;  
1*   *   *   *  * 
(zb) “security agreement ” means an agreement, instrument or any other document or arrangement 
under which security interest is created in favour of the secured creditor including the creation of 
mortgage by deposit of title deeds w ith the secured credito r; 
(zc) “secured asset ” means the property on whic h security interest is created;  
4[(zd) “secured creditor ” means — 
(i) any bank or financial institution or any consortium or group of banks or financial 
institutions holding any right, title or interest upon any tangible asset or intangible as set as 
specified in clause ( l); 
(ii) debenture trustee appointed by any ba nk or financial institution; or  
(iii) an asset reconstruction company whether acting as such or managing a trust set up by 
such asset reconstruction company for the secu ritisation or reconstruction, as the case may be; or  
(iv) debenture trustee registered with the Board appointed by any company for secured debt 
securities; or  
(v) any other trustee holding securities on behalf of a  bank or financial institution,  
in whose f avour security interest is created by any borrower for due repaymen t of any financial 
assistance.]  
(ze) “secured debt ” means a debt which is se cured by any security interest;  
5[(zf) “security interest ” means right, title or interest of any kind, other than  those specified in 
section 31, upon property created in favour of any  secured creditor and includes — 
(i) any mortgage, charge, hypothecation, assignment or any right, title or interest of any kind, 
on tangible asset, retained by the secured creditor as an  owner of the property, given on hire or 
financial lease or conditional sale or under any other contract which secures the obligation to pay 
any unpaid portion of the purchase price of the asset or an obligation incurred or credit provided 
to enable the bo rrower to acquire t he tangible asset; or   
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 44 of 2016, s. 4 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3,ibid.,for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “qualified institutional buyers” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( zd) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by s. 4, ibid., for clause ( zf) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  9 
 (ii) such right, title or interest in any intangible asset or assignment or licence of such 
intangible asset which secures the obligation to pay any unpaid portion of the purchase price of 
the intangible asset or t he obligation incurred or any credit provided to enable the borrower to 
acquire the intangible asset o r licence of intangible asset;]  
(zg) “security receipt ” means a receipt or other security, issued by a 1[asset reconstruction 
company ]to any 2[qualified buyer ]pursuant to a scheme, evidencing the purchase or acquisition by th e 
holder thereof, of an undivide d right, title or interest in the financial asset involved in securitisation;  
 (zh) “sponsor ” means any person holding not less than ten per cent. of the paid -up equity capital 
of a 1[asset reconstruction company ]; 
(zi) “State Bank of India ” means the State Bank of India constituted under section 3 of the State 
Bank o f India Act, 1955 (23 of 1955) ; 
(zj) “subsidiary bank ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( k) of section 2 of the State 
Bank of India (Subsidiary  Banks) Act, 1959 (38 of 1959).  
(2) Words and expressions used and not defined in this Act but defined in the Indian Contract Ac t, 
1872 (9 of 1872) or the transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882) or the Companies Act, 1956  
(1 of 1956) or the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act 1992 (15 of 1992) shall have the same 
meanings respectively assigned to them in those Acts.  
CHAP TER II  
REGULATION OF SECURITISATION AND RECONSTRUCTION OF FINANCIAL ASSETSOF BANKSAND 
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS  
3. Registration of 3[asset reconstruction companies] .—(1) No 1[asset reconstruction company ]shall 
commence or carry on the business of securitisation o r asset reconstruction without — 
(a) obtaining a certificate of registration granted under this section; and  
4[(b) having net owned fund of not less than two crore rupees or such other higher amount as the 
Reserve Bank, may, by notification, specify;]  
Provid ed that the Reserve Bank may, by notification, specify different amounts of owned fund for 
different class or classes of 3[asset reconstruction companies ]: 
Provided further that a 1[asset reconstruction company] , existing on the commencement of this Act, 
shall make an application for registration to the Reserve Bank before the expiry of six months from such 
commencement and notwithstanding anything  contained in thissub -section may continue to carry on the 
busines s of securitisation or asset reconstruction until a certificate of registration is granted to it or, as the 
case may be, rejection of application for registration is communicated t o it. 
(2) Every 1[asset reconstruction company] shall make an application for  registration to the Reserve 
Bank in such for m and manner as it may specify.  
(3) The Reserve Bank may, for the purpose of considering the application for registration of a 1[asset 
reconstruction company] to commence or carry on the business of securitisation or asset reconstruction, as 
the case may be, require to be satisfied, by an inspection of records or books of such 1[asset reconstruction 
company] , or otherwise, that the following con ditions are fulfi lled, namely: — 
(a) that the 1[asset reconstruction company] has not incurred losses in any of the th ree preceding 
financial years;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3,ibid.,for “qualified institutional buyer” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 3,ibid., for “securitisation companies or reconstruction companies” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  10 
 (b) that such 1[asset reconstruction company] has made adequate arrangements for realisation of 
the financial assets acquired f or the purpose of securitisation or asset reconstruction and shall be able 
to pay periodical returns and redeem  on respective due dates on the investments made in the company 
by the 2[qualified buyers ]or other persons;  
(c) that the directors of 1[asset reconstruction company] have adequate professional experience in 
matters related to finance, sec uritisation and reconstruction;  
3*   *   *  *   * 
(e) that any of its directors has not been convicted of any off ence involving moral turpitude;  
4[(f) that a sponsor of an asset reconstruction company is a fit and proper person in accordance 
with the criteria as may be specified in the guidelines issued by the Reserve Bank for such persons;]  
(g) that1[asset reconstruction company] has complied with or is in a po sition to comply with 
prudential norms  specified by the Reserve Bank;  
5[(h) that 1[asset reconstruction company] has complied with one or more conditions specified in 
the guidelines issued by the Rese rve Bank for the said purpose.]  
(4) The Reserve Bank may,  after being satisfied that the conditions specified in sub -section ( 3) are 
fulfilled, grant a certificate of registration to the 6[asset reconstruction company ]to commence or  carry on 
business of securitisa tion or asset reconstruction, subject to such con ditions, which it may consider, fit to 
impose.  
(5) The Reserve Bank may reject the application made under sub -section ( 2) if it is satisfied that the 
conditions specified in sub -section ( 3) are not fulfilled:  
Provided that before rejecting the application,  the applicant shall be given a reasona ble opportunity of 
being heard.  
(6) Every 1[asset reconstruction company] shall obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank for any 
substantial change in its management7[including appointment of any director on the board of directors of 
the asset reconstruction company or managing director or chief executive officer thereof] or change of 
location of its registered office or change in its name:  
Provided that the decision of  the Reserve Bank, whether the change in management of a 8[asset 
reconstruction company ]is a substantial change in its management or not, shall be final.  
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression “substantial change in management ” 
mean s the change in the management by way of transfer of shares or  9[change affecting the sponsorship in 
in the company by way of transfer of shares or] amalgamation or transfer of the business of the company.  
4. Cancellation of certificate of registration .—(1) The Reserve Bank may cancel a certificate of 
registration granted to a 8[asset reconstruction company ], if such company — 
(a) ceases to carry on the business of securitisation or asset reconstruction; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. bys. 3,ibid.,for “qualified institutional buyers” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for clause ( f) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Ins. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 3 (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
6. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s.  3, for “securitisation company or the reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
7. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
8. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “securitisation company or a reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
9. Ins. by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-9-2016).  11 
 (b) ceases to receive or hold any investment from a 1[qualifie dbuyer ]; or 
(c) has failed to comply with any conditions subject to which the certificate of registration has 
been granted to it; or  
(d) at any time fails to fulfil any of the conditions referred to in clauses ( a) to ( g) of s ub-section 
(3) of section 3; or  
(e) fails to— 
(i) comply with any direction issued by the Reserve Bank under the provisions of this Act; or  
(ii) maintain accounts in accordance with the requirements of any law or any direction or 
order issued by the Reserve Bank under  the p rovisions of this Act; or  
(iii) submit or offer for inspection its books of account or other relevant documents when so 
demanded by the Reserve Bank; or  
(iv) obtain prior approval of the Reserve Bank required under sub -section ( 6) of section 3:  
Provided that before cancelling a certificate of regi stration on the ground that the 2[asset 
reconstruction company ] has failed to comply with the provisions of clause ( c) or has failed to fulfil any 
of the  conditions referred to in claus e (d) or sub -clause ( iv) of clause ( e), the Reserve Bank, unless it is of 
the opinion that the delay in cancelling the certificate of registration granted under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 3 shall be prejudicial to the public interest or the interests of the investors or the 
3[asset  reconstruction company ], shall give an opportunity to such company on such terms as the Reserve 
Bank may specify for taking n ecessary steps to comply with su ch provisions or  fulfilment of such 
conditions.  
(2) A 2[asset reconstruction company ]aggrieved by the order of 4*** cancellation of certificate of 
registration may prefer an appeal, within a period of thirty days from the date on which 5[such orde r of 
cancellation ] is communicated to  it, to the Central Government:  
Provided that before reje cting an appeal such company shall be given a reasona ble opportunity of 
being heard.  
(3) A 2[asset reconstruction company ], which is holding investments of 6[qualified buyers ]and whose 
application for grant of certificate of registration has been rejected or certificate of registration has been 
cancelled shal l, notwithstanding such rejection or cancellation be deemed to be a 2[asset reconstruction 
company ]until it repays the entire investments held by it (together with interest, if any) within such period 
as the Reserve Bank may direct.  
5. Acquisition of rights o r interest in financial assets .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in 
any agreement or any other law for the time being in force, any 2[asset reconstruction company ]may 
acquire financial assets of an y bank o r financial institution — 
(a) by issuing a debenture or bond or any other security in the nature of debenture, for 
consideration agreed upon between such company and the bank or financial institution, incorporating 
therein such terms and condit ions as may be agreed upon between them; or  
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “qualified institutional buyer” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3,ibid.,for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “securitisation company or the  reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. The words “rejection of application for registration or” omitted by Act 30 of 2004, s. 4 (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
5. Subs. by s. 4,ibid.,for “such order of rejection or cancellation” (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
6. Subs. b y Act 44 of 2016, s. 3,for “qualified institutional buyers” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  12 
 (b) by entering into an agreement with such bank or financial institution for the transfer of such 
financial assets to such company on such terms and conditions as may be agreed upon between them.  
1[(1A) Any document executed by any bank or financial institution under sub -section ( 1) in favour of 
the asset reconstruction company acquiring financial assets for the purposes of asset reconstruction or 
securitisation shall be exempted from stamp duty in accordance  with the provisions of section 8F  of the 
Indian Stamp Act, 1899  (2 of 1899) : 
Provided that the provisions of this sub -section shall not apply where the acquisition of the financial 
assets by the asset reconstruction company is for the purposes other than asset rec onstruction or 
securitisation.]  
(2) If the bank or financial institution is a lender in relation to any financial assets acquired under  
sub-section ( 1) by the 2[asset reconstruction company ], such 3[asset reconstruction company ]shall, on 
such acqu isition , be deemed to be the lender and all the rights of such bank or financial institution shall 
vest in such company in rel ation to such financial assets.  
1[(2A) If the bank or financial institution is holding any right, title or interest upon any t angible asset 
or intangible asset to secure payment of any unpaid portion of the purchase price of such asset or an 
obligation incurred or credit otherwise provided to enable the borrower to acquire the tangible asset or 
assignment or licence of intangible  asset, such right, title or interest shall vest in the asset reconstruction 
company on acquisition of such assets under sub -section ( 1).] 
(3) Unless otherwise expressly provided by this Act, all contracts, deeds, bonds, agreements, powers -
of-attorney, grants of legal representation, permissions, approvals, consents or no -objections under any 
law or otherwise and other instruments of whateve r nature which relate to the said financial asset and 
which are subsisting or having effect immediately before the acquisition of financial asset under  
sub-section ( 1) and to which the concerned bank or financial institutio n is a party or which are in fa vour 
of such bank or financial institution shall, after the acquisition of the financial assets, be of as full force 
and effect against or in favour of the 3[asset reconstruction company ], as the case may be, and may be 
enforced or acted upon as fully and effe ctually as if, in the place of the said bank or financial institution, 
3[asset reconstruction company ], as the case may be, had been a party thereto or as if they had been issued 
in favour of 3[asset reconstruction company ], as the case may be.  
(4) If, on the date of acquisition of financial asset under sub -section ( 1), any suit, appeal or other 
proceeding of whatever nature relating to the said financial asset is pending by or against the bank or 
financial institution, save as provided in the third proviso  to sub -section ( 1) of section 15 of the Sick 
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986) the same shall not abate, or be 
discontinued or be, in any way, prejudicially affected by reason of t he acquisition of financial asse t by 
the3[asset reconstruction company ], as the case may be, but the suit, appeal or other proceeding may be 
continued, prosecuted and enforced by or against the 3[asset reconstruction company ], as the case may be.  
4[(5) On acquisition of financial assets under sub -section (1), the 3[asset reconstruction company ], 
may with the consent of the originator, file an application before the Debts Recovery Tribunal or the 
Appellate Tribunal or any court or other Authority for th e purpose of substitution of its name in any 
pending suit, appeal or other proceedings and on receipt of such application, such Debts Recovery 
Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal or court or Authority shall pass orders for the substitution of the 3[asset 
reconstruction company ]in such pending suit, appeal or other proceedings.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “securitisation company or the reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Ins. by Act 1 of 2013, s. 3 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2013).  13 
 1[5A.Transfer of pending applications to any one of Debts RecoveryTribunals in certain 
cases .—(1) If any financial asset, of a borroweracquired by a 2[asset reconstruction company ],comprise of 
secured debts of more than one bank or financialinstitution for recovery of which such banks or financial 
institutionshas filed applications before two o r more Debts Recovery Tribunals the2[asset reconstruction 
company ]may file anapplication t o the Appellate Tribunal having jurisdiction over any ofsuch Tribunals 
in which such applications are pending for transfer ofall pending applications to any one of the Debts 
Recovery Tribunals asit deems fit.  
(2) On receipt of such application for transfer  of all pendingapplications under sub -section ( 1), the 
Appellate Tribunal may, aftergiving the parties to the application an opportunity of being heard,pass an 
order for transfer of the pending applications to any one ofthe Debts Recovery Tribunals.  
(3) No twithstanding anything contained in the Recovery of Debts Due toBanks and Financial 
Institutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993), any orderpassed by the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 2) shall 
be bindingon all the Debts Recovery Tribunals referred to in sub -section ( 1) asif such order had been 
passed by the Appellate Tribunal havingjurisdiction on each such Debts Recovery Tribunal.  
(4) Any recovery certificate, issued by the Debts Recovery Tribunal towhich all the pending 
applications are transferred under su b-section( 2), shall be executed in accordance with the provisions 
contained insub -section ( 23) of section 19 and other provisions of the Recovery ofDebts Due to Banks 
and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993)shall, accordi ngly, apply to such execut ion.] 
6. Notice to obligor and discharge of obligation of  such obligor .—(1) The bank or financial 
institution may, if it considers appropriate, give a notice of acquisition of financial assets by any 2[asset 
reconstruction company ], to the con cerned  obligor and any other concerned person and to the concerned 
registering authority (including Registrar of Companies) in whose jurisdiction the mortgage, charge, 
hypothecation, assignment or other interest created on t he financial assets had been re gistere d. 
(2) Where a notice of acquisition of financial asset under sub -section ( 1) is given by a bank or 
financial institution, the obligor, on receipt of such notice, shall make payment to the concerned 2[asset 
reconstruction company ], as the ca se may be, and payment made to such company in discharge of any of 
the obligations in relation to the financial asset specified in the notice shall be a full discharge to the 
obligor making the payment from all liability in respect of such payment.  
(3) Where no notice of  acquisition of financial asset under sub -section ( 1) is given by any bank or 
financial institution, any money or other properties subsequently received by the bank or financial 
institution, shall constitute monies or properties hel d in trust for the benef it of and on behalf of the 2[asset 
reconstruction company ], as the case may be, and such bank or financial institution shall hold such 
payment or property which shall forthwith be made over or delivered to 2[asset reconstruction company ], 
as the case may be, or its agent duly authorised in this behalf.  
7. Issue of security by raising of receipts or funds by 2[asset reconstruction company ].—(1) 
Without prejudice to the provisions contained in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of  1956),  the Securities  
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956) and the Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 
(15 of 1992), any 2[asset reconstruction company ], may, after acquisition of any financial asset under sub -
section ( 1) of section 5, offer security rece ipts to qualified institutebuyers3[or such other category of 
investors including non -institutional investors as may be specified by the Reserve Bank in consultation 
with the Board, from time to time, ] for subscription in accordance with the provisions of t hose Acts.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 5 (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisation company or reconstruct ion company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for “ (other than by offer to public) ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  14 
 (2) A 1[asset reconstruction company ]may raise funds from the 2[qualified buyers ]by formulating 
schemes for acquiring financial assets and shall keep and maintain separate and distinct accounts in 
respect of each such scheme for every financial asset acquired out of investments made by a 3[qualified 
buyer ]and ensure that realisations o f such financial asset is held and applied towards redemption of 
investments and payment of returns assured on such investm ents und er the relevant scheme.  
4[(2A) (a) The scheme for the purpose of offering security receiptsunder sub -section ( 1) or raising 
funds under sub -section ( 2), may be inthe nature of a trust to be managed by the 1[asset reconstruction 
company ], and the 1[asset reconstruction company ]shall hold the assets so acquired or the fundsso raised 
for acquiring the assets, in trust for the bene fit of the2[qualified buyers ]holding the security receipts or 
fromwhom the funds are raised.  
(b) The provisions of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882) shall,except in so far as they are 
inconsistent with the provisions of thisAct, apply with respect to  the trust re ferred to in clause ( a) above.]  
(3) In the event of non -realisation under sub -section ( 2) of financial assets, the 2[qualified buyers]  of a 
1[asset reconstruction company ], holding security receipts of not less than seventy -five per cent. of the 
total value of the 5[security receipts issued under a scheme by such company ], shall be entitled to call a 
meeting of all the 2[qualified buyers] and every resolution passed in such m eeting s hall be binding on the 
company.  
(4) The 2[qualified buyers] shall, at a meeting called under sub -section ( 3), follow the same procedure, 
as nearly as possible as is followed at meetings of the board of directors of the 1[asset reconstruction 
company ], as the case may be.  
8. Exemption from re gistration of security receipt .—Notwithstanding anything contained in  
sub-section ( 1) of section 17 of the Regist ration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), — 
(a) any security receipt issued by the 1[asset reconstruction company ], as the case may be, under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 7, and not creating, declaring, assigning, limiting or extinguishing any right, 
title or interest, to or in immovable  property except in so far as it entitles the holder of the security 
receipt  to an undivided interest afforded  by a registered instrument; or  
(b) any transfer of security receipts, shall not require compulsory registration.  
6[9. Meas ures for assets reconstruction .—(1)Without prejudice to the provisions contained in any 
other law for the time being in force, an asset reconstruction company may, for the purposes of asset 
reconstruction, provide for any one or more of t he following measures, namely: — 
(a) the proper management of the business of the borrower, by change in, or take ove r of, the 
management o f the business of the borrower;  
(b) the sale or lease of a part or whole o f the business of the borrower;  
(c) rescheduling of payment of  debts payable by the borrower;  
(d) enforcement of security interest in accordance w ith the provis ions of this Act;  
(e) settlement o f dues payable by the borrower;  
(f) taking possession of secured assets in accordance w ith the provisions of this Act;  
(g) conversion of any portion of debt int o shares of a borrower company:   
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “qualified institutional buyers” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “qualified institutional buyer” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Ins. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 6 (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
5. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for “security receipts issued by such company”  (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
6. Subs. by  Act 44 of 2016, s. 8, for section 9 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  15 
 Provided that conversion of a ny part of debt into shares of a borrower company shall be deemed 
always to have been valid, as if the provisions of this clause were in force at all material times.  
(2) The Reserve Bank shall, for the purposes of sub -section ( 1), determine the policy and issue 
necessary directions including the direction for regulation of management of the business of the b orrower 
and fees to be charged.  
(3) The asset reconstruction company shall take measures under sub -section ( 1) in accordance with 
policies and direction s of the Reserve Bank det ermined under sub -section ( 2).] 
10. Other functions of 1[asset reconstruction company] .—(1) Any 1[asset reconstruction company ] 
regist ered under section 3 may — 
(a) act as an agent for any bank or financial institution for the purpose of recovering their dues 
from the borrower on payment of such fees or charges as may be mutually a greed upon between the 
parties;  
(b) act as a manager referred to in clause ( c) of sub -section ( 4) of section 13 on such fee as may 
be mutually a greed upon between the parties;  
(c) act as receiver if appo inted by any court or tribunal:  
Provided that no 1[asset reconstruction company ]shall act as a manager if acting as such gives r ise to 
any pecuniary liability.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section ( 1), no 1[asset reconstruction company ]which has been 
granted a certificate of registration under sub -section ( 4) of section 3, shall commence or carry on, 
without prior approval of the Reser ve Bank, any business other than that of securiti sation or asset 
reconstruction:  
Provided that a 1[asset reconstruction company ]which is carrying on, on or before the commencement 
of this Act, any business other than the business of securitisation or asset reconstruction or business 
referred to in sub-section ( 1), shall cease to carry on any such business within one year from the da te of 
commencement of this Act.  
Explanatio n.—For the purposes o f this section, “2[asset reconstruction company ]'' or “3[asset 
reconstruction company ]'' does not include its subsidiary.  
11. Resolution of disputes .—Where any dispute relating to securitisation or reconstruction or non -
payment of any amount due including interest arises amongst any of the parties, namely, the bank, or 
financial institution, o r 1[asset reconst ruction company ]or 4[qualified buyer ], such dispute shall be settled 
by conciliation or arbitration as provided in the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 (26 of 1996), as if 
the parties to the dispute have  consented in writing for deter mination  of such dispute by conciliation or 
arbitration and the provisions of that Act shall apply accordingly.  
12. Power of Reserve Bank to determi ne policy and issue directions .—(1) If the Reserve Bank is 
satisfied that in the public interest or to regulate financial system of the country to its advantage or to 
prevent the affairs of any 1[asset reconstruction company ] from being conducted in a manner detrimental 
to the interest of investors or in any manner prejudicial to the interest of such 1[asset reconstruction 
company ], it is necessary or ex pedient so to do, it may determine  the policy and give directions to all or 
any 1[asset reconstruction company ]in matters relating to incom e recognition, accounting standards, 
making provisions for bad and doubtful debts, capital adequac y based on risk weights for assets  and also 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. b ys. 3,ibid.,for “securitisation company” (w.e.f. 1-9-2016).  
3. Subs. by s. 3,ibid.,for “reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “qualified institutional buyer” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  16 
 relating to deployment of funds by the 1[asset reconstruction company ], as the case may be, and such 
company shall  be bound to follow the policy so determine d and the directions so issued.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power vested under sub -section ( 1), the Reserve Bank 
may give directions to any 1[asset reconstruction company ]generally or to a class of 2[asset reconstruction 
companies ]or to any 1[asset reconstruction company ]in pa rticular as to — 
 (a) the type of financial asset of a bank or financial institution which can be acquired and 
procedure for acquisition of suc h assets  and valuation thereof;  
(b) the aggregate value of financial assets which may be acquired by any 1[asset reconstruction 
company ]. 
3[(c) the fee and other charges which may be charged or incurred for management of financial 
assets acquired by any asset reconstruction company;  
(d) transfer of security receipts issued to qualified buyers.]  
4[12A.  Power of Reserve Bank to call for statements and information .—The Reserve Bank may 
at any time direct a 1[asset reconstruction company ]to furnish it within such time as may be specified by 
the Reserve Bank, with such statements and information relating to the business or affairs of such 1[asset 
reconstruction company ](including any business or affairs with which such company is concerned)  as the 
Reserve Bank may consider necessary or expedient to obtain for the purposes of this Act.]  
5[12B. Power of Reserve Bank to carry out audit and inspection .—(1) The Reserve Bank may, for 
the purposes of this Act, carry out or caused to be carried out audit and inspection of an asset 
reconstruc tion company from time to time.  
(2) It shall be the duty of an asset reconstruction company and its officers to provide assistance and 
cooperation to the Reserve Bank to carry out audit or in spection under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Where on audit or inspection or otherwise, the Reserve Bank is satisfied that business of an asset 
reconstruction company is being conducted in a manner detrimental to public interest or to the interests of 
investors in security receipts issued by such asset reconstruction company, the Reserve Bank may, for 
securing proper management of an asset recon struction company, by an order — 
(a) remove the Chairman or any director or appoint additional directors on the board of directors 
of the a sset reconstruction company; or  
(b) appoint any of its officers as an observer to observe the working of the board of directors of 
such asset reconstruction company:  
Provided that no order for removal of Chairman or director under clause ( a) shall be made except 
after giving him an opportunity of being heard.  
(4) It shall be the duty of every director or other officer or employee of the asset reconstruction 
company to produce before the person, conducting an audit or inspection under sub -section ( 1), all su ch 
books, accounts and other documents in his custody or control and to provide him such statements and 
information relating to the affairs of the asset reconstruction company as may be required by such person 
within the stipulated time specified by him.]  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e. f. 1-9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “securitisation companies or reconstruction companies” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Ins. by s. 9, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Ins. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 7 (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
5. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 10 (w.e.f. 1-9-2016).  17 
 CHAPTER III  
ENFORCEMENT OF SECURITY  INTEREST  
13. En forcement of security interest .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 69 or 
section 69A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882), any security interest created in favour of 
any secured  creditor m ay be enforced, without the int ervention  of the court or tribunal, by such creditor in 
accordance w ith the provisions of this Act.  
(2) Where any borrower, who is under a liability to a secured creditor under a security agreement, 
makes any defau lt in repayment of secured debt or any instalment thereof, and his account in respect of 
such debt is classified by the secured creditor as non-performing asset, then, the secured creditor may 
require the borrower by notice in writing to discharge in full his liabilities to the secured creditor within 
sixty days from the date of notice failing which the secured creditor shall be entitled to ex ercise all or any 
of the rights under sub -section ( 4). 
1[Provided that — 
(i) the requirement of classification of secured debt as non -performing asset under this  
sub-section shall not apply to a borrower who has raised funds through issue of debt securities; and  
(ii) in the event of default, the debenture trustee shall be entitl ed to enforce security interest in the 
same manner as provided under this section with such modifications as may be necessary and in 
accordance with the terms and conditions of security documents executed in favour of the debenture 
trustee. ] 
(3) The notice  referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall give details of the amount payable by the borrower 
and the secured assets intended to be enforced by the secured creditor in the event of non -payment of  
secured debts by the borrower.  
2[(3A) If, on receipt of the notic e under sub -section ( 2), the borrower makes any representation or 
raises any objection, the secured creditor shall consider such representation or objection and if the secured 
creditor comes to the conclusion that such representation or objection is not ac ceptable or tenable, he shall 
communicate 3[within fifteen days]  of receipt of such representation or objection the reasons for non -
acceptance of the representation or objection to the borrower:  
Provided that the reasons so communicated or the likely actio n of the secured creditor at the stage of 
communication of reasons shall not confer any right upon the borrower to prefer an application to the 
Debts Recovery Tribunal under section 17  or the Court of District Judge under section 17A.]  
(4) In case the borrower fails to discharge his liability in full within the period specified in  
sub-section ( 2), the secured creditor may take recourse to one or more of the following measures to 
recover his secured debt, namely: — 
(a) take possession of th e secured assets of the borrower including the right to transfer by way of 
lease, assignment or sale f or realising the secured asset;  
4[(b) take over the management of the business of the borrower including the right to transfer by 
way of lease, assignment  or sale for realising the secured asset:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 11 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Ins. by  Act 30 of 2004, s. 8(w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2013, s. 5, for “within one week” (w.e.f. 15 -1-2013).  
4. Subs. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 8, for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 11-11-2004).  18 
 Provided that the right to transfer by way of lease, assignment or sale shall be exercised only 
where the substantial part of the business of the borrower is held as security for the debt:  
Provided further that where the management of whole of the business or part of the business is 
severable, the secured creditor shall take over the management of such business of the borrower 
which is relatable to the security for the debt;]  
(c) appoint any  person (hereafter referred to as the manager), to manage the secured assets the 
possession of which has been take n over by the secured creditor;  
(d) require at any time by notice in writing, any person who has acquired any of the secured 
assets from the b orrower and from whom any money is due or may become due to the borrower, to 
pay the secured creditor, so much of the money as is suff icient to pay the secured debt.  
(5) Any payment made by any person referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section (4) to the secured 
creditor shall give such person a valid discharge as if he ha s made payment to the borrower.  
1[(5A) Where the sale of an immovable property, for which a reserve price has been specified, has 
been postponed for want of a bid of an amount not  less than such reserve price, it shall be lawful for any 
officer of the secured creditor, if so authorised by the secured creditor in this behalf, to bid for the 
immovable property on behalf of the secured creditor at any subsequent sale.  
(5B) Where the s ecured creditor, referred to in sub -section (5A), is declared to be the purchaser of the 
immovable property at any subsequent sale, the amount of the purchase price shall be adjusted towards 
the amount of the claim of the secured creditor for which the auction of enforcement of security interest is 
taken  by the secured creditor, under sub -section (4) of section 13.  
(5C)The provisions of section 9 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) shall, as far as may 
be, apply to the immovable property acquired by secured cre ditor under sub -section ( 5A).] 
(6) Any transfer of secured asset after taking possession thereof  or take over of management under 
sub-section ( 4), by the secured creditor or by the manager on behalf of the secured creditor shall vest in 
the transferee all rights in, or in relation to, th e secured asset transferred as if the transfer had been made 
by the owner of such secured asset.  
(7) Where any action has been taken against a borrower under the provisions of sub -section ( 4), all 
costs, charges and expenses which, in the opinion of the se cured creditor, have been properly incurred by 
him or any expenses incidental thereto, shall be recoverable from the borrower and the money which is 
received by the secured creditor shall, in the absence of any contract to the contrary, be held by him in 
trust, to be applied, firstly, in payment of such costs, charges and expenses and secondly, in dis charge of 
the dues of the secured creditor and the residue of the money so received shall be paid to the person 
entitled thereto in accordance  with his rights and interests.  
2[(8) Where the amount of dues of the secured creditor together with all costs, charges and expenses 
incurred by him is tendered to the secured creditor at any time before the date of publication of notice for 
public auction or inviting quot ations or tender from public or private treaty for transfer by way of lease, 
assignment or sale of the secured assets, — 
(i) the secured assets shall not be transferred by way of lease assignment or sale by the secured 
creditor; and   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2013, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 11, for sub -section ( 8) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  19 
 (ii) in case, any step  has been taken by the secured creditor for transfer by way of lease or 
assignment or sale of the assets before tendering of such amount under this sub -section, no further 
step shall be taken by such secured creditor for transfer by way of lease or assignm ent o r sale of such 
secured assets.]  
(9) 1[Subject to the provisions of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, i n the case of ] financing 
of a financial asset by more than one secured creditors or joint financing of a financial asset by secured 
creditors, no secured creditor shall be entitled to exercise any or all of the rights c onferred on him under 
or pursuan t to sub -section ( 4) unless exercise of such right is agreed upon by the secured creditors 
representing not less than 2[sixty per cent.]  in value of the amount outstanding as on a record date and 
such action shall be bindin g on all the secured creditors:  
Provided that in the  case of a company in liquidation, the amount realised from the sale of secured 
assets shall be distributed in accordance with the provisions of section 529A of the C ompanies Act, 1956 
(1 of 1956):  
Provided further that in the case of a company being wound  up on or after the commencement of this 
Act, the secured creditor of such company, who opts to realise his security instead of relinquishing his 
security and proving his debt under proviso to su b-section ( 1) of section 529 of the Companies Act, 1956 
(1 of  1956), may retain the sale proceeds of his secured assets after depositing the workmen's dues with 
the liquidator in accordance with the provisio ns of section 529A of that Act:  
Provided also that liquidator referred to in the second proviso shall intimate  the secured creditor the 
workmen's dues in accordance with the provisions of section 529A of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956) and in case su ch workmen's dues cannot be asce rtained, the liquidator shall intimate the estimated 
amount of workmen's dues un der that section to the secured creditor and in such case the secured creditor 
may retain the sale proceeds of the secured assets after depositing the amount of such est imate dues with 
the liquidator:  
Provided also that in case the secured creditor deposit s the estimated amount of workmen's dues, such 
creditor shall be liable to pay the balance of the workmen's dues or entitled to receive the excess amount, 
if any, depo sited by the secured creditor w ith the liquidator:  
Provided also that the secured credito r shall furnish an undertaking to the liquidator to pay the 
balance  of the workmen's dues, if any.  
Explanation .—For the  purposes of this sub -section,— 
(a) “record date ” means the date agreed upon by the secured creditors representing not less than 
2[sixty per cent.]  in value of the a mount outstanding on such date;  
(b) “amount outstanding ” shall include principal, interest and any other dues payable by the 
borrower to the secured creditor in respect of secured asset as per the books of a ccount of the secured  
creditor.  
(10) Where dues of the secured creditor are not fully satisfied with the sale proceeds of the secured 
assets, the secured creditor may file an application in the form and manner as may be prescribed to the 
Debts Recovery Tribunal having jurisdic tion or a competent court, as the case may be, for recovery of the 
balance amount from the borrower.  
(11) Without prejudice to the rights conferred on the secured creditor under or by this section, secured 
creditor shall be entitled to proceed against the guarantors or sell the pledged assets without first taking 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 31 of 2016, s. 251 and The Seventh Schedule, for “In the case of”  (w.e.f. 28 -5-2016)  
2. Subs. by Act 1  of 2013, s. 5, for “three -fourth” (w.e.f. 15 -1 -2013).  20 
 any of the measured specifies in clause s (a) to ( d) of sub -section ( 4) in relation to the  secured assets under 
this Act.  
(12) The rights of a secured creditor under this Act may be exercised by one  or more of his officers 
authorised in this behalf in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(13) No borrower shall, after receipt of notice referred to in sub -section ( 2), transfer by way of sale, 
lease or otherwise (other than in the ordinary course of his bu siness) any of his secured assets referred to 
in the no tice, without prior written con sent of the secured creditor.  
14. Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate to assist secured creditor in taki ng 
possession of secured asset .—(1) Where the possession of any secured assets is required to be taken by 
the secured creditor or if  any of the secured assets is r equired  to be sold or transferred by the secured 
creditor under the provisions of this Act, the secured creditor may, for the purpose of ta king possession or 
control of any such secured assets, request, in writing, the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or the District 
Magistrate within whose jurisdiction any such secured asset or other documents relating thereto may be 
situated or found, to take possession thereof, and the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or as the case may be, 
the District Magistrate shall, on such request being made to him — 
(a) take possession of such asset and documents relating thereto; and 
(b) forward such asset and documents to  the secured credito r: 
1[Provided that any application by the secured creditor shall be accompanied by an affidavit duly 
affirmed by the authorised officer of the secured creditor, declaring that — 
(i) the aggregate amount of financial assistance granted and the total claim of the Bank as on the 
date of filing the application;  
(ii)the borrower has created security interest over various properties and that the Bank or 
Financial Institution is holding a valid and subsisting security interest over such proper ties and the 
claim of the Bank or Financial Institution is within the limitation period;  
(iii)the borrower has created security interest over various properties giving the details of 
properties referred to in sub -clause (ii)above;  
(iv) the borrower has com mitted default in repayment of the financial assistance granted 
aggregating the specified amount;  
(v) consequent upon such default in repayment of the financial assistance the account of the 
borrower has been classified as a non -performing asset;  
(vi) affirming that the period of sixty days notice as required by the provisions of sub -section ( 2) 
of section 13, demanding payment of the defaulted financial assistance has been served on the 
borrower;  
(vii) the objection or representation in reply to the no tice received from the borrower has been 
considered by the secured creditor and reasons for non -acceptance of such objection or representation 
had been communicated to the borrower;  
(viii) the borrower has not made any repayment of the financial assistance  in spite of the above 
notice and the Authorised Officer is, therefore, entitled to take possession of the secured assets under 
the provisions of sub -section ( 4) of section 13 read with section 14 of the principal Act;  
(ix) that the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder had been complied with:  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2013 , s. 6 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2013).  21 
 Provided further that on receipt of the affidavit from the Authorised Officer, the District Magistrate or 
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, shall after satisfying the contents of th e affidavit 
pass suitable orders for the purpose of taking possession of the secured assets1[within a period of thirty 
days from the date of application] : 
1[Provided also that if no order is passed by the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate 
within the said period of thirty days for reasons beyond his control, he may, after recording reasons in 
writing for the same, pass the order within such further period but not exceeding in aggregate sixty days.]  
Provided also that the requireme nt of filing affidavit stated in the first proviso shall not apply to 
proceeding pending before any District Magistrate or the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may 
be, on the date of commencement of this Act.]  
2[(1A) The District Magistrate or th e Chief Metropolitan Magistrate may authorise any officer 
subordinate to him, — 
(i)to take possession of such assets and documents relating thereto; and  
(ii) to forward such assets and docu ments to the secured creditor.]  
(2) For the purpose of securing compliance with the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the Chief 
Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate may take or cause to be taken such steps and use, or 
cause to be used, such force, as may, in his opinion, be  necessary.  
(3) No act of the Chief  Metropolitan Magistrate or the District Magistrate1[any officer authorised by 
the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate or District Magistrate]  done in pursuance of this section shall be called 
in question in any court or before any authority.  
15. Manner and eff ect of take over of management .—(1) 3[When the management of business of a 
borrower istaken over by a 4[asset reconstruction company ]under clause ( a) of section 9 or, as the case 
may be, by a secured creditor under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 4) of section 13], the secured creditor may, 
by publishing a notice in a newspaper published in English l anguage and in a newspaper published  in an 
Indian language in circulation in the place where the principal office of the borrower is situated, appoint 
as many person s as it thinks fit — 
(a) in a case in which the borrower is a company as defined in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956), to be the directors of that borrower in accordance with the provisions o f that Act; or  
(b) in any other case, to be the administrator o f the business of the borrower.  
(2) On publication of a  notice under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) in any case where the borrower is a company as defined in the Companies Act,  
1956 (1 of 1956), all persons holding office as directors of the company and in any othe r case, all 
persons holding any office having power of superintendence, direction and control of the business of 
the borrower immediately before the publication of the notice under sub -section ( 1), shall be deemed 
to have  vacated their offices as such;   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Ins. by Act 1 of 2013, s. 6 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2013).  
3. Subs. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 9, for “When the management of business of a borrower is taken over by a secured creditor”  
(w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  22 
 (b) any contract of management between the borrower and any director or manager thereof 
holding office as such immediately before publication of the notice under sub -section ( 1), shall be 
deemed t o be terminated;  
(c) the directors or the administrators appoi nted under this section shall take such steps as may be 
necessary to take into their custody or under their control all the property, effects and actionable 
claims to which the business of the borrower is, or appears to be, entitled and all the property an d 
effects of the business of the borrower shall be deemed to be in the custody of the directors or 
administrators, as the case may be, as from the date of  the publication of the notice;  
(d) the directors appointed under this section shall, for all purposes , be the directors of the 
company of the borrower and such directors or as the case may be, the administrators appointed under 
this section, shall alone be entitled to exercise all the powers of the directors or as the case may be, of 
the persons exercisin g powers of superintendence, direction and control, of the business of the 
borrower whether such powers are derived from the memorandum or articles of association of the 
company of th e borrower or fr om any other source whatsoever.  
(3) Where the management of the business of a borrower, being a company as defined in the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), is taken over by the secured creditor, then, notwithstanding any thing 
contained in the said Act or in the memorandum or articles of association of  such borrow er,— 
(a) it shall not be lawful for the shareholders of such company or any other person to nominate or 
appoint any person t o be a director of the company;  
(b) no resolution passed at any meeting of the shareholders of such company shall be given effect 
to unless ap proved by the secured creditor;  
(c) no proceeding for the winding up of such company or for the appointment of a receiver in 
respect thereof shall lie in any court, except with the conse nt of the secured creditor.  
(4) Where the management of the business of a borrower had been taken over by the secured creditor, 
the secured creditor shall, on realisation of his debt in full, restore the management of the business of the 
borrower to him.  
1[Provided that if any secured creditor jointly with other se cured creditors or any asset reconstruction 
company or financial institution or any other assignee has converted part of its debt into shares of a 
borrower company and thereby acquired controlling interest in the borrower company, such secured 
creditors sh all not be liable to restore the management of the business to such borrower.]  
16. No compensation t o directors for loss of office .—(1) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary 
contained in any contract or in any other law for the time being in force, no managing director or any 
other director or a manager or any person in charge o f management of the business of the borrower shall 
be entitled to any compensation for the loss of office or for the premature termination under this Act of 
any contract of manag ement entered  into by him with the borrower.  
(2) Nothing contained in sub -section ( 1) shall affect the right of any such managing director or any 
other director or manager or any such person in charge of management to recover from the business of the 
borro wer, moneys recoverable otherwise than by way of such compensation.  
17. 2[Application against measures to recover secured debts] .—(1) Any person (including 
borrower), aggrieved by any of the measures referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 13 taken by the 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for “Right to appeal” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  23 
 secured creditor or his authorised officer under this Chapter,1[may make an application along with such 
fee, as may be prescribed,] to the Debts Recovery Tribunal having jurisdiction in the matter within forty -
five days from the  date on whi ch such measure had been taken:  
2[Provided that different fees may be prescribed for making the application by the borrower and the 
person other than the borrower.]  
3[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the communication of the 
reasons to the borrower by the secured creditor for not having accepted his representation or objection or 
the likely action of the secured creditor at the stage of communication of reasonsto the borrower shall not 
entitle the person ( including borrower) tomake an application to the Debts Recovery Tribunal under this 
sub-section.]  
4[(1A) An application under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed before the Debts Recovery Tribunal within 
the loca l limits of whose jurisdiction — 
(a) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises;  
(b) where t he secured asset is located; or  
(c) the branch or any other office of a bank or financial institution is maintaining an account in 
which debt claimed is o utstanding for the time being.]  
5[(2) The Debts Recovery Tribunal shall consider whether any of the measures referred to in  
sub-section ( 4) of section 13 taken by the secured creditor for enforcement of security are in accordance 
with the provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder . 
6[(3) If, the Debts Recovery Tribunal, after examining the facts and circumstances of the case and 
evidence produced by the parties, comes to the conclusion that any of the measures referred to in  
sub-section ( 4) of section 13, taken by the secured cred itor are not in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act and the rules made thereunder, and require restoration of the management or restoration of 
possession, of the secured assets to the borrower or other aggrieved person, it may, by order, —  
(a) decla re the recourse to any one or more measures referred to in sub -section ( 4) of section 13 
taken by the secured creditor as  invalid; and  
(b) restore the possession of secured assets or management of secured assets to the borrower or 
such other aggrieved pers on, who has made an application under sub -section ( 1), as the case may be; 
and  
(c) pass such other direction as it may consider appropriate and necessary in relation to any of the 
recourse taken by the secured creditor under sub -section ( 4) of section 13. ] 
(4) If, the Debts Recovery Tribunal declares the recourse taken by a secured creditor under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 13, is in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the rules made 
thereunder, then, notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the 
secured creditor shall be entitled to take recourse to one or more o f the measures specified under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 13 to recover his secured debt.  
  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 10, for “may prefer an appeal” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2002).  
2. Ins. by s. 10, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2002).  
3. Ins. bys. 10 , ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
4. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
5. Subs. by  Act 30 of 2004, s.10, for sub -sections ( 2) and ( 3) (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
6. Subs. by  Act 44 of 2016, s. 14,for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  24 
 1[(4A) Where — 
(i) any person, in an application under sub -section ( 1), claims any tenancy or leasehold rights 
upon the secured asset, the Debt Recovery Tribunal, a fter examining the facts of the case and 
evidence produced by the parties in relation to such claims shall, for the purposes of enforcement of 
security interest, have the jurisdiction to examine whether lease or tenancy, —  
(a) has expired or stood determine d; or 
(b) is contrary to section 65A of the Tra nsfer of Property Act, 1882  (4 of 1882) ; or 
(c) is co ntrary to terms of mortgage; or  
(d) is created after the issuance of notice of default and demand by the Bank under sub -
section ( 2) of section 13 of the Act; and  
(ii) the Debt Recovery Tribunal is satisfied that tenancy right or leasehold rights claimed in 
secured asset falls under the sub -clause ( a) or sub -clause ( b) or sub -clause ( c) or sub -clause ( d) of 
clause ( i), then notwithstanding anything to the c ontrary contained in any other law for the time being 
in force, the Debt Recovery Tribunal may pass such order as it deems fit in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act.]  
(5) Any application made under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by the Debts R ecovery Tribunal as 
expeditiously as possible and disposed of within sixty days from the date of such application:  
Provided that the Debts Recovery Tribunal may, from time to time, extend the said period for reasons 
to be recorded in writing, so, however, that the total period of pendency of the application with the Debts 
Recovery Tribunal, shall not exceed four months from the date of making of such application made under 
sub-section ( 1). 
(6) If the application is not disposed of by the Debts Recovery Trib unal within the period of four 
months as specified in sub -section ( 5), any part to the application may make an application, in such form 
as may be prescribed, to the Appellate Tribunal for directing the Debts Recovery Tribunal for expeditious 
disposal of t he application pending before the Debts Recovery Tribunal and  the Appellate Tribunal may, 
on such application, make an order for expeditious disposal of the pending application by the Debts 
Recovery Tribunal.  
(7) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the  Debts Recovery Tribunal shall, as far as may be, 
dispose of the application in accordance with the provisions of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and 
Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993) and the rules made thereunder.]  
2[17A. Making of application to Court of District Judge in certain cases .—In the case of a 
borrower residing in the State of Jammu and Kashmir, the application under section 17 shall be made to 
the Court of District Judge in that State having jurisdiction over the borrower  which shall pass an order on 
such application.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the communication of the reasons 
to the borrower by the secured creditor for not having accepted his representation or objection or the 
likely action of the secured creditor at the stage of communication of reasons shall not entitle the person 
(including borrower) to make an application to the Court of Dist rict Judge under this section.]  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 14 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Ins. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 11 (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  25 
 18. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Any person aggrieved, by any order made by the Debts 
Recovery Tribunal1[under section 17, may prefer an appeal along with  such fee, as may be prescribed] to 
the Appellate Tribunal within thirty days from the date of receipt of t he order of Debts Recovery 
Tribunal.  
2[Provided that different fees may be prescribed for filing an appeal by the borrower or by the p erson 
other than the borrower:]  
3[Provided further that no appeal shall be entertained unless the borrower has deposited with the 
Appellate Tribunal fifty per cent. of the amount of debt due from him, as claimed by the secured creditors 
or determined by the Debts Recovery Tribunal, whichever is less:  
Provided also that the Appellate Tribunal may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, reduce the 
amount to no t less than twenty -five per cent. of debt refe rred to in the second proviso.]  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall, as far as may be, dispose of 
the appeal in accordance with the provisions of the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial 
Institutions Act, 1993  (51 of 1993) and rules made th ereunder . 
4[18A. Validation of fees levied .—Any fee levied and collected forpreferring, before the 
commencement of the Enforcement of Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws ( Amendment) Act, 
2004, an appeal to the Debts Recovery Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal under this Act, shall be deemed 
always to have been levied and collected in accordance with law as if the amendments made to sections 
17 and 18 of this Act by sections  10 and 12 of the said Act were in force at all material times.  
18B. Appeal to High Court in certain cases .—Any borrower residing in the State of Jammu and 
Kashmir and aggrieved by any order made by the Court of District Judge under section 17A may prefer 
an appeal, to the High Court having jurisdiction over such Court, within thirty days from the date of 
receipt of the order of the Court of District Judge:  
Provided that no appeal shall be preferred unless the borrower has deposited, with the Jammu and 
Kash mir High Court, fifty per cent. of the amount of the debt due from him as claimed by the secured 
creditor or determined by the Court of District Judge, whichever is less:  
Provided further that the High Court may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, reduce the 
amount to not less than twenty -five per cent. of the debt ref erred to in the first proviso.]  
5[18C. Right to lodge a caveat .—(1) Where an application or an appeal is expected to be made or 
has been made under sub -section ( 1) of section 17orsection 17A or sub -section ( 1) of section 18 or 
section 18B, the secured creditor or any person claiming a right to appear before the Tribunal or the Court 
of District Judge or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court, as the case may be, on  the hearing of such 
application or appeal, may lodge a caveat in respect thereof.  
(2) Where a caveat has been lodged under sub -section ( 1),— 
(a) the secured creditor by whom the caveat has been lodged (hereafter in this section referred to 
as the caveator ) shall serve notice of the caveat by registered post, acknowledgement due, on the 
person by whom the application has been or is expected  to be made under sub -section ( 1); 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 30 of 2004, s. 12, for “under section 17, may prefer an appeal” (w.e.f. 21 -6-2002).  
2. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 21 -6-2002).  
3. Ins. by s. 12, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
4. Ins. by s. 13, ibid. (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
5. Ins. by Act 1 of 2013, s. 7 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2013).  26 
 (b) any person by whom the caveat has been lodged (hereafter in this section referre d to as the 
caveator) shall serve notice of the caveat by registered post, acknowledgement due, on the person by 
whom the application has been or is expected  to be made under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Where after a caveat has been lodged under sub -section ( 1), any application or appeal is filed 
before the Tribunal or the court of District Judge or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court, as the case 
may be, the Tribunal or the District Judge or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court, as the case may 
be, shall  serve a notice of application or appeal filed by the applicant or the appellant on the caveator.  
(4) Where a notice of any caveat has been served on the applicant or the Appellant, he shall 
periodically furnish the caveator with a copy of the application or the appeal made by him and also with 
copies of any paper or document which has been or may be filed by him in support of the application or 
the appeal.  
(5) Where a caveat has been lodged under sub -section ( 1), such caveat shall not remain in force after  
the expiry of the period of ninety days from the date on which it was lodged unless the application or 
appe al referred to in sub -section ( 1) has been made befor e the expiry of the said period .] 
1[19. Right of borrower to receive compensat ion and costs in certain cases .—If the 
DebtsRecovery Tribunal or the Court of District Judge,on an application made under section 17 or section 
17A or the Appellate Tribunal or the High Court on an appeal preferred under section 18 or section 18A, 
holds that the possession of secured ass ets by the secured creditor is not in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act and rules made thereunder and directs the secured creditors to return such secured assets to the  
2[concerned borrowers or any other aggrieved person, who has filed the applic ation under section 17 or 
section 17A or appeal under section 18 or section 18A, as the case may be, the borrower or such other 
person ] shall be entitled to the payment of such compensation and costs as may be determined by such 
Tribunal or Court of Distri ct Judge or Appellate Tribunal or the High Court referred to in section 18B.]  
CHAPTER IV  
CENTRAL  REGISTRY  
20. Central Registry .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, set up or cause to be set up 
from such date as it may specify in such notification, a registry to be known as the Central Registry with 
its own seal for the purposes of registration of transaction of securitisation and reconstruction of financial 
assets and creation of se curity interest under this Act.  
(2) The head office of  the Central Registry shall be at such place as the Central Government may 
specify and for the purpose of facilitating registration of transactions referred to in sub -section ( 1), there 
may be established at such other places as the Central Government may think fit, branch offices of the 
Central Re gistry.  
(3) The Central Government may, by notification, define the territorial limits within which an office 
of the Central Registry may exercise its functions.  
 (4) The provisions of this Act pertaining to the C entral Registry shall be in addition to and not in 
derogation of any of the provisions contained in the Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908), the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 197 0), 
the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (49 of 1988), and the Designs Act, 2000 (16 of 2000) or any other law 
requiring registration of charges and shall not affect the priority o f charges or validity thereof un der those 
Acts or laws.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 14, for section 19 (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 15, for “ concerned borrowers, such bo rrower ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  27 
 1[20A. Integration of registr ation systems with Central Registry .—(1) The Central Government 
may, for the purpose of providing a Central database, in consultation with State Governments or other 
authorities operating registration system for recording rights over any property or creation, modification 
or satisfaction of any  security interest on such property, integrate the registration records of such 
registration systems with the records of Central Registry established under section 20, in such manner as 
may be prescribed.  
Explanation .—For the purpose of this sub -section, the registration records includes records of 
registration under the Companies Act, 2013  (18 of 2013) , the Registration Act, 1908  (16 of 1908) , the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958  (44 of 1958) , the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988  (59 of 1988) , the Patents  
Act, 1970  (39 of 1970) , the Designs Act, 2000  (16 of 2000)  or other such records under any other l aw for 
the time being in force.  
(2) The Central Government shall after integration of records of various registration systems referred 
to in sub -section ( 1) with the Cen tral Registry, by notification, declare the date of integration of 
registration systems and the date from which such integrated records shall be available; and with effect 
from such date, security interests over properties which are registered under any re gistration system 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be registered with the Central Registry for the purposes 
of this Act.  
20B.  Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification, delegate its powers and 
functions under this Chapter, in relation to establishment, operations and regulation of the Central 
Registry to the Reserve Bank, subject to such terms and conditions as may be prescribed.]  
21. Central Registrar .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, appoint a pers on for the 
purpose of registration of transactions relating to securitisation, reconstruction of financial assets and 
security interest created over properties, to be known  as the Central Registrar.  
(2) The Central Government may appoint such other officer s with such designations as it thinks fit for 
the purpose of discharging, under the superintendence and direction of the Central Registrar, such 
functions of the Central Registrar under this Act a s he may, from time to time, authorise them to 
discharge.  
22. Register of securitisation, reconstruction and security interest transactions .—(1) For the 
purposes of this Act, a record called the Central Register shall be kept at the head office of the Central 
Registry for entering the particulars of t he transac tions  relating to — 
(a) secu ritisation of financial assets;  
(b) reconstr uction of financial assets; and  
(c)creation of security interest.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), it shall be lawful for the Central Registrar 
to keep the rec ords wholly or partly in computer, floppies, diskettes or in any other electronic form 
subject to such safeguards as may be prescribed.  
(3) Where such register is maintained wholly or partly in computer, floppies, diskettes or in any other 
electronic form,  under sub -section ( 2), any reference in this Act to entry in the Central Register shall be 
construed as a reference to any entry as maintained in computer o r in any other electronic form.  
(4) The register shall be kept under the control and management of the Central Registrar.  
  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 16 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  28 
 23. Filing of transactions of securitisation, reconstruction and  creation of security interest .—
1[(1)] The particulars of every transaction of securitisation, asset reconstruction or creation of security 
interest shall be filed, with the Central Registrar in th e manner and on payment of  such fee as may be 
prescribed 2***: 
3*     *   *  *  * 
4[Provided 5*** that the Central Government may, by notification, require registration of all 
transactions of securitisation, or asset reconstruction or creation of security interest which are subsisting 
on or before the date of establishment of the Central Registry unde r sub -section ( 7) of section 20 within 
such period and on payment of such fees as may be prescribed.]  
6[(2) The Central Government may, by notification, require the registration of transaction relating to 
different types of security interest created on dif ferent kinds of property with the Central Registry.  
(3) The Central Government may, by rules, prescribe forms for registration for different types of 
security interest under this section and fee to be charged for such registration.]  
24. Modification of sec urity inte rest registered under this Act .—Whenever the terms or 
conditions, or the extent or operation of any security interest registered under this Chapter are or is  
7[asset reconstruction company ] or the secured creditors, as the case may be, to send to the Central 
Registrar, the particulars of such modification, and the provisions of this Chapter as to registration of a 
security interest shall apply to such modification modified, it shall be the du ty of the 8[asset 
reconstruction company ] or the of such security interest.  
25. 9[Asset reconstruction company ] or secured creditors to report sat isfaction of security 
interest .—(1) The 9[asset reconstruction company ] or the secured creditors as the case may be, sh all give 
intimation to the Centr al Registrar of the payment or satisfaction in full, of any security interest relating to 
the 10[asset reconstruction company ] or the secured creditors and requiring registration under this Chapter, 
within thirty days from the date o f such payment or satisfaction.  
11[(1A) On receipt of intimation under sub -section ( 1), the Central Registrar shall order that a 
memorandum of satisfa ction shall be entered in the Central Register.]  
(2) 12[If the concerned borrower gives an intimation to the Central Registrar for not recording the 
payment or satisfaction referred to in sub -section ( 1), the Central Registrar shal l on receipt of such 
intimation] , cause a notice to be sent to the 8[asset reconstruction company ]or the secured creditors calling 
upon it to show cause within a time not exceeding fourteen days specified i n such notice, as to why 
payment or satisfaction should not be recorded  as inti mated to the Central Registrar.  
(3) If no cause is shown, the Central Registrar shall order that a memorandum of satisfaction shall be 
entered in the Central Register.  
(4) If cause is shown, the Central Registrar shall record a note to that effect in the Central Register, 
and shall inform the borrower that he has done so.  
                                                           
1. Section 23 numbered as sub -section ( 1) by Act 44 of 2016, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2.The certain words omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016) . 
3. Omitted by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
4. Ins. by Act 1 of 2013, s.8 (w.e.f. 15 -5-2013).  
5. The word “further” omitted by Act 44 of 2016, s. 17 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
6. Ins. by s. 17, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
7. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “ reconstruction company ” (w.e.f. 1-9-2016).  
8. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “securitisation company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
9. Subs. by s. 3,ibid., for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
10.  Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “securitisation company or the reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
11. Ins. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 15 (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
12. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for “The Central Registrar shall, on receipt of such intimation” (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  29 
 26. Right to inspect particulars of securitisation, reconstruction and security interest 
transactions .—(1) The particulars of securitisation or reconstruction or security interest entered in the 
Central register of such transactions kept under section 22 shall be open during the business hours for 
inspection by any person on payment of such fe es as may be prescribed.  
(2) The Central Register referred to in sub -section ( 1) maintained  in electronic form  shall also be 
open during the business hours for the inspection of any person through electronic media on payment of 
such fees as may be prescribed.  
1[26A. Rectification by Central Government in matters of registration, modification and 
satisfaction, etc .—(1) The Central Government, on being satisfied — 
(a) that the omission to file with the Registrar the particulars of any transaction of securitisation, 
asset reconstruction or security interest or modification or satisfaction of such transaction or; the 
omission or mis -statement of any particular with respect to any such transaction or modification or 
with respect to any satisfaction or other entry made in pursuance of section 23 or section 24 or section 
25 of the principal Act was acc idental or due to inadvertence or some other sufficient cause or it is not 
of a nature to prejudice the position of creditors; or  
(b) that on other grounds, it is just and equitable to grant relief,  
may, on the appli cation of a secured creditor or 2[asset reconstruction company ]or any other person 
interested on such terms and conditions as it may seem to the Central Government just and expedient, 
direct that the time for filing of the particulars of the transaction for registration or modification or 
satisf action shall be extended or, as the case may require, the omission or mis -statement shall be rectified.  
(2) Where the Central Government extends the time for the registration of transaction of security 
interest or securitisation or asset reconstruction or modification or satisfaction thereof, the order shall not 
prejudice any rights acquired in respect of the property concerned or financial asset before the transaction 
is actually registered.]  
 
3[CHAPTER IVA  
REGISTRATION BY SECURE D CREDITORS AND OTHER CREDITORS  
26B.  Registration by secured creditors and other creditors .—(1) The Central Government may by 
notification, extend the provisions of Chapter IV relating to Central Registry to all creditors other than 
secured creditors as defined in clause ( zd) of sub -section ( 1) of section 2, for creation, modification or 
satisfaction of any security interest over any property of the borrower for the purpose of securing due 
repayment of any financial assistance granted by  such creditor to the borrower.  
(2) From t he date of notification under sub -section ( 1), any creditor including the secured creditor 
may file particulars of transactions of creation, modification or satisfaction of any security interest with 
the Central Registry in such form a nd manner as may be p rescribed.  
(3) A creditor other than the secured creditor filing particulars of transactions of creation, 
modification and satisfaction of security interest over properties created in its favour shall not be entitled 
to exercise any right of enforcemen t of securities under this Act.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2013, s. 9 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2013).  
2. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “ securiti sation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Ins. by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  30 
 (4) Every authority or officer of the Central Government or any State Government or local authority, 
entrusted with the function of recovery of tax or other Government dues and for issuing any order for 
attachment of any propert y of any person liable to pay the tax or Government dues, shall file with the 
Central Registry such attachment order with particulars of the assessee and details of tax or other 
Government dues from such date as may be notified by the Central Government, i n such form a nd manner 
as may be prescribed.  
(5) If any person, having any claim against any borrower, obtains orders for attachment of property 
from any court or other authority empowered to issue attachment order, such person may file particulars 
of such  attachment orders with Central Registry in such form and manner on payment of such fee as may 
be prescribed.  
26C.  Effect of the registration of transactions , etc.—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions 
contained in any other law, for the time being in force, any registration of transactions of creation, 
modification or satisfaction of security interest by a secured creditor or other creditor or filing of 
attachment orders under this Chapter shall be deemed to constitute a public notice from the date and  time 
of filing of particulars of such transaction with the Central Registry for creation, modification or 
satisfaction of such security interest or attach ment order, as the case may be.  
(2) Where security interest or attachment order upon any property in favour of the secured creditor or 
any other creditor are filed for the purpose of registration under the provisions of Chapter IV and this 
Chapter, the claim of such secured creditor or other creditor holding attachment order shall have priority 
over any s ubsequent security interest created upon such property and any transfer by way of sale, lease or 
assignment or licence of such property or attachment order subsequent to such registration, shall  be 
subject to such claim:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to transactions carried on by the 
borrower in the ordinary course of business.  
26D.  Right of enforcement of securities .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, from the date of commencem ent of the provisions of this Chapter, no secured 
creditor shall be entitled to exercise the rights of enforcement of securities under Chapter III unless the 
security interest created in its favour by the borrower has been registered with the Central Regis try.  
26E. Priority to secured creditors .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the 
time being in force, after the registration of security interest, the debts due to any secured creditor shall be 
paid in priority over all other debts and all revenues, taxes, cesses and other rat es payable to the Central 
Government or State Government or local authority.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that on or after the 
commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016  (31 of 2016) , in cases where i nsolvency or 
bankruptcy proceedings are pending in respect of secured assets of the borrower, priority to secured 
creditors in payment of debt shall be subject to  the provisions of that Code.]  
  31 
 CHAPTER V  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
27. Penalties .—If a default is made— 
(a) in filing under section 23, the particulars of every transaction of any securitisation or asset 
reconstruction or security interest created by a 1[asset reconstruction company ]or secured creditors; or  
(b) in sending under section 24, the particulars of the modification referred to in that section; or  
(c) in giving intimation under section 25, every company and every officer of the company or the 
secured creditors and every officer of the secured creditor who is in default shall be punishab le with 
fine which may extend to five thousand rupees for every day dur ing which the default continues:  
2[Provided that provisions of this section shall be deemed to have been omitted from the date of 
coming into force of the provisions of this Chapter and  section 23 as amended by the Enforcement of 
Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act,  
2016  (44 of 2016 ).] 
28. [Penalties for non -complianc e of direction of Reserve Bank .] Omitted by the Enforcement of 
Security Interest and Recovery of Debts Laws and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment) Act,  
2016  (44 of 2016 ) s. 20 (w.e.f. 1-9-2016 ). 
29. Offences .—If any person contravenes or attempts to contravene or abets the contravention of the 
provisions of this Act  or of any rules made thereunder, he shall be punishable with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to one year, or with fine, or with both.  
3[30. Cognizance of offence s.—(1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
section 27 in relation to non -compliance with the provisions of section 23, section 24 or section 25 or 
under section 28 or section 29 or any other provisions of the Act, except upon a complaint in writing 
made by an officer of the Central Registry or an officer of the Reserve Bank, generally or specially 
authorised in writing in this behalf by the Central Registrar or, as the case may be, the Reserve Bank.  
(2) No court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a Judicial Magistrate of the first class 
shall try an y offence punishable under this Act.]  
4[30A.  Power of adjudicating authority to impose penalty .—(1) Where any asset reconstruction 
company or any person fails to comply with any direction issued by the Reserve Bank under this Act the 
adjudicating authority may, by an order, impose on such company or person in default, a penalty not 
exceeding one crore rupees or twice the amount involved in such failure where such amount is 
quantifiable, whichever is more, and where such failure is a continuing one, a further penalty which may 
extend to one lakh rupees for every day, after the first, during which such fa ilure continues.  
(2) For the purpose of imposing penalty under sub -section ( 1), the adjudicating authority shall serve a 
notice on the asset reconstruction company or the person in default requiring such company or person to 
show cause why the amount speci fied in the notice should not be imposed as a penalty and a reasonable 
opportunity of being heard shall be given to such person.   
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisation company or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Ins. by s. 19 , ibid. (w.e.f.1 -9-2016).  
3. Subs. by Act 1 of 2013, s. 10, for section 30 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2013).  
4. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 21 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  32 
 (3) Any penalty imposed under this section shall be payable within a period of thirty days from the 
date of issue o f notice u nder sub -section ( 2). 
(4) Where the asset reconstruction company fails to pay the penalty within the specified period under 
sub-section ( 3), the adjudicating authority shall, by an order, cancel its registration:  
Provided that an opportunity of being heard  shall be given to such asset reconstruction company 
befor e cancellation of registration.  
(5) No complaint shall be filed against any person in default in any court pertaining to any failure 
under sub -section ( 1) in respect of which any penalty has been im posed and recovered by the R eserve 
Bank under this section.  
(6) Where any complaint has been filed against a person in default in the court having jurisdiction no 
proceeding for imposition of penalty against that person shall be taken under this section.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and sections 30B, 30C and 30D, — 
(i) “adjudicating authority ” means such officer or a committee of officers of the Reserve Bank, 
designated as such from time to time, by notification, by the Central B oard of Res erve Bank;  
(ii) “person in default ” means the asset reconstruction company or any person which has 
committed any failure, contravention or default under this Act and any person incharge of such 
company or such other person, as the case may be, shall be lia ble to be proceeded against and 
punished under section 33 for such failure or contravention or default committed by such company or 
person.  
30B. Appeal against penalties .—A person in default, aggrieved by an order passed under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 30A, may, within a period of thirty days from the date on which such order is 
passed, prefer an app eal to the Appellate Authority:  
Provided that the Appellate Authority may entertain an appeal after the expiry of the said period of 
thirty days, if it is sa tisfied that there was sufficient cause for not filing it within such period.  
30C.  Appellate Authority .—(1) The Central Board of Reserve Bank may designate such officer or 
committee of officers as it deems fit to exercise th e power of Appellate Authority.  
(2) The Appellate Authority shall have power to pass such order as it deems fit after providing a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard to the person in default.  
(3) The Appellate Authority may, by an order stay the enforcement of the order passed by the 
adjudicating authority under section 30A, subject to such terms a nd conditions, as it deems fit.  
(4) Where the person in default fails to comply with the terms and conditions imposed by order under 
sub-section ( 3) without reasonable cause, the Appellate Au thority may dismiss the appeal.  
30D.  Recovery of penalties .—(1) Any penalty imposed under section 30A shall be recovered as a 
“recoverable sum ” and shall be payable within a period of thirty days fromthe date on which notice   33 
 demanding payment of the recov erable sum is served upon the person in default and, in the case of failure 
of payment by such person within such period, the Reserve Bank may , for the purpose of recovery, — 
(a) debit the current account, if any, of the person in default maintained with th e Reserve Bank or 
by liquidating the securities, if any, held to the credit of such person in  the books of the Reserve 
Bank;  
(b) issue a notice to the person from whom any amount is due to the person in default, requiring 
such person to deduct from the amo unt payable by him to the person in default, such amount 
equivalent to the amount of the recoverable sum, and to make payment of s uch amount to the Reserve 
Bank.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 4), a notice issued under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) 
shall be binding on every person to whom it is issued, and, where such notice is issued to a post office, 
bank or an insurance company, it shall not be necessary to produce any pass book, deposit receipt, policy 
or any other document for th e purpose of any entry or endorsement thereof before payment is made, 
notwithstanding any rule, practice or requirement to the contrary.  
(3) Any claim in respect of any amount, arising after the date of issue of notice under sub -section ( 1) 
shall be void a s against the d emand contained in such notice.  
(4) Any person, to whom the notice is sent under sub -section ( 1), objects to such notice by a 
statement on oath that the sum demanded or any part thereof is not due to the person in default or that he 
does not  hold any money for or on account of the person in default, then nothing contained in this section 
shall be deemed to require, such person to pay such sum or part thereof, as the case may be.  
(5) Where it is found that statement made by the person under s ub-section ( 4) is false in material 
particulars, such person shall be personally liable to the Reserve Bank to the extent of his own liability to 
the person in default on the date of the notice, or to the extent of the recoverable sum payable by the 
person  in default to the R eserve Bank, whichever is less.  
(6) The Reserve Bank may, at any time, amend or revoke any notice issued under sub -section ( 1) or 
extend the time for making the payme nt in pursuance of such notice.  
(7) The Reserve Bank shall grant a rec eipt for any amount paid to it in compliance with a notice 
issued under this section and the person so paying shall be fully discharged from his liability to the person 
in default to th e extent of the amount so paid.  
(8) Any person discharging any liabilit y to the person in default after the receipt of a notice under this 
section shall be persona lly liable to the Reserve Bank — 
(a) to the extent of his own liability to the pers on in default so discharged; or  
(b) to the extent of the recoverable sum payable by the person in default to the Reserve Bank,  
whichever is less.  
(9) Where the person to whom the notice is sent under this section, fails to make payment in 
pursuance thereof to the Reserve Bank, he shall be deemed to be the person in default in respect o f the 
amount specified in the notice and action or proceedings may be taken or instituted against him for the 
realisation of the amount in the m anner provided in this section.   34 
 (10) The Reserve Bank may enforce recovery of recoverable sum through the princ ipal civil court 
having jurisdiction in the area where the registered office or the head office or the principal place of 
business of the person in default or the usual place of residence of such person is situated as if the notice 
issued by the Reserve B ank were a decree of the Court.  
(11) No recovery under sub -section ( 10) shall be enforced, except on an application made to the 
principal civil court by an officer of the Reserve Bank authorised in this behalf certifying that the person 
in default has fail ed to pay the recoverable sum.]  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
31. Provisions of this Act  not to apply in certain cases .—The provisions of this Act shall not apply 
to— 
(a) a lien on any goods, money or security given by or under the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of 
1872) or the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (3 of 1930) or any other l aw for the time being in force;  
(b) a pledge of movables within the meaning of section 172 of the Indian Contract Act, 1872 (9 of  
1872);  
(c) creation of any security in any aircraft as defin ed in clause ( 1) of section 2 of the A ircraft Act, 
1934 (24 of 1934);  
(d) creation of security interest in any vessel as defined in clause ( 55) of section 3 of the 
Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44  of 1958);  
1*    *  *  *   * 
(f) any rights of unpaid seller under section 47 of the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (3 of 1930);  
(g) 2[any properties not liable to attachment (excluding the properties specifically charged with 
the debt recoverable under this Act)] or sale under the first proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 60 of 
the Code of Civ il Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908);  
(h) any security interest for securing repayment of any financial asset  not exceeding one lakh 
rupees;  
(i) any security interest c reated in agricultural land;  
(j) any case in which the amount due is less than twenty per cent . of the principal amount and 
interest thereon.  
3[31A. Power to exempt a class or classes of  banks or financial institutions .—(1)The Central 
Government may, by notification in the public interest,  direct that any of the provisions of this Act, — 
(a) shall not apply to such class or classes of banks or financial institutions; or  
(b) shall apply to the class or classes of banks or financial institutions with such exceptions, 
modifications and adaptati ons, as may be specified in the notification.  
4[(2) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub -section ( 1), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days, and if, both 
                                                           
1. Omitted by Act 44 of 2016, s. 22 (w. e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 17, for “any properties not liable to attachment” (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  
3. Ins. by Act 1 of 2013, s. 11 (w.e.f. 15 -1-2013).  
4. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 23, for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  35 
 Houses agree in disapproving the issue of notification or both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the notification, the notification shall not be issued or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as may be agreed upon by both the Houses.  
(3) In reckoning any such period of thirty days as is referred to in sub -section ( 2), no account shall be 
taken of any period during which the House referred to in sub -section ( 2) is prorogued or adjourned for 
more than four consecutive days.  
(4) The copies of every notification issued under this section shall, as soon as may be after it has been 
issued, be laid before each House of Parliament. ]] 
32. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against 1[the Reserve Bank or the Central Registry or any secured creditor or any of its officers ] for 
anything done or omitted  to be done in good faith under this Act.  
33. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time t he offence was committed was in charge of, and was responsible 
to, the company, for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall be deemed 
to be guilty of the offence and shall be liab le to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person  liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or 
that h e had exercised all due diligence to prevent the com mission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attrib utable to any neglect on the par t of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of the offence and s hall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company'' means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director'', in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
34. Civil court not to have jurisdiction .—No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which a Debts Recovery Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal is 
empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court or other 
authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under 
this Act or under the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993 ). 
35. The provisions of t his Act to override  other laws .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect, 
notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or 
any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.  
36. Limitation .—No secured creditor  shall be entitled to take all or any of the measures under  
sub-section ( 4) of section 13, unless his claim in respect of the financial asset is made within the period of 
limitation prescribed under the Limitation Act, 1963 (36 of 1963).  
37. Applic ation of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder 
shall be in addition to, and not in derogation of, the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by  Act 44 of 2016, s. 24, for “ any secured creditor or any of his officers or manager exercising any of the rights of the 
secured creditor or borrower” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  36 
 Securities Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956  (42 of 1956) , the Securities and Exchan ge Board of India Act, 
1992  
(15 of 1992), the Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993) or 
any other law for the time being in force.  
38. Power of Ce ntral Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by  
notification and in the Electronic Gazette as defined in clause ( s) of section 2 of the Information 
Technology Act, 2000 (21 of 2000), make r ules for carrying out the provi sions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of th e foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
1[(a) other business or commercial rights of similar nature under clause ( t) of section 2;]  
2[(aa)] the form and manner in which an application may be filed under sub -section ( 10) of 
section 13;  
(b) the manner in which the rights of a secured creditor may be exercised by one or more of his 
officers under sub-section ( 12) of section 13;  
3[(ba) the fee fo r making an application to the Debts Recovery Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 17;  
(bb) the form of making an application to the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 6) of  
section 17;  
(bc) the fee for preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribun al under sub-section ( 1) of section 
18;] 
1[(bca) the manner of integration of records of various registration systems with the records of 
Central Registry under sub -section ( 1) of section 20A;  
(bcb) the terms and conditions of delegation of powers by the Central Government to the Reserve 
Bank under section 20B;]  
(c) the safeguards subject to which the records may be kept under sub -section ( 2) of section 22;  
(d) the manner in which the particulars of every transaction of securitisation shall be filed under 
section 23 and f ee for filing such transaction;  
1[(da) the form for registration of different types of security interests and fee thereof under  
sub-section ( 3) of section 23;]  
(e) the fee for inspecting the particulars of transactions kept under section 22 and entered in the 
Central Register under  sub-section ( 1) of section 26;  
(f) the fee for inspecting the Central Register maintained in electronic form under  sub-section ( 2) 
of section 26;  
1[(fa) the form and the manner for filing particulars of transact ions under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 26B;  
(fb) the form and manner of filing attachment orders with the Central Registry and the date under 
sub-section ( 4) of section 26B;  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 25 (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Clause ( a) renumbered as clause (aa) by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
3. Ins. by Act 30 of 2004, s. 18 (w.e.f. 11 -11-2004).  37 
 (fc) the form and manner of filing particulars of attachment order with the Central  Registry and 
the fee under  sub-section ( 5) of section 26B;]  
(g) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed, in respect of which provision 
is to be, or may be, made by rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House 
of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effe ct only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule.  
39. Certain provisions of this Act to apply a fter Central Registry i s set up or cause to be set 
up.—The provisions of sub -sections ( 2), (3) and ( 4) of section 20 and sections 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26 and 
27 shall apply after the Central Registry is set up or cause to be set up under sub -section ( 1) of section 20.  
40. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act a s may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period of two years fro m 
the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid,  as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
41. Ame ndments to certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the Schedule shall be 
amended in the manner specified therein.  
42. Repeal and s aving .—(1) The Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest (Second) Ordinance, 2002 (Ord.  3 of 2002) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been d one or taken under the corresponding provisions of this Act.   38 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 41)  
Year  Act No.  Short title  Amendment  
1956  1 The Companies  
Act, 1956.  In section 4A, in sub -section ( 1), after clause ( vi), insert the 
following: — 
“(vii) the 1[asset  reconstruction company ]which has obtained 
a certificate of registration under sub -section ( 4) or section 3 of 
the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. ”. 
1956  42 The Securities  
Contracts  
(Regulation)  
Act, 1956.  In section 2, in clause ( h), after sub -clause ( ib), insert the 
following: — 
“(ic) security receipt as defined in clause ( zg) of section 2 of 
the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002. ”. 
1986  1 The Sick  
Industrial  
Companies 
(Special 
Provisions)  
Act, 1985.  In section 15, in sub -section ( 1), after the proviso, insert the 
following: — 
“Provided further that no reference shall be made to the 
Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction after the 
commencement of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of 
Financial  Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 
2002, where financial as sets have been acquired by any  
2[asset reconstructioncompany ] under sub -section ( 1) of section 
5 of that Act:  
Provided also that on or after the commencement of the 
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and 
Enforcement of Security Interest  Act, 2002, where a reference 
is pending before the Board for Industrial and Financial 
Reconstruction, such reference shall abate if the secured 
creditors, representing not less than three -fourth in value of the 
amount outstanding against financial assista nce disbursed to the 
borrower of such secured creditors, have taken any measures to 
recover their secured debt under sub -section ( 4) of section 13 of 
that Act. ”. 
 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 44 of 2016, s. 3, for “securitisation company or the reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “securitisation compa ny or reconstruction company” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2016).  
--------------------------The Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of Maritime Navigation and Fixed Platforms on Continental Shelf Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE SUPPRESSION OF UNLAWFUL ACTS AGAINST SAFETY OF MARITIME 
NAVIGATION  AND FIXED PLATFORMS ON CONTINENTAL SHELF ACT, 2002  
______  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
______  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
CHAPTER II  
OFFENCES  
3. Offences against ship, fixed platform, cargo of a ship, maritime  navigational facilities, etc . 
4. Conferment of powers of investigation . 
5. Designated Courts . 
6. Offence triable by Designated Court . 
7. Application of Code to proceedings before a De signated Court . 
8. Provision as to bail . 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
9. Provisions as to extradition . 
10. Contracting parties to Convention or Protocol . 
11. Power to treat certain ships to be registered in Convention  States . 
12. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution . 
13. Presumptions as to offences under section 3 . 
14. Protection of action taken in good faith . 
  2 
  
THE SUPPRESSION OF UNLAWFUL ACTS AGAINST SAFETY OF MARITIME 
NAVIGATION  AND FIXED PLATFORMS ON CONTINENTAL SHELF ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 69 OF 2002  
[20th December , 2002.]  
An Act to give effect to the International Maritime Organisation Convention for Suppression of 
Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Maritime Navigation and the Protocol for the 
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on th e 
Continental Shelf and for matters connected therewith.  
WHEREAS a Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against the  Safety of Maritime 
Navigation and the Protocol for the Suppression of  Unlawful Acts Against the Safety of Fixed Platforms 
Located  on the  Continental Shelf were signed at Rome on the 10 th day of March, 1988;  
AND WHEREAS India, having acceded to the said Convention and the  Protocol, should make 
provisions for giving effect thereto and formatters connected therewith;  
BE it enacted by P arliament in the Fifty -third Year of the Republic of  India as fo llows:— 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent, application and commencement .—(1) This Act  may be called the 
Suppression of Unlawful Acts Against Safety of  Maritime Navigation and Fixed Platforms on Continental 
Shelf Act,  2002.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India including the limit of the  territorial waters, the continental shelf, 
the exclusive economic zone  or any other maritime zone of India within the meaning of section 2 of  the 
Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclu sive Economic Zone and  other Maritime Zones Act, 1976         
(80 of 1976).  
(3) Save as oth erwise provided, it shall apply — 
(a) to any offence under section 3 committed outside India by any  person;  
(b) to a ship, if that ship is navigating or scheduled to navigate  into, through or from waters 
beyond the outer limits of the  territorial waters of India, or the lateral limits of its territorial  waters 
with adjacent States;  
(c) when  the offence is committed on board a ship in the territorial  waters of India or against a 
fixed platform located on the Continental  Shelf of India.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), this Act  shall apply only to offences 
committed b y an offender or alleged  offender,— 
(a) when such an offender is found in the territory of a Convention  State;  
(b) when such an offender is found in the territory of a Protocol  State in whose internal water or 
territorial waters or continental  shelf the fi xed platform is located; or  
(c) when such an offender is found in the territory of a State other  than the State referred to in 
clause ( a) or clause ( b). 
(5) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification in the 
Offici al Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) "Code" means the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974);  
                                                           
1. 1st February, 2003, vide notification No. S.O. 115(E), dated 30th, January, 2003, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part 
II, sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (b) "Continental Shelf of India" shall have the meaning assigned to it  in the Territorial Waters, 
Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economic Zone  and other Maritime Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976);  
(c) "Convention" means the Convention for the Suppression of Unlawful  Acts Against the Safety 
of Maritime Navigation, signed at Rome on the10th day of March, 1988 a s amended from time to 
time;  
(d) "Convention State" means a State Party to the Convention;  
(e) "fixed platform" means an artificial island, installation or  structure permanently attached to 
the seabed for the purpose of  exploration for, or exploitation of resources or for other economic  
purposes;  
(f) "Protocol" means the Protocol for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts  Against the Safety of 
Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf  adopted at Rome on the 10th day of March,1988 as 
amended from time to  time; 
(g) "Protocol State" means a State Party to the Protocol;  
(h) "ship" means a vessel of any type whatsoever not permanently  attached to the seabed and 
includes dynamically supported craft,  submersibles, or any other floating craft.  
CHAPTER II  
OFFENCES  
3. Offences against ship, fixed platform, cargo of a ship, maritime navigational  facilities,           
etc.—(1) Whoever unlawfully and  intentionally — 
(a) commits an act of violence against a person on board a fixed  platform or a ship which is likely 
to endanger the safety of the fixed  platform or, as the case may be, safe navigation of the ship shall be  
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years  and shall also be liable to fine;  
(b) destroys a fixed platform or a ship or causes damage to a fixed  platform or a ship or cargo of 
the ship in such manner which is likely  to endanger the safety of such platform or safe navigation of 
such ship shall be pun ished with imprisonment for life ; 
(c) seizes or exercises control over a fixed plat form or a ship by  force or threatens or in any other 
form intimidates shall be punished  with imprisonment for life;  
(d) places or causes to be placed on a fixed platform or a ship, by  any means whatsoever, a device 
or substance which is likely to destroy  that fixed platform or that ship or cause damage to that fixed  
platform or that ship or its cargo which endangers o is likely to  endanger that fixed platform or the 
safe navigation of that ship shall  be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend  to 
fourteen  years;  
(e) destroys or damages maritime navigational facilities or interferes  with their operation if such 
act is likely to endanger the safe  navigation of a ship shall be punished with imprisonment for a term  
which may extend to fourteen year s; 
(f) communicates information which he knows to be false thereby  endangering the safe 
navigation of a ship shall be punished with  imprisonment for a term which may extend to fourteen 
years and shall  also be liable to fine;  
(g) in the course of commission  of or in attempt to commit, any of the  offences specified in 
clauses ( a) to ( d) in connection with a fixed  platform or clauses ( a) to ( f) in connection with a ship — 
(i) causes death to any person shall be punished with death;  
(ii) causes grievous hurt to any person shall be punished with  imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to fourteen years;  
(iii) causes injury to any person shall be punished with imprisonment  for a term which may 
extend to ten years;  
(iv) seizes or threatens a person shall be punishe d with imprisonment  for a term which may 
extend to ten years; and  4 
 (v) threatens to endanger a ship or a fixed platform shall be punished  with imprisonment for a 
term which may extend to two years.  
(2) Whoever attempts to commit, or abets the commission of,  an offence  punishable under                   
sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to have committed  such offence and shall be punished with the 
punishment provided for  such offence.  
(3) Whoever unlawfully or intentionally threatens a person to compel  that person to do or refrain from 
doing any act or to commit any  offence specified in clause ( a), clause ( b) or clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1), 
if such thr eat is likely to endanger the sa fe navigation of a ship or safety of a fixed platform shall be 
punished  with the punishment provided for such offence.  
(4) Where any act referred to in sub -section ( 1) is committed, — 
(a) against or on board — 
(i) an Indian ship at the time of commission of the offence; or  
(ii) any ship in the territory of India including its terri torial  waters;  
(b) by a stateless person,  
such act shall be deemed to be an offence committed by such person for  the purposes of this Act.  
Explanation .—In this sub -section, the expression "stateless person"  means a person whose habitual 
residence is in India but he does not  have nationality of any country.  
(5) Where an offence under sub -section ( 1) is committed and the person accused  of or suspected of 
the commission of such offence is present  in the territory of India and is not extradited to any Conven tion 
State or Protocol State, as the case may be, s uch person shall be  dealt with in India in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act.  
(6) On being satisfied that the circumstances so warrant, the Central  Government or any other 
authority designated by it shall take the  person referred to in sub -section ( 5) and present in the territory of  
India into custo dy or take measures, in accordan ce with the law for  the time being in force, to ensure his 
presence in India for such time  as is necessary to enable any  criminal or extradition proceeding to be  
instituted:  
Provided that when a person is taken into custody under this  sub-section, it shall be necessary for the 
Central Government or any  other authority designated by it  to notify the Government of any Convent ion 
State or Protocol State which have also established jurisdiction over the offence committed or suspected 
to have been  comm itted by the person in custody.  
(7) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 8), where an offence  under sub -section ( 1) is committed 
outside India, the person  committing such offence may be dealt with in respect thereof as if  such offence 
had been committed at any place within India at which he  may be found.  
(8) No court shall take cognizance of an offence punishable under this section which is  committed 
outside India unless — 
(a) such offence is committed on a fixed platform or on board a ship  flying the Indian flag at the 
time the offence is committed;  
(b) such offence is committed on board a ship which is for the time  being chartered without crew 
to a lessee who has his principal place  of business, or where he has no such place of business, his 
permanent  residence, is in India; or  
(c) the alleged offender is a citizen of India or is on a fixed  platform or on board a ship in  relation 
to which such offence is  committed when it enters the territorial waters of India or is found  in India.  
4. Conferment of powers of investigation .—(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code, 
for the purpose of this Act, the  Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  confer on 
any gazetted officer of the Coast Guard or any other  gazetted officer of the Central Government powers 
of arrest,  investigation and prosecution exercisable by a police officer under  the Cod e. 5 
 (2) All officers of police and all officers of Government are hereby  required and empowered to assist 
the officer of the Central Government  referred to in sub -section ( 1), in the execution of provisions of this  
Act. 
Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, "officer of the Coast  Guard" means an officer as 
defined in clause ( q) of section 2 of the  Coast Guard Act, 1978 (30 of 1978).  
5. Designated Courts .—(1) For the purpose of providing for speedy  trial, the State Government 
shall, with the concurrenc e of the Chief  Justice of the High Court, by notification in the Official Gazette,  
specify a Court of Session to be a Designated Court for such area or areas as may be  specified in the 
notification.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, a Designated Court  shall, as far as practicable, 
hold the trial on a day -to-day basis.  
6. Offence triable by Designated Court .—(1) Notwithstanding anything  contained in the Code, — 
(a) all offences under this Act shall be triable only by the  Designated Court specified under             
sub-section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) where a person accused of or suspected of the commission of an  offence under this Act is 
forwarded to a Magistrate under sub -section  (2) or sub -section ( 2A) of section 167 of the Code, such 
Magi strate  may authorise the detention of such person in suc h custody as he thinks  fit for a period not 
exceeding fifteen days in the whole where such  Magistrate is a Judicial Magistrate and seven days in 
the whole where  such Magistrate is an Executive Magistr ate: 
Provided that w here such Magistrate considers, — 
(i) when such person is forwarded to him as aforesaid; or  
(ii) upon or at any time before the expiry of the period of detention  authorised by him,  
that the detention of such person is unnecessary, he shall order such  person to be forwarded to the 
Designated Court having the  jurisdiction;  
(c) the Designated Court may exercise, in relation to the person  forwarded to it under clause ( b), 
the same power whic h a Magistrate  having jurisdiction to try a case may exercise under section 167 
of the Code, in relation to an accused person in such ca se who has been  forwarded to him under that 
section;  
(d) a Designated Court may, upon a perusal of a complaint made by a n officer of the Central 
Government or the State Government, as the case  may be, authorised in this behalf, take cognizance 
of that offence  without the accused being committed to it for trial. 
(2) When trying an offence under this Act, a Designated Court m ay also  try an offence other than an 
offence under this Act, with which the  accused may, under the Code, be charged at the same trial.  
7. Application of Code to proceedings before a Designated Court .—Save  as otherwise provided in 
this Act, the provisions of the Code shall  apply to the proceedings before a Designated Court and the 
person  conducting a prosecution before a Designated Court shall be deemed to  be a Public Prosecutor.  
8. Provision as to bail .—(1) Notwithstanding anything in the Code, no  person a ccused of an offence 
punishable under this Act shall, if in  custody, be released on  bail or on his own bond unless — 
(a) the Public Prosecutor has been given an opportunity to oppose the  application for such 
release; and  
(b) where the Public Prosecutor oppo ses the application, the Court is  satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is  not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to 
commit any  offence while on bail.  
(2) The limitations on granting of bail specified in sub -sectio n (1) are in addition to the limitations 
under the Code or any other law for  the time being in force on granting of bail.  
(3) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the  special powers of the High Court 
regarding bail under section 439 of the Code.  
  6 
 CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
9. Provisions as to extradition .—(1) The offences under section 3shall be deemed to have been 
included as extraditable offences and  provided for in all the extradition treaties made by India with  
Convention States o r Protocol States and which extend to , and are  binding on, India on the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) For the purposes of the application of the Extradition Act, 1962(34 of 1962) to offences under this 
Act, any ship registered in a  Convention State  or Protocol State shall, at any time while that ship  is 
plying, be deemed to be within the jurisdictio n of that Convention  State or Protocol State, whether or not 
it is for the time being also  within the jurisdiction of any other country.  
10. Contracting parties to Convention or Protocol .—The Central  Government may, by notification 
in the Official Gazette, certify as to  which are the Convention States or Protocol States and to what extent  
such States have availed themselves of the provisi ons of the  Convent ion or Protocol, as the case may be, 
and any such notification  shall be conclusive evidence of the matters certified therein.  
11. Power to treat certain ships to be registered in Convention  States .—If the Central 
Government is satisfied that the requiremen ts of the Convention have been satisfied in relation to any 
ship, it may,  by notification in the Official Gazette, direct th at such ship shall,  for the purposes of this Act, 
be deemed to be registered in such  Convention State as may be specified in the not ification.  
12. Previous sanction necessary for prosecution .—No prosecution for  an offence under this Act 
shall be instituted except with the previous  sanction of the Central Government.  
13. Presumptions as to offences under section 3 .—In a prosecution for  an offence under                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 3, if it is proved — 
(a) that the arms, ammunition or explosives were recovered from the  possession of the accused 
and there is reason to believe that such  arms, ammunition or explosives of similar  nature were used in 
the commission of such offence;  
(b) that there is evidence of use of force, threat of force or any  other form of intimidation caused 
to the crew or passengers in  connection with the commission of such offence; or  
(c) that there is evid ence of an intended threat of using bomb, fire,  arms, ammunition, or 
explosives or committing any form of violence  against the crew, passengers or cargo of a ship or 
fixed platform  located on the Continental Shelf of India,  
the Designated Court shall presu me, unless the contrary is proved,  that the accused had committed such 
offence.  
14. Protection of action taken in good faith .—(1) No suit,  prosecution or other legal proceeding 
shall lie against any person for  anything which is in good faith done or intend ed to be done in  pursuance 
of the provisions of this Act.  
(2) No suit or other legal proceeding shall lie against the Central  Government for any damage caused 
or likely to be caused for anything  which is in good faith done or intended to be done in pursuan ce of the  
provisions of this Act.  
___________  
 
--------------------------The Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE UNIT TRUST OF INDIA (TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKING AND REPEAL) ACT, 2002  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
TRANSFER  AND VESTING OF THE UNDERTAKING OF  TRUST IN THE SPECIFIED  COMPANY AND 
TRANSFER  AND VESTING OF THE SPECIFIED  UNDERTAKING OF TRUST IN THE  ADMINISTRATOR  
3. Transfer of initial capital.  
4. Undertaking of Trust to vest in specified company and spe cified undertaking of Trust to v est in 
Administrator.  
5. General effect of vesting of undertaking or specified undertaking in specified company or 
Administrator.  
6. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of Trust.  
 
CHAPTER III  
APPOINTMENT  OF ADMINISTRATOR  TO MANAGE THE SPECIFIED UNDERTAKING  OF THE  TRUST  
7. Appointment  of Administrator to manage specified undertaking.  
8. Administrator to vacate office.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND  FUNCTIONS  OF ADMINISTRATOR  
9. Board of Advisers.  
10. Powers and functions of Administrator.  
11. Maintenance of accounts by Administrator.  
 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANE OUS 
12. Concession, etc., to be deemed to have been granted to specified undertaking.  
13. Tax exemption or benefit to continue to have effect.  
14. Exemption from stamp duty.  
15. Guarantee to be operative.  
16. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
17. Shares, bonds,  debentures and units to be deemed to be approved securities.  
18. Substitution in every Act, rule, regulation or notification by specified company or Administrator 
in place of Trust.  
19. Power of Central Government to alter Schedules I and II.  
20. Power of Central Gov ernment to make Scheme.  
21. Repeal and saving of Act  52 of 1963 . 
22. Act to have overriding effect.  
23. Application of other laws not barred.  
24. Power to remove difficulties.  
25. Repeal and saving.  
SCHEDULE I.  
SCHEDULE II.  
  3 
  
THE UNIT TRUST OF INDIA (TRANSFER OF  UNDERTAKING AND  
REPEAL) ACT, 2002  
ACT 58 OF 2002  
[17th December , 2002.]  
An Act to provide for the transfer and vesting of the undertaking (excluding the specified  
undertaking) of the Unit Trust of India to the specified company to be formed and  registered 
under the Co mpanies Act, 1956, and the transfer and vesting of the specified  undertaking of 
the Unit Trust of India in the Administrator and for matters connected  therewith or incidental 
thereto and also to repeal the Unit Trust of India Act, 19 63. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of 
Undertaking and  Repeal) Act, 2002.  
(2) It shall be deemed to hav e come into force on the 29th day of October, 2002.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Administrator” means a person or a body of persons appointed as Administrator  under 
section 7;  
(b) “appointed day” means such date  as the Central Government may, by notification in  the 
Official Gazette, appoint under section 4;  
(c) “bank” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( d) of section 2 of the Recovery  of 
Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993);  
(d) “Development Bank” means the Industrial Development Bank of India established  under the 
Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964);  
(e) “financial institution” shall have the meaning assigned to it in clause ( h) of section 2of t he 
Recovery of Debts Due to Banks and Financial Institutions Act, 1993 (51 of 1993);  
(f) “Life Insurance Corporation of India” means the Life Insurance Corporation of India  
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Life Insurance Corporation Act, 1956                    
(31 of 1956);  
(g) “Schedule” means Schedules I and II to this Act;  
(h) “specified company” means a company to be formed and registered under the  Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) and whose entire capital is subscribed by such fina ncial  institutions or banks as may 
be specified by the Central Government, by notification in  the Official Gazette, for the purpose of 
transfer and vesting of the undertaking;  
(i) “specified undertaking” includes all business, assets, liabilities and prope rties of the  Trust 
representing and relatable to the schemes and Development Reserve Fund specified  in the Schedule I;  
(j) “State Bank” means the State Bank of India constituted under the State Bank of India  Act, 
1955 (23 of 1955);  
(k) “Trust” means the Un it Trust of India established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of  the 
Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (52 of 1963);  
(l) “undertaking” includes all business, assets, liabilities and properties of the Trust  representing 
and relatable to the schemes and plans  specified in the Schedule II;  4 
 (m) “unit” means a unit issued under a unit scheme made under section 21 of the Unit  Trust of 
India Act, 1963 (52 of 1963).  
CHAPTER II  
TRANSFER AND VESTING OF THE UNDERTAKING OF TRUST IN THE  SPECIFIED COMPANY  AND  
TRANSFER  AND  VESTING OF THE SPECIFIED  UNDERTAKING OF TRUST IN THE  ADMINISTRATOR  
3. Transfer of initial capital. —(1) On the appointed day, the initial capital of the Trust, contributed 
by the  Development Bank, the Life Insurance Corporation, the State Bank and the s ubsidiary  banks and 
other institutions under sections 4 and 4A of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963(52 of 1963), as it stood 
immediately before the commencement of this Act, shall stand  transferred to, and vest in, the Central 
Government.  
(2) The initial c apital contributed by the Development Bank, the Life Insurance  Corporation, the State 
Bank and the subsidiary banks and other institutions shall be  refunded, by the Central Government, to 
such extent as may be determined by it, having  regard to the book va lue, the assets and liabilities of the 
Trust.  
4.Undertaking of Trust to vest in specified company and specified undertaking of  Trust to vest 
in Administrator. —(1) On such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official  
Gazette, appoint,  there shall be transferred to, and vest in, — 
(a) the specified company, the undertaking (excluding the specified undertaking) of the  Trust for 
such consideration and on such terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed  upon between the 
Central Governmen t and the subscribers to the capital of the specified  company;  
(b) the Administrator, the specified undertaking of the Trust.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government, as to whether any  business, assets, liabilities  or 
properties represent or relate to t he undertaking or specified undertaking, shall be final:  
Provided that any business, asset or property which is not represented or related to the  undertaking or 
specified undertaking, shall vest in the Central Government.  
5. General effect of vesting of undertaking or specified undertaking in specified  company or 
Administrator. —(1) The undertaking of the Trust which is transferred to, and which vest in, the  
specified company or the specified undertaking of the Trust, which is transferred to, and  vest in, the 
Administrator, as the case may be, under section 4, shall be deemed to include  all business, assets, rights, 
powers, authorities and privileges and all properties, movable  and immovable, real and personal, 
corporeal and incorporeal, in possession or  reservation, present or contingent of whatever nature and 
wheresoever  situate including  lands, buildings, vehicles, cash balances, deposits, foreign currencies, 
disclosed and  undisclosed reserves, reserve fund, special reserve fund, benevolent reserve fund, any other 
fund, stocks, investments, shares, bonds, debentures, security, management of any  industrial concern, 
loans, advances and guarantees given to industrial concerns, tenancies,  leases and book -debts and all 
other rights and interests arising out of such property as  were immediately before the appointed day in the 
ownership, possession or power of the  Trust in relation to the undertaking or the specified undertaking, as 
the case may be,  within or without India, all books of account, registers, records  and documents relating  
thereto and shall also be deemed to include all borrowings, liabilities, units issued and  obligations of 
whatever kind within or without India then subsisting of the Trust in  relation to such undertaking or the 
specified undertaking , as the case may be.  
(2) All contracts, deeds, bonds, guarantees, powers -of-attorney, other instruments(including all units 
issued and unit schemes formulated by the Trust) and working  arrangements subsisting immediately 
before the appointed day and affec ting the Trust  shall cease to have effect or to be enforceable against the 
Trust and shall be of as full  force and effect against or in favour of the specified company or the 
Administrator, as the  case may be, in which the undertaking or specified undertak ing has vested by virtue 
of this Act and enforceable as fully and effectually as if instead of the Trust, the specified  company or the 
Administrator, as the case may be, had been named therein or had been a  party thereto.  
(3) All unit schemes taken by the Board of the Trust immediately before the  commencement of this 
Act shall be deemed to have been taken by the specified company  or the Administrator, as the case may 5 
 be, and all the units issued by the Trust under such  scheme shall be deemed to be the units  issued by the 
specified company or the  Administrator, as the case may be, and the income on such units shall be 
distributed and  such units shall be redeemed or purchased by them in the same manner as would have  
been done by the Trust had the undertaking o r the specified undertaking not been  transferred under 
section 4.  
(4) Any proceeding or cause of action pending or existing immediately before the  appointed day by or 
against the Trust may, as from the appointed day, be continued and  enforced by or against  the specified 
company or the Administrator, as the case may be, in  which the undertaking or specified undertaking has 
vested by virtue of this Act as it  might have been enforced by or against the Trust if this Act had not been 
enacted and  shall cease to b e enforceable by or against the Trust.  
6. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of Trust .—(1) Every officer or other 
employee of the Trust (except a trustee of the Board, the  Chairman and executive trustee) serving in the 
employment immediately before the  appointed day shall become, as from the appointed day, an officer or, 
as the case may be,  other employee of the specified company and shall hold his office or service therein 
by the same tenure, at the same remuneration, upon the sam e terms and conditions, with the  same 
obligations and with the same rights and privileges as to leave, leave fare  concession, welfare scheme, 
medical benefit scheme, insurance, provident fund, other  funds, retirement, voluntary retirement, gratuity 
and oth er benefits as he would have held  under the Trust if its undertaking had not vested in the specified 
company and shall  continue to do so as an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of the specified  
company or until the expiry of a period of six mo nths from the appointed day if such  officer or other 
employee opts not to continue to be the officer or other employee of the  specified company within such 
period.  
(2) The Administrator, in consultation with the specified company, may requisition, the  services of 
such officers or other employees as it may deem fit, on such terms and  conditions which may be mutually 
agreed upon between the Administrator and the  specified company.  
(3) Where an officer or other employee of the Trust opts under sub -section ( 1) not to be  in 
employment or service of the specified company, such officer or other employee shall  be deemed to have 
resigned.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 (14 of 1947)  or in any 
other law for the time being in  force, the transfer of the services of any officer  or other employee of the 
Trust to the specified company shall not entitle such officer or  other employee to any compensation under 
this Act or under any other law for the time  being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by any 
court, tribunal or other  authority.  
(5) The officers and other employees who have retired before the appointed day from the  service of 
the Trust and are entitled to any benefits, rights or privileges shall be entitled to  receive the same benefits, 
rights or privileges from the specified company.  
(6) The trust of the provident fund or the gratuity fund of the Unit Trust of India and any  other bodies 
created for the welfare of officers or other employees would continue to  discharge their functions in the 
specified company as was being done hitherto in the Unit  Trust of India and any tax exemption granted to 
the provident fund or the gratuity fund  would continue to be applied to the specified company.  
(7) Notwithstanding anythi ng contained in this Act or in the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of  1956) or in 
any other law for the time being in force or in the regulations of the Unit  Trust of India, the Chairman, the 
trustees, executive trustee or any other person entitled to  manage the wh ole or substantial part of the 
business and affairs of the Trust shall not been  titled to any compensation against the Trust for the loss of 
office or for the premature  termination of any contract of management entered into by him with the Trust.  
CHAPTER I II 
APPOINTMENT  OF ADMINISTRATOR  TO MANAGE THE SPECIFIED  UNDERTAKING  OF THE  TRUST  
7. Appointment of Administrator to manage specified undertaking .—(1) The Central 
Government shall, on and from the appointed day, appoint a person or  a body of persons, as the  
“Administrator of the specified undertaking of the Unit Trust of  India” for the purpose of taking over the 6 
 administration thereof and the Administrator  shall carry on the management of the specified undertaking 
of the Trust for and on behalf  of the Centra l Government.  
(2) The Central Government may issue such directions (including directions as to  initiating, 
defending or continuing any legal proceedings before any court, tribunal or  other authority) to the 
Administrator as to his powers and functions as that Government  may deem desirable and the 
Administrator may apply to the Central Government at anytime for instructions as to the manner in which 
he shall conduct the management of the  specified undertaking or in relation to any matter arising in the 
course of such  management.  
(3) Subject to the other provisions of this Act and the Schemes made thereunder and the  control of the 
Central Government, the Administrator shall be entitled, notwithstanding  anything contained in any other 
law for the time being in  force, to exercise, in relation to  the management of the specified undertaking, 
the powers specified under section 10including powers to dispose of any property or assets of such 
specified undertaking  whether such powers are derived under any law for the time being in force.  
(4) Every person having possession, custody or control of any property forming part of  the specified 
undertaking of the Trust shall deliver forthwith such property to the  Administrator.  
(5) Any person who, on the appointed day, has in his possession or u nder his control any  books, 
papers or other documents relating to the specified undertaking, including the  minutes book containing 
the resolutions of the persons in charge of the management of  the specified undertaking before the 
appoint ed day, the current cheque books relating to  the specified undertaking, any letters, memoranda, 
notes or other communications  between him and the T rust so far they relate to the specified undertaking 
shall,  notwithstanding anything contained in any other l aw for the time being in force, be liable  to account 
for the books, papers and other documents (including such minutes book,  letters, memoranda, notes or 
other communications) to the Administrator.  
(6) Any person in charge of the management of the specifie d undertaking immediately  before the 
appointed day shall, within ten days from that day or within such further  period as the Central complete 
inventory of all the properties and assets (including  particulars of book -debts and investments and 
belongings) fo rming part of the specified  undertaking immediately before the appointed day and of all the 
liabilities and  obligations of such specified undertaking, in relation to its administration, subsisting  
immediately before that day, and also of all agreements rel ating to specified undertaking  entered into by 
the Trust in relation to its administration and in force immediately before  that day.  
(7) The Administrator shall receive from the funds of the specified undertaking such  remuneration as 
the Central Government  may fix.  
8. Administrator to vacate office. —(1) The Administrator shall, immediately on redemption of all 
the schemes of the  specified undertaking and the payment of entire amount to investors, shall vacate his  
office; but nothing in this sub -section shall be construed as prohibiting his appointment as  a member of 
the Board of Advisers after vacation of his office as such.  
(2) On the vacation of his office, the Administrator shall forthwith deliver, to the Central  Government 
or any institution or offic er specified by it, possession of all assets and  properties representing and 
relatable to the specified undertaking which are in his  possession, custody and control on the date 
immediately preceding the date on which he  vacates his office as the Administra tor. 
CHAPTER IV  
POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF  ADMINISTRATOR  
9. Board of Advisers .—(1) On such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official  Gazette, appoint a Board of Advisers to advise and assist the Administrator in carrying on  the 
management of the specified undertaking.  
(2) The composition, term of office of the Advisers, the fees and allowances and other  conditions of 
appointment, disqualifications for being an Adviser, filling up of casual  vacancy in the office of the 
Adviser, th e meetings of the Board of Advisers, vacation and  resignation of office of the Advisers, shall 
be such as may be specified in the Scheme  made by the Central Government.  7 
 10. Powers and functions of Administrator .—(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act an d the 
Scheme made thereunder, the  Administrator may, on the advice of the Board of Advisers, transact any of 
the following  kinds of business in India in relation to the spec ified undertaking only, namely: — 
(a) selling and purchasing units of the schemes specified in Schedule I;  
(b) investing in and acquiring, holding or disposing of securities and exercising and  enforcing, all 
powers and rights incidental thereto including protection or realisation of  such investment and the 
taking over of the administrat ion of any property offered as  security for such investment;  
(c) granting of loans and advances upon the security of any movable or immovable  property or 
otherwise;  
(d) accepting, collecting, discounting, re -discounting, purchasing, selling or negotiating  or 
otherwise dealing with, any bills of exchange, hundies, promissory notes, coupons,  drafts, bill of 
lading, railway receipts, warehouse receipts, documents of title to goods,  warrants, certificates, scrips 
and other mercantile instruments;  
(e) purchasing , selling or issuing participation certificates in relation to any loan or  advance 
granted by any public financial institution or scheduled bank or such other  institution as may be 
specified by the Central Government;  
(f) keeping money on deposit with comp anies or other bodies corporate, scheduled banks  or such 
other institutions as may be specified by the Central Government;  
(g) formulating in relation to any unit scheme specified in Schedule I, — 
(i) savings and life insurance plan or plans under which a p erson may acquire an interest  in 
units in association with or as the agent of, the Life Insurance Corporation of India or  the Central 
Government, but not including the life insurance business;  
(ii) savings and insurance plan or plans under which a person m ay acquire an interest in  units 
in association with, or as the agent of, the General Insurance Corporation but not  including the 
general insurance business; or  
(iii) any other plan or plans, under which a person may acquire an interest in units;  
(h) acquiring immovable property or any interest therein, the development (including  
construction) and sale of such property and the rendering of financial and other assistance  to any 
person for the acquisition of any immovable property or any interest therein  and for the development 
(including construction) of such property;  
(i) providing leasing and hire purchase finance to persons, companies, and other bodies  corporate;  
(j) providing merchant banking and investment advisory services;  
(k) exten ding investment  or fund or port folio management services to persons resident  outside 
India;  
(l) opening of an account or the making of an agency arrangement with a bankin g corporated 
outside India;  
(m) buying or selling of or entering into such other dealings in, foreign  exchange, as maybe 
necessary for the discharge of its functions;  
(n) doing any other kind of business connected with mobilisation of savings or  investments which 
the Central Government may authorise;  
(o) generally doing all such acts and things as may be incidental to or consequential upon  the 
discharge of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The Administrator shall, on and after the appointed day, neither formulate any new  scheme nor 
issue any new unit, whether related to the undertaking or the specified  undertaking or otherwise.  8 
 11. Maintenance of accounts by Administrator .—(1) The Administrator shall maintain separate 
accounts of each of the specified  undertaking asset possession whereof has been taken by him, and shall 
cause to be made  therein entries of all receipts and expenditure in respect thereof.  
(2) The separate accounts under sub -section (1) shall be maintained in such form and in  such manner 
as may be specified by the Central Government.  
(3) The Central Government shall cause the accounts maintain ed under this section to be  inspected 
and audited at such intervals and by such persons as may be specified by it.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
12. Concession, etc., to be deemed to have been granted to specified undertaking .—With effect 
from the appointed day,  all fiscal and other concessions, licences,  benefits, privileges and exemptions 
granted to the Trust in connection with the affairs and  business of the specified undertaking of the Trust 
under any law for the time being in  force shall be deemed to have be en granted in relation to the specified 
undertaking.  
13.Tax exemption or benefit to continue to have effect. —(1) Notwithstanding anything contained 
in the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) or  any other enactment for the time being in force relating to tax 
or income, profits or gains,  no income -tax or any other tax shall be payable by the Administrator in 
relation to the  specified undertaking for a period of five years computed from the appointed day in  respect 
of any income, profits or gains derived, or any  amount received in relation to the  specified undertaking.  
(2) The transfer and vesting of the undertaking or the specified undertaking in terms of  section 4 shall 
not be construed as a transfer within the meaning of the Income -tax Act,  1961 (43 of 1961) f or the 
purposes of capital gains.  
14.Exemption from stamp duty. —Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Stamp Act, 
1899 (2 of 1899), the  transfer and vesting of the undertaking and the specified undertaking in terms of 
section 4  shall not be liabl e to the payment of any stamp duty under that Act.  
15. Guarantee to be operative. —Any guarantee given for or in favour of the Trust with respect to 
any loan, lease,  finance or other assistance shall continue to be operative in relation to the specified  
undertaking managed by the Administrator.  
16. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit or other legal proceedings shall lie against 
the Central Government or the  Administrator, Board of Advisers or any of the officers or other employees 
of the Central  Government for any damage caused or likely to be caused by anything which is in good  
faith done or intended to be done under this Act.  
17. Shares, bonds, debentures and units to be deemed to be approved                                   
securities. —Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the  shares, 
bonds, debentures and units of the specified undertaking shall be deemed to be  approved securities for the 
purposes of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (2 of 1882), th e Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of 1938) and the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949).  
18. Substitution in every Act, rule, regulation or notification by specified company or  
Administrator in place of Trust. —In every Act, rule, regulation or notification in force on the appointed 
day, for the  words “Unit Trust of India”, wherever they occur, the words, brackets and figures  “specified 
company referred to in the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and  Repeal) Act, 2002” or 
“Administrator of the specifi ed undertaking of the Unit Trust of  India referred to in the Unit Trust of India 
(Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act,  2002”, as the case may be, shall be substituted.  
19. Power of Central Government to alter Schedules I and II. —(1) The Central Governm ent may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, alter  Schedules I and II.  
(2) Every alteration made by the Central Government under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid,  as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session,  for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the  session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 9 
 agree in ma king any  modification in the alteration, or both Houses agree that the alteration should not be  
made, the alteration shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case 
may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be  without prejudice to the validity of 
anything previously done under that alteration.  
20. Power of Central Government to make Scheme. —(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make a  Scheme for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the said  Scheme may 
provide for all or any of the follo wing matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the specified undertaking and schemes and a ssets and  investments 
specified in Schedule I shall be managed;  
(b) the term of office of the Advisers, the fee and allowances and other conditions of  appointment 
of the Advisers, disqualifications for being an Adviser, filling up of casual  vacancy in the office of 
Adviser, the meetings of Board of Advisers, vacation and  resignation of office of the Advisers;  
(c) the manner of payment of consideration for which the undertaking shall be transferred  to the 
specified company;  
(d) the assets representing and re latable to the undertaking and the specified undertaking;  and 
(e) such incidental, consequential and supplemental matters as may be necessary to carry  out the 
provisions of this Act.  
(3) Every Scheme made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may  be after it is  made before 
each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty  days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions and if  before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the se ssion or the successive  sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the Scheme or both  Houses agree that the Scheme should not be made, the Scheme shall thereafter 
have  effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the ca se may be; so, however, that  any such 
modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything  previously done under 
that Scheme.  
21. Repeal and saving of Act  52 of 1963 .—(1) On the appointed day, the Unit Trust of India Act, 
1963 ( 52 of 1963) shall stand  repealed and the Board of trustees referred to in section 10 of the said Act 
(herein  after referred to as the repealed Act) shall stand dissolved.  
(2) On the dissolution of the said Board, the person appointed as the Chairman of the  Board and every 
other person appointed as the trustee and executive trustee and holding  office as such immediately before 
such date shall vacate their respective office.  
(3) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken or purported to ha ve been done or 
taken including any rule, regulation, notification, scheme, inspection, order  or notice made or issued or 
any appointment, confirmation or declaration made or any  permission, authorisation or exemption granted 
or any document or instrument executed  or any direction given under the Act hereby repealed shall, in so 
far as it is not  inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have been done or taken under  
the corresponding provisions of this Act.  
(4) Notwithstanding the repeal of  the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (52 of 1963), the  Administrator 
shall, so far as may be, comply with the provisions of Chapter VI of the  Act so repealed for any of the 
purposes related to the annual accounts and audit of the  Trust.  
22. Act to have overr iding effect. —The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything in  consistent  therewith contained in any enactment other than this Act or in any instrument 
having  effect by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
23. Application of  other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of the  provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
24. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central  Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 10 
 not in consistent with the provisions of this Act as appear to it to be necessary or expedient for  removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years  from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid  before each 
House of Parliament.  
25. Repeal and sa ving.—(1) The Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) 
Ordinance, 2002 (5of 2002) is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Unit Trust of India (Transfer of Undertaking and  Repeal) 
Ordinance, 2002 (5 of 2002), anything done or any action taken under the said  Ordinance, shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken under the corresponding  provisions of this Act.  
  11 
 SCHEDULE I  
[See sections 2( g), 2(i) and 19]  
PART I  
SCHEMES  
 
1. The Unit Scheme, 1964 published on May 30, 1964, in the Gazette of India, Part III,  Section 4, 
dated the 30th May, 1964.  
 
2. The Children's Gift Plan -1970 published on December 11, 1971, in the Gazette of  India, Part III, 
Section 4.  
 
3. The Children's Gift Growth Fund Unit Scheme, 1986 published on April 19, 1986, in  the Gazette 
of India, Part III, Section 4 , vide No. UT/392/DPD(P&R) 3B/Vol.  I/85-86,dated the 3rd April, 
1986.  
 
4. The Bhopal G as Victims -Monthly Income Plan -1992 (BGVMIP) published on  September 18, 
1993, in the Gazette of India, Part III, Se ction 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/360A/SPD -174/93 -94, 
dated the 13th August,  1993.  
 
5. The Rajlakshmi Unit Scheme (II) published on August 27, 1994, in the Gazette of  India, Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/140A/SPD55/93 -94, dated the 29th July,  1994.  
 
6. The Monthly Income Plan, 1997 (IV) published on November 2, 1997, in the Gazette  of India, 
Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/SPD -71-R/R-97-98, dated the 23rdOctober, 1997.  
 
7. The Institutional Investor s’ Special Fund Unit Scheme, 1997 (II) published on February 21,1998, 
in the Gazette of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -96/SPD89C/97 -98, dated the 
5th January, 1998.  
 
8. The Monthly Income Plan, 1997 (V) published on February 21, 1998, in the Gazette of  India, 
Part III, Section 4 ,vide No. UT/DBDM/R -95/SPD71S/97 -98, dated the 12thJanuary, 1998.  
 
9.  The Monthly Income Plan 1998 published on April 4, 1998, in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -104/SPD71T/97 -98, dated the 5th March,  1998.  
 
10. The Institutional In vestors' Special Fund Unit Scheme 1998 (IISFUS' 98) published  on May 23, 
1998, in the Gazette of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/SPD -89-D/R-III/97 -98, 
dated the 27th April, 1998.  
 
11. The UTI/NRI Fund (UNF) published on June 13, 1998, in the Gazette of India, Part  III, Section 
4, vide No. UT/NRI/R -113/N -52/97 -98, dated the 15th May, 1998.  
 
12. The Monthly Income Plan 1998 (II) published on August 1, 1998, in the Gazette of  India, Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -119/SPD -71U/ 97 -98, dat ed the 29thJune, 1998.  
 
13. The Monthly Income Plan (III) published on September 5, 1998, in the Gazette of  India, Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -125/SPD -71-V/ 98 -99, dated the 7thAugust, 1998.  
 
14. The Monthly Income Plan (IV) published on February 27, 1999, in the Gazette of  India, Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -160/SPD -71W/ 98 -99, dated the 28thJanuary, 1999.  
 
15. The Monthly Income Plan 1998 (V) published on March 6, 1999 , in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -101 /SPD -71X/98 -99, dated the 28th January,  1999.  
 12 
 16. The Children's Gift Growth Fund Unit Scheme 1999, published on May 29, 1999, in the  Gazette 
of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -175/SPD55/98 -99, dated the29th May, 1999.  
 
17. The Institutional Investors' Special Fund Unit Scheme 1998 (II) published on May 29,1999, in 
the Gazette of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/ DBDM/R/SPD/98 -99 vide dated the 31st 
March, 1999.  
 
18. The Rajlakshmi Unit Plan 1999 published on May 29, 1999, in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -175/SPD -59A/98 -99. 
 
19. The Monthly Income Plan 1999 published on June 12, 1999, in the Gazette of India, Part  III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -179/SPD -71-Y/98 -99, dated the 5th May,  1999.  
 
20. The Special Unit Scheme -1999 formulated in pursuance of agreement between  Government of 
India and Unit Trust of India signed on 22nd July, 1999.  
 
21.  The Monthly Income Plan 1999 (II) published on January 22, 2000, in the Gazette of  India, P art 
III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -224/SPD -71-Z/ 99 -2000, dated the 30th  December, 1999.  
 
22. The Monthly Income Plan 2000 published on April 15, 2000, in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/SPD -119-A/R-235/99 -2000, dated the 1 4th March, 2000.  
23. The Monthly Income Plan 2000 (Second) published on September 9, 2000, in the  Gazette of 
India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/SPD -119-B/ R -7/99-2000,  dated the 10th August, 
2000.  
 
24. The Monthly Income Plan 2001 published on May 12, 2001, in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -69/SPD -119-D/2000 -2001, dated the 9th  April, 2001.  
 
25. The Monthly Income Plan 2000 (Third) published on January 13, 2001, in the Gazette  of India, 
Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/SPD -119-C/R15/2000 -2001, dated the14th November, 
2000.  
 
 
PART II  
ASSETS AND INVESTMENTS  
 
26. All assets and investments made out of the Development Reserve Fund created in  1984 under                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 25B of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (52 of1963).  
 
 
 
  13 
 SCHEDULE II  
[See sections 2( g), 2(l) and 19]  
SCHEMES AND PLANS  
 
1. The Mutual Fund (Subsidiary) Unit Scheme, 1986 published on October 25, 1986 , in the Gazette 
of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. 158/DPD (P& R) 100/Vol. I/86 -87 dated  the 9th October, 
1986 . 
2. The Capital Growth Unit Scheme, 1992 (Master  gain 92) published on July 4,1992 , in the 
Gazette of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/ DBDM/ 1144/ SPD -185/91 -92dated the 8th 
June, 1992.  
3. The Housing Unit Scheme -1992 published in the Gazette of India, Part III, Section 4,  vide No. 
UT/DBDM/ 155A/SPD -184/92 -93 dated August 8, 1992.  
4. The Unit Scheme 1992 published on April 17, 1993, in the Gazette of India, Part  III, Section 4, 
vide No. UT/DBDM /2044A/SPD -61/92 -93. 
5. The Master Equity Plan -1993 published on July 17, 1993, in the Gazette of India, Part  III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/2454A/SPD -74A/92 -93. 
6. The Senior Citizens Unit Plan published on August 28, 1993 , in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/393A/SPD -60/93 -94 dated the 18th August,  1993.  
7. The Eq uity Linked Savings Unit Scheme -1994 (ELSS 94) published on February 12,  1994 , in the 
Gazette of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R96A/SPD74B/93 -94 dated the 11th 
January, 1994.  
8. The Growi ng Corpus Growing Income Scheme -1994 (GCGI 94) published on April 2,  1994 , in 
the Gazette of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/1704A/SPD -78/93 -94 dated the 7th 
March, 1994.  
9. The Grihalakshmi Unit Sch eme 1994 (GUS 1994) published on August 20, 1994 , in the  Gazette 
of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/76A/ SPD -68/93 -94.  
10. The Equity Linked Savings Unit Scheme 1995 (ELSS 95) published on February 11,1995 , in the 
Gazette of India, Part III,  Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/680A/SPD/74C/94 -95 dated the 10th 
January, 1995.  
11. The Primary Equity Fund published on June 3, 1995 , in the Gazette of India, Part III,  Section 4, 
vide No. UT/DBDM/ 1109A/SPD -85 /94 -95 dated the 2nd May, 1995.  
12. The Master Equity Plan 1996 published on December 23, 1995 , in the Gazette of  India, Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/431A/SPD -74D/ 95 -96 dated the 30thNovember, 1995.  
 
  14 
 13. The Grandmaster Unit Scheme 1993 published on January 25, 1997 , in the Gazette of  India, Part 
III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -172/SPD -77/96 -97 dated the 9th  December, 1996.  
 
14. The Master Equity Plan 1997 published on January 25, 1997 , in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R173/SPD -74-E/96 -97 dated the 23rd December,  1996.  
 
15. The UTI Money Market Fund (A MONEY MARKET MUTUAL FUND ) published on July  26, 
1997 , in the Gazette of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/SPD -93/R -223/96 -97 dated 
the 24th June, 1997.  
 
16. The Master Equity Plan 1998 published on February 21, 1998 , in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -96/SPD -74F/97 -98 dated the 5th January,  1998.  
 
17. The Unit Growth Scheme 10,000 published on June 27, 1998 , in the Gazette  of India,  Part III, 
Section 4. 
 
18. The UTI -Bond Fund published on August 8, 1998 , in the Gazette of India, Part III,  Section 4, 
vide No. UT/DBDM/R -121/SPD -102/97 -98 dated the 14th July, 1998.  
 
19. The UTI -Small Investor s’ Fund published on August 8, 1998 , in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -181/SPD -98/97 -98 dated the 14th July, 1998.  
 
20. The Master Value Unit Plan 1998 published on August 8,  1998 , in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4,  vide No. UT/DBDM/SPD -107/R -121/97 -98 dated the 14th July, 1998.  
 
21. The Master Index Fund published on August 15,  1998 , in the Gazette of India, Part III,  Section 4, 
vide No. UT/DBDM/SPD -108/R -122/97 -98 dated the 17th July, 1998.  
 
22. The Master  share Plus Unit Scheme 1991 published on April 24, 1999 , in the Gazette  of India, 
Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -171/SPD -172/ 98 -99 dated the 30th  March, 1999.  
 
23. The Master Equity Plan 1999 published on May 29, 1999 , in the Gazette of India, Part  III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R/SPD -74G/98 -99 dated the 7th April, 1999.  
 
24. The UTI Growth Sectors Fund (UTI - GSF) published on August 28, 1999 , in the  Gazette of 
India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/SPD -112/R194A/98 -99 dated  the 27th July, 1999.  
 
25. The UTI G -Sec. Fund published on December 18, 1999 , in the Gazette of India, Part  III, Section 
4, vide No. UT/DBM/R/SPD -114/99 -2000 dated the 18th November, 1999.  
 
26. The UTI Equity Tax Savings Plan published on March 18, 2000 , in the Gazette of  India, Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBD/R -SPD-117/99 -2000 dated the 9th February,  2000.  
 
27. The Master  growth Unit Scheme -1993 published on May 20, 2000 , in the Gazette of  India, Part 
III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -238 /SPD -118/ 99 -2000 dated the 17th  April, 2000.  
 
28. The Nifty Index Fund (NIF) published on May 20, 2000 , in the Gazette of India, Part  III, Section 
4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -239/SPD -120/99 -2000 dated the 17th April, 2000.  
 
 
  15 
 29. The Unit Scheme 1995 (US-95) published on June 3, 2000 , in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -241/SPD -84/99 -2000 dated the 3rd May, 2000.  
 
30. The Index Select Equity Fund published on March 17, 2001 , in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -62/SPD -96/2000 -2001 dated the 12thFebruary, 2001.  
 
31. The Unit Scheme for Charitable and Religious Trusts and Registered Societies, 1981published on 
April 28, 2001 , in the Gazette of India, Part III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -65/SPD -
53/2000 -2001 dated the 20th March, 2001.  
 
32. The Unit Linked Insurance Plan 1971 published on May 19, 2001 , in the Gazette of  India, Part 
III, Section 4 , vide No. UT/DBDM/R -7/SPD -52/2000 -2001 dated the 24th  April, 2001.  
 
33. The Children's Career Plan (CCP) published on May 12, 2001 , in the Gazette of India,  Part III, 
Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -69/SPD -64/2000 -2001 dated the 9th April,  2001.  
 
34. The UTI -Mahila Unit Scheme (MUS) published on June 16, 2001 , in the Gazette of  India, Part 
III, Section 4 , vide No. UT/DBDM/R/SPD -68-A/20002001 dated the 11thMay, 2001.  
 
35. The Retirement Benefit Plan (RBP) published on August 10, 2002 , in the Gazette of  India, Part 
III, Section 4, vide No. UT/DBDM/R -47/SPD -66/ 2001 -2002 dated the 25thJuly, 2002.  
 
36. The UTI Regular Income Scheme . 
 
37. The India Fund Unit Scheme 1986.  
 
38. The India Access Fund Unit Scheme 1996.  
 
39. The India Information Technology Fund Unit Scheme 1997.  
 
40. The India Infrastructure Fund Unit Scheme 1999.  
 
41. The India Media, Internet and Communication Fund Unit Scheme 2000.  
 
42. The Variable Investment Scheme 2002.  
 
43. The Unit Scheme 2002.  
 
 
 
