--------------------------The Biological Diversity Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short  title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
REGULATION OF ACCESS TO BIOLOGICAL  DIVERSITY  
3. Certain persons not to undertake Biodiversity related activities without approval of National 
Biodiversity Authority.  
4. Results of research not to  be transferred to certain person s without approval of National 
Biodiversity Authority.  
5. Sections 3 and 4 not to apply to certain collaborative re search projects.  
6. Application for intellectual property rights not to be made without approval of National 
Biodiversity Authority.  
7. Prior intimation to State Biodiversity Board for obtaining biological resource for certain 
purpose s. 
 
CHAPTER III  
NATIONAL  BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY  
8. Establishment of National Biodiversity Authority.  
9. Conditions of service of Chairperson and members.  
10. Chairperson to be Chief Executive of National Biodiversity Authority.  
11. Removal of members.  
12. Meetings of National Biodiversity Authority.  
13. Committees of National Biodiversity Authority.  
14. Officers and employees of National Biodiversity Authority.  
15. Authentication of orders and decisions of National Biodiversity Authority.  
16. Delegation of powers.  
17. Expenses of National Biodiversity Authority to be defrayed o ut of the C onsolidated Fund of 
India.  
CHAPTER IV  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE NATIONAL  BIODIVERSITY  AUTHORITY  
18. Functions and powers of National Biodiversity Authority.  
 
CHAPTER V  
APPROVAL BY THE NATIONA L BIODIVERSITY  AUTHORITY  
19. Approval by National Biodiversity Authority for undertaking certain activities.  
20. Transfer of biological resource or knowledge.  
21. Determination of equitable benefit sharing by National Biodiversity Authority.  
  2 
 CHAPTER VI  
STATE  BIODIVERSITY  BOARD  
SECTIONS  
22. Establishment of State Biodiversity Board.  
23. Functions of State Biodiversity Board.  
24. Power of State Biodiversity Board to restrict certain activities violating the o bjectives of 
conservation, etc.  
25. Provisions of sections 9 to 17 to apply with modifications to State Biodiversity Board.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
FINANCE , ACCONTS AND AUDIT OF NATIONAL  BIODIVERSITY  AUTHORITY  
26. Grants or loans by the Central Government.  
27. Constitution of National Biodiversity Fund . 
28. Annual report of National Biodiversity Authority.  
29. Budget, accounts and audit.  
30. Annual report to be laid before Parliament.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  OF STATE  BIODIVERSITY  BOARD  
31. Grants of money by State Government to State Biodiversity Board.  
32. Constitution of State Biodiversity Fund.  
33. Annual report of State Biodiversity Board.  
34. Audit of accounts of State Biodiversity Board.  
35. Annual report of State Biodiversity Board to be laid before State Legislature.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
DUTIES OF THE CENTRAL AND  THE STATE  GOVERNMENTS  
36. Central Government to develop National strategies,  plans, etc., for conservation, etc. , of 
biological diversity.  
37. Biodiversity heritage sites.  
38. Power of Central Government  to notify threatened species.  
39. Power of Central Government  to designate repositories.  
40. Power of Central Government to exempt certain biolo gical resource s. 
 
CHAPTER X  
BIODIVERSITY  MANAGEMENT  COMMITTEES  
41. Constitutions of Biodiversity Management Committees.  
 
CHAPTER XI  
LOCAL  BIODIVERSITY  FUND 
42. Grants to Local Biodiversity Fund.  
43. Constitution of Local Biodiversity Fund.  
44. Application of Local  Biodiversity Fund.  
45. Annual report of Biodiversity Management Committees.  
46. Audit of accounts of Biodiversity Management Committees.  3 
 SECTIONS  
47. Annual report, etc., of Biodiversity Management Committee to be submitted to District 
Magistrate.  
CHAPTER XII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
48. National Biodiversity Authority to be bound by the directions given by Central Government.  
49. Power of State Government to give directions.  
50. Settlement of disputes between State Biodiversity Boards.  
51. Members, officers, etc., of National Biodiversit y Authority and State Biodiversity Board deemed 
to be public servants.  
52. Appeal.  
52A.  Appeal to National Green Tribunal . 
53. Execution of determination or order.  
54. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
55. Penalties . 
56. Penalty for contravention for directions or orders of Central Government, State Government, 
National Biodiversity Authority and State Biodiversity Board s. 
57. Offences by companies.  
58. Offences to be cognizable and non -bailable.  
59. Act to have effect in addition to other Acts.  
60. Power of Central Government to give directions to State Government.  
61. Cognizance of offences.  
62. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
63. Power of State Government to make rules.  
64. Power to make regulations.  
65. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
 
 
 
  4 
 THE BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 18 OF 2003  
[5th February,  2003 .] 
An Act to provide for conservation of biological diversity, sustainable use of its  components and 
fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the  use of biological resources, 
knowledge and for matters connected the rewith or  incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS  India is rich in biological diversity and associated traditional and  contemporary knowledge 
system relating thereto.  
AND WHEREAS  India is a party to the United Nations Convention on  Biological Diversity signed at 
Rio de Janeiro on the 5th day of June, 1992;  
AND WHEREAS the said Convention came into force on the 29th December,  1993;  
AND WHEREAS  the said Convention reaffirms the sovereign rights of the  States over their biological 
resources;  
AND WHEREAS the said Convention has the main objective of conservation  of biological diversity, 
sustainable use of its components and fair and  equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of utilisation  of 
genetic resources;  
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to provide f or conservation,  sustainable utilisation  and 
equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of  utilisation  of genetic resources and also to give effect to the 
said Convention.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the Republic of India as  follows:— 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Biological Diversity 
Act, 2002.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may,  by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this  Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this Act  shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “benefit claimers ” means the conservers of biological resources, their  by-products, creators 
and holders of knowledge and information relating  to the use of such biological resources, 
innovations and practices  associated with such use and application;  
(b) “biological diversity ” means the variability among living organisms from  all sources and the 
ecological complexes of which they are part and  includes diversi ty within species or between species 
and of  eco-systems;  
(c) “biological resources ” means plants, animals and micro -organisms or  parts thereof, their 
genetic material and by -products (excluding value  added products) with actual or potential use or 
value, b ut does not  include human genetic material;  
                                                           
1. 1st October, 2003 (ss. 1, 2, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 48, 54, 59, 62, 63, 64, 65), vide notific ation No. S.O. 
1146( E), dated 1 st October, 2003, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 
1st July, 2004 (ss. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40 , 41, 
42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 55, 5 6, 57, 58, 60, 61), vide notification No. S.O. 753( E), dated 1st July, 2004, 
see Gazette of India, Extraordinary , Part II, sec. 3( ii). 5 
 (d) “bio-survey and bio -utilisation ” means survey or collection of species,  subspecies, genes, 
components and extracts of biological resource for  any purpose and includes characteris ation, 
inventorisation and  bioassay;  
(e) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the National Biodiversity  Authority or, as the case 
may be, of the State Biodiversity Board;  
(f) “commercial utilisation ” means end uses of biological resources for  commercial utilisation  
such as drugs, industrial enzymes, food flavours,  fragrance, cosmetics, emulsifiers, oleoresins, 
colours, extracts and  genes used for improving crops and livestock through genetic  intervention, but 
does not include conventional breeding or traditional  practices in use in  any agriculture, horticulture, 
poultry, dairy farming,  animal husbandry or bee keeping;  
(g) “fair and equitable benefit sharing ” means sharing of benefits as  determined by the National 
Biodive rsity Authority under section 2 1; 
(h) “local bodies ” means Panchayats and Municipalities, by what  ever name called, within the 
meaning of clause ( 1) of article 243B and  clause ( 1) of article 243Q of the Constitution and in the 
absence of any  Panchayats or Municipalities, institutions of self -government  constituted under any 
other provision of the Constitution or any Central  Act or State Act;  
(i) “member” means a member of the National Biodiversity Authority or a  State Biodiversity 
Board and includes the Chairperson;  
(j) “National Biodiversity Authority ” mean s the National Biodiversity  Authority established 
under section 8;  
(k) “prescribed ” means prescribed by r ules made  under this Act;  
(l) “regulations ” means regulations made under this Act;  
(m) “research” means study or systematic investigation of any biological  resource or 
technological application, that uses biological systems,  living organisms or derivatives thereof to 
make or modify products or  processes for any use;  
(n) “State Biodiversity Board ” mean s the State Biodiversity Board  established under section 22;  
(o) “sustainable use ” means the use of components of biological diversity  in such manner and at 
such rate that does not lead to the long -term decline of the biological diversity thereby maintaini ng its 
potential to  meet the needs and aspirations of present and future generations;  
(p) “value added products ” means products which may contain portions or  extracts of plants and 
animals in unrecognizable and physically  inseparable form.  
CHAPTER II 
REGULATION OF ACCESS TO BIOLOGICAL DIVERSITY  
3. Certain persons not to undertake Biodiversity related activities without  approval of National 
Biodiversity Authority .—(1) No person referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall, without previous  approval of 
the Nation al Biodiversity Authority, obtain any biological  resource occurring in India or knowledge 
associated thereto for  research or for commercial utilisation  or for bio -survey and  bio-utilisation . 
(2) The persons who shall be required to take the approval of the  National  Biodiversity Authority 
under sub -section ( 1) are the following, namely: — 
(a) a person who is not a citizen of India;  
(b) a citizen of India, who is a non -resident as defined in clause ( 30) of secti on 2 of the               
Income -tax Act, 196 1 (43 of 1961) ; 
(c) a body corpora te, association or organis ation— 
(i) not incorporated or registered in India; or  
(ii) incorporated or registered in India under any law for the  time being in force which has 
any non -Indian participation  in its share capital or  management.  6 
 4. Results of research not to be transferred to certain persons without  approval of National 
Biodiversity Authority .—No person shall, without the previous approval of the National  Biodiversity 
Authority, transfer the results of any research relating to  any biological resources occurring in, or 
obtained from, India for  monetary consideration or otherwise to any person who is not a citizen  of India 
or citizen of India who is non -resident as defined in clause (30)  of section 2 of the Income -tax Act, 1961  
(43 of 1961)  or a body corporate or  organis ation which i s not registered or incorporated in India or which  
has any non -Indian participation in its share capital or management.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “transfer” does not include  publication of research 
papers or dissemination of knowledge in any seminar  or workshop, if such publication is as per the 
guidelines issued by the Central  Government.  
5. Sections 3 and 4 not to apply to certain collaborative research pro jects.—(1) The provisions of 
sections 3 and 4 shall not apply to collaborative  search projects involving transfer or exchange of 
biological resources  or information relating thereto between institutions, including  Government sponsored 
institutions of India , and such institutions in  other countries, if such collaborative research projects satisfy 
the conditions specified in sub -section ( 3). 
(2) All collaborative research projects, other than those referred to in  sub-section ( 1) which are based 
on agreements concluded before the  commencement of this Act and in force shall, to the extent the  
provisions of agreement are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act  or any guidelines issued under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 3), be void.  
(3) For the purposes of sub-section ( 1), collaborative research projects  shall— 
(a) conform to the policy guidelines issued by the Central  Government in this behalf;  
(b) be approved by the Central Government.  
6. Application for intellectual property rights not to be made without  approval of National 
Biodiversity Authority .—(1) No person shall apply for any intellectual property right, by whatever  name 
called, in or outside India for any invention based on any  research or information on a biological resource 
obtained from India  without obtaining the previous approval of the National Biodiversity  Authority  
before making such application:  
Provided that if a person applies for a patent, permission of the  National Biodiversity Authority may 
be obtained after the acceptance of  the patent  but before the sealing of the  patent by the patent authority  
concerned:  
Provided further that the National Biodiversity Authority shall dispose of  the application for 
permission made to it within a period of ninety days  from the date of receipt thereof.  
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority may, while granting the approval  under this section, impose 
benefit sharing fee or royalty or both or  impose conditions including the sharing of financial benefits 
arising out  of the commercial utilisation  of such rig hts. 
(3) The provisions of this section shall not apply to any person making an  application for any right 
under any law relating to protection of plant  varieties enacted by Parliament.  
(4) Where any right is granted under law referred to in sub -section ( 3), the  concerned authority 
granting such right shall endorse a copy of such  document granting the right to the National Biodiversity 
Authority.  
7. Prior intimation to State Biodiversity Board for obtaining biological  resource for certain 
purposes .—No person , who is a citizen of India or a body corporate, association or  organis ation which is 
registered in India, shall obtain any biological  resource for commercial utilisation , or bio -survey and              
bio-utilisation  for commercial utilisation  except after giving prior intimation to the State  Biodiversity 
Board concerned:  
Provided that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the local  people and communities of the 
area, including growers and cultivators  of biodiversity, and vaids and hakims , who have been practicing  
indigenous medicine.  
  7 
 CHAPTER III 
NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY AUTHORITY  
8. Establishment of National Biodiversity Authority .—(1) With effect from such date as the 
Central Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, appoint, there shall be established  by the 
Central Government for the purposes of this Act, a body to be  called the National Biodiversity Authority.  
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority shall be a body corporate by the  name aforesaid, having 
perpetual s uccession and a common seal, with  power to acquire, hold and dispose of property, both 
movable and  immovable, and to contract, and shall by the said name sue and be  sued.  
(3) The head office of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be at  Chennai and th e National 
Biodiversity Authority may, with the previous  approval of the Central Government, establish offices at 
other places in  India.  
(4) The National Biodiversity Authority shall consist of the following  members,  namely:— 
(a) a Chairperson, who shall be an eminent person having  adequate knowledge and experience in 
the conservation and  sustainable use of biological diversity and in matters relating to  equitable 
sharing of benefits, to be appointed by the Central  Government;  
(b) three ex officio  members to be appointed by the Central  Government, one representing the 
Ministry dealing with Tribal  Affairs and two representing the Ministry dealing with  Environment and 
Forests of whom one shall be the Additional  Director General of Forests or the Director Gene ral of 
Forests;  
(c) seven ex officio  members to be appointed by the Central  Government to represent respectively 
the Ministries of the  Central Government dealing with — 
(i) Agricultural Research and Education;  
(ii) Biotechnology;  
(iii) Ocean Development;  
(iv) Agriculture and Cooperation;  
(v) Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy;  
(vi) Science and Technology;  
(vii) Scientific and Industrial Research;  
(d) five non -official members to be appointed from amongst  specialists and scientists having 
special knowledge of, or  experience in, matters relating to conservation of biological  diversity, 
sustainable use of biological resources and equitable  sharing of benefits arising out of the use of 
biological resources,  representatives of industry, co nservers, cre ators and know ledge -holders of 
biological resources.  
9. Conditions of service of Chairperson and members .—The term of office and conditions of 
service of the Chairperson and the  other members other than ex officio members of the National  
Biodiversity Autho rity shall be such as may be prescribed by the  Central Government.  
10. Chairperson to be Chief Executive of National Biodiversity Authority .—The Chairperson 
shall be the Chief Executive of the National  Biodiversity Authority and shall exercise such powers and 
perform such  duties, as may be prescribed.  
11. Removal of members .—The Central Government may remove from the National Biodiversity  
Authority any member who, in its opinion, has — 
(a) been adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) been convicted of an offence which involves moral turpitude; or  
(c) become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a member;  or 8 
 (d) so abused his position as to render his continuance in office  detrimental to the public interest; 
or 
(e) acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect  prejudicially his functions as a 
member.  
12. Meetings of National Biodiversity Authority .—(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall 
meet at such time and place  and shall observe such rules of procedure in regard to the transaction  of 
business at its meetings (including the quorum at its meetings) as  may be prescribed.  
(2) The Chairperson of the National Biodiversity Authority shall preside at  the meetings of the 
National Biodiversity Authority.  
(3) If for any reason the Chairperson is unable to attend any meeting of the  National Biodiversity 
Authority, any member of the National Biodiversity  Authority chosen by the members present at the 
meeting shall preside  at the meeting.  
(4) All questions which come before any meeting  of the National  Biodiversity Authority shall be 
decided by a majority of votes of the  members present and voting and in the event of equality of votes, 
the Chairperson or, in his absence, the person presiding, shall have and  exercise a second or casting v ote. 
(5) Every member who is in any way, whether directly, indirectly or  personally, concerned or 
interested in a matter to be decided at the  meeting shall disclose the nature of his concern or interest and 
after such disclosure, the member concerned or in terested shall not attend  that meeting.  
(6) No act or proceeding of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be  invalidated merely by reason 
of— 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the National  Biodiversity Authority; or  
(b) any defe ct in the appointment of a person acting as a member;  or 
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the National Biodiversity  Authority not affecting the 
merits of the case.  
13. Committees of National Biodiversity Authority .—(1) The National Biodiversity Authority may 
constitute a committee to deal  with agro -biodiversity.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this sub -section, “agro-biodiversity ” means  biological diversity  of 
agriculture related species and their wild relatives.  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 1), the National  Biodiversity Authority may 
constitute such number of committees as it  deems fit for the efficient discharge of its duties and 
performance of its  functions under this Act.  
(3) A committee constituted under this se ction shall co -opt such number of  persons, who are not the 
members of the National Biodiversity  Authority, as it may think fit and the persons so co -opted shall have 
the right to attend the meetings of the committee and take part in its  proceedings but sha ll not have the 
right to vote.  
(4) The persons appointed as members of the committee under  sub-section ( 2) shall be entitled to 
receive such allowances or fees for  attending the meetings of the committee as may be fixed by the 
Central  Government.  
14. Offic ers and employees of National Biodiversity Authority .—(1) The National Biodiversity 
Authority may appoint such officers and other  employees as it considers necessary for the efficient 
discharge of its  functions under this Act.  
(2) The terms and conditions of service of such officers and other  employees of the National 
Biodiversity Authority shall be such as may  be specified by regulations.  
15. Authentication of orders and decisions of National Biodiversity  Authority .—All orders and 
decisions of the National  Biodiversity Authority shall be  authenticated by the signature of the Chairperson 
or any    other   member  authorised  by the   National  Biodiversity   Authority in this behalf and   all    other  9 
 instruments executed by the National Biodiversity Authority shall  be authenticated by the signature of an 
officer of the National  Biodiversity Authority authorised  by it in this behalf.  
16. Delegation of powers .—The National Biodiversity Authority may, by general or special order in  
writing, delegate to any member,  officer of the National Biodiversity  Authority or any other person 
subject to such conditions, if any, as may  be specified in the order, such of the powers and functions 
under this  Act (except the power to prefer an appeal under section 50 and the  power t o make regulations 
under section 64) as it may deem  necessary.  
17. Expenses of National Biodiversity Authority to be defrayed out of the  Consolidated Fund of 
India .—The salaries and allowances payable to the members and the  administrative expenses of the 
National Biodiversity Authority including  salaries, allowances and pension payable to, or in respect of, 
the officers and other employees of the National Biodiversity Authority shall  be defrayed out of the 
Consolidated Fund of India.  
CHAPTER IV 
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE NATIONAL  BIODIVERSITY  AUTHORITY  
18. Functions and powers of National Biodiversity Authority —(1) It shall be the duty of the 
National Biodiversity Authority to regulate  activities referred to in sections 3, 4 and 6 and by regulati ons 
issue  guidelines for access to biological resources and for fair and equitable  benefit sharing.  
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority may grant approval for undertaking  any activity referred to in 
sections 3, 4 and 6.  
(3) The National Biodiversity Authority may — 
(a) advise the Central Government on matters relating to the  conservation of biodiversity, 
sustainable use of its components  and equitable sharing of benefits arising out of the utilisation  of 
biological resources;  
(b) advise the State Governments in the selection of areas of  biodiversity importance to be 
notified under sub -section ( 1) of section 37 as heritage sites and measures for the management  of 
such heritage sites;  
(c) perform such other functions as may be necessary to carry out  the provisions of this Act.  
(4) The National Biodiversity Authority may, on behalf of the Central  Government, take any 
measures necessary to oppose the grant of  intellectual property rights in any country outside India on any 
biological  resource obtained f rom India or knowledge associated with such  biological resource which is 
derived from India.  
CHAPT ER V 
APPROVAL BY THE  NATIONAL  BIODIVERSITY  AUTHORITY  
19. Approval by National Biodiversity Authority for undertaking certain  activities .—(1) Any 
person referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 3 who intends to  obtain any biological resource occurring 
in India or knowledge  associated thereto for research or for commercial utilisation  or for  bio-survey and 
bio-utilisation  or transfer the results of any res earch  relating to biological resources occurring in, or 
obtained from, India,  shall make application in such form and payment of such fees as may  be prescribed, 
to the National Biodiversity Authority.  
(2) Any person who intends to apply for a patent or any  other form of  intellectual property protection 
whether in India or outside India referred  to in sub -section ( 1) of section 6, may make an application in 
such form  and in such manner as may be prescribed to the National Biodiversity  Authority.  
(3) On recei pt of an application under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2), the National Biodiversity 
Authority may, after making such enquiries as  it may deem fit and if necessary after consulting an expert 
committee  constituted for this purpose, by order, grant appro val subject to any  regulations made in this 
behalf and subject to such terms and  conditions as it may deem fit, including the imposition of charges by  
way of royalty or for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject the  application:  10 
 Provided that no such or der for rejection shall be made without giving  an opportunity of being heard 
to the person affected.  
(4) The National Biodiversity Authority shall give public notice of every  approval granted by it under 
this section.  
20. Transfer of biological resource or  knowledge .—(1) No person who has been granted approval 
under section 19 shall  transfer any biological resource or knowledge associated thereto which  is the 
subject matter of the said approval except with the permission of  the National Biodiversity Authority.  
(2) Any person who intends to transfer any biological resource or  knowledge associated thereto 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall make  an application in such form and in such manner as may be 
prescribed  to the National Biodiversity Authority.  
(3) On receipt of an application under sub -section ( 2), the National  Biodiversity Authority may, after 
making such enquiries as it may deem  fit and if necessary after consulting an expert committee 
constituted for  this purpose, by order, grant approval sub ject to such terms and  conditions as it may deem 
fit, including the imposition of charges by  way of royalty or for reasons to be recorded in writing, reject 
the application:  
Provided that no such order for rejection shall be made without giving  an opportun ity of being heard 
to the person affected.  
(4) The National Biodiversity Authority shall give public notice of every  approval granted by it under 
this section.  
21. Determination of equitable benefit sharing by National Biodiversity  Authority .—(1) The 
National Biodiversity Authority shall while granting approvals under  section 19 or section 20 ensure that 
the terms and conditions subject to  which approval is granted secures equitable sharing of benefits arising  
out of the use of accessed biological reso urces, their by -products,  innovations and practices associated 
with their use and applications  and knowledge relating thereto in accordance with mutually agreed  terms 
and conditions between the person applying for such approval,  local bodies concerned and the benefit 
claimers.  
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority shall, subject to any regulations  made in this behalf, 
determine the benefit sharing which shall be given  effect in all or any of the following manner,                
namely:— 
(a) grant of joint  ownership of intellectual property rights to the  National Biodiversity Authority, 
or where benefit claimers are  identified, to such benefit claimers;  
(b) transfer of technology;  
(c) location of production, research and development units in such  areas whic h will facilitate 
better living standards to the benefit  claimers;  
(d) association of Indian scientists, benefit claimers and the local  people with research and 
development in biological resources  and bio -survey and bio -utilisation ; 
(e) setting up of ventu re capital fund for aiding the cause of benefit  claimers;  
(f) payment of monetary compensation and other non-monetary benefits  to the benefit claimers as 
the National Biodiversity Authority may  deem fit.  
(3) Where any amount of money is ordered by way of benefit sharing, the  National Biodiversity 
Authority may direct the amount to be deposited  in the National Biodiversity Fund:  
Provided that where biological resource or knowledge was a result of  access from specific individual 
or group of individuals or or ganis ations,  the National Biodiversity Authority may direct that the amount 
shall be  paid directly to such individual or  group of individuals or organis ations  in accordance with the 
terms of any agreement and in such manner as  it deems fit.  
(4) For the pur poses of this section, the National Biodiversity Authority  shall, in consultation with the 
Central Government, by regulations,  frame guidelines.  
  11 
 CHAPTER VI 
STATE  BIODIVERSITY  BOARD  
22. Establishment of State Biodiversity Board .—(1) With effect from such date as the State 
Government may, by  notification in the Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf, there shall be  established 
by that Government for the purposes of this Act, a Board  for the State to be known as 
the______________  (name of the State) Biodiv ersity Board.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, no State  Biodiversity Board shall be 
constituted for a Union territory and in  relation to a Union territory, the National Biodiversity Authority 
shall  exercise the powers and perform the  functions of a State Biodiversity  Board for that Union territory:  
Provided that in relation to any Union territory, the National Biodiversity  Authority may delegate all 
or any of its powers or functions under this  sub-section to such person or group of pe rsons as the Central  
Government may specify.  
(3) The Board shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid, having  perpetual succession and a 
common seal, with power to acquire, hold  and dispose of property, both movable and immovable, and to 
contract,  and shall by the said name sue and be sued.  
(4) The Board shall consist of the following members, namely: — 
(a) a Chairperson who shall be an eminent person having adequate  knowledge and experience in 
the conservation and sustainable  use of biological diversity and in matters relating to equitable  
sharing of benefits, to b e appointed by the State Government;  
(b) not more than five ex officio  members to be appointed by the  State Government to represent 
the concerned Departments of  the State Government;  
(c) not more than five members to be appointed from amongst  experts in matters relating to 
conservation of biological diversity,  sustainable use of biological resources and equitable sharing of  
benefits arising out of the use of biological resources.  
(5) The head office of the State Biodiversity Board shall be at such place  as the State Government 
may, by notification in the Official Gazette,  specify.  
23. Functions of State Biodiversity Board .—The functions of the State Biodiversity Board shall b e 
to— 
(a) advise the State Government, subject to any guidelines issued by the  Central Government, on 
matters relating to the conservation of  biodiversity, sustainable use of its components and equitable 
sharing of  the benefits arising out of the utilisation  of biol ogical resources;  
(b) regulate by granting of approvals or otherwise requests for commercial  utilisation  or                     
bio-survey and bio -utilisation  of any biological resource by  Indians;  
(c) perfo rm such other functions as may b e necessary to ca rry out the  provisions of this Act or as 
may be prescribed by the State  Government.  
24. Power of State Biodiversity Board to restrict certain activities  violating the objectives of 
conservation, etc. —(1) Any citizen of India or a body corporate, organis ation or association  registered in 
India intending to undertake any activity referred to in  section 7 shall give prior intimation in such form 
as may be prescribed  by the State Government to the State Biodiversity Board.  
(2) On receipt of an intimation under sub-section ( 1), the State Biodiversity  Board may, in 
consultation with the local bodies concerned and after  making such enquires as it conservation, may deem 
fit, by order,  prohibit or restrict any such activity if it is of opinion that such activity is  detrimental or 
contrary to the objectives of conservation and  sustainable use of biodiversity or equitable sharing of 
benefits arising  out of such activity:  
Provided that no such order shall be made without giving an  opportunity of being heard to the person  
affected.  12 
 (3) Any information given in the form referred to in sub -section ( 1) for prior  intimation shall be kept 
confidential and shall not be disclosed, either  intentionally or unintentionally, to any person not concerned 
thereto.  
25. Provisions of sect ions 9 to 17 to apply with modifications to State  Biodiversity  Board.—The 
provisions of sections 9 to 17 shall apply to a State Biodiversity  Board and shall have effect subject to the 
following modifications,  namely:— 
(a) references to the Central Government shall be construed as  references to the State 
Government;  
(b) references to the National Biodiversity Authority shall be  construed as references to the State 
Biodiversity Board;  
(c) reference to the Consolidated Fund of India shall be construed  as reference to the 
Consolidated Fund of the State.  
CHAPER VII 
FINANACE , ACCOUNTS  AND  AUDIT  OF NATIONAL  BIODIVERSITY  AUTHORITY  
26. Grants or loans by the Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation made by  Parliament by law in this behalf, pay to the National Biodiversity  Authority by 
way of grants or loans such sums of money as the Central  Governmen t may think fit for being utilis ed for 
the purposes of this Act.  
27. Constitution of National Biodiversity Fund —(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called 
the National Biodiversity  Fund and th ere shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the National Biodiversity Authority  under section 26;  
(b) all charges and royalties received by the National Biodiversity  Authority under this Act; and  
(c) all sums received by the National Biodiversity Authority from  such other sources as may be 
decided upon by the Central  Government.  
(2) The Fund shall be applied for — 
(a) channeling benefits to the benefit claimers;  
(b) con servation and promotion of biological resources and  development of areas from where 
such biological resources or  knowledge associated thereto has been accessed;  
(c) socio -economic development of areas referred to in clause ( b) in consultation with the loca l 
bodies concerned.  
28. Annual report of National Biodiversity Authority .—The National Biodiversity Authority shall 
prepare, in such form and at  such time each financial year as may be prescribed, its annual report,  giving a 
full account of its activities during the previous financial year  and furnish, to the Central Government, 
before such date as may be  prescribed, its audited copy of accounts together with auditors report  thereon.  
29. Budget , accounts and audit .—(1) The National Biodiversity Authority shall prepare a budget, 
maintain  proper accounts and other relevant records (including the accounts and  other relevant records of 
the National Biodiversity Fund) and prepare  an annual statement of account in such form as may be 
prescribed by  the Central Go vernment in consultation with the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the National Biodiversity Authority shall be audited by  the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India at such intervals as may  be specified by him and any expenditure incurred in 
connection with  such audit shall be payable by the National Biodiversity Authority to the  Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person  appointed by him in 
connection  with the audit of the accounts of the  National Biodiversity Authority shall have the same 
rights and  privileges and authority in connection with such audit as the  Comptroller and Auditor -General 
generally has in connection with the  audit of the Government  accounts and, in particular, shall have the  13 
 right to demand the production of books, accounts, connected  vouchers and other documents and papers 
and to inspect any of the  offices of the National Biodiversity Authority.  
(4) The accounts of the National Bio diversity Authority as certified by the  Comptroller and                  
Auditor -General of India or any other person  appointed by him in this behalf together with the audit 
report there  on shall be forwarded annually to the Central Government.  
30. Annual report to be laid before parliament .—The Central Government shall cause the annual 
report and auditor's  report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are received, before  each House of 
Parliament.  
CHAPTER VIII  
FINANCE , ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT OF  STATE BIODIVE RSITY  BOARD  
31. Grants of money by State Government to State Biodiversity Board .—The State Government 
may, after due appropriation made by the State  Legislature by law in this behalf, pay to the State 
Biodiversity Board by  way of grants or loans such sums of money as the State Government  may think fit 
for being utilis ed for the purposes of this Act.  
32. Constitution  of State Biodiversity Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the 
State Biodiversity  Fund and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) any grants and loans made to the State Biodiversity Board  under section 31;  
(b) any grants or loans made by the National Biodiversity Authority;  
(c) all sums received by the State Biodiversity Board from such  other sources as may be decided 
upon by th e State  Government.  
(2) The State Biodive rsity Fund shall be applied for — 
(a) the management and conservation of heritage sites;  
(b) compensating or rehabilitating any section of the people e conomically affected by notification 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 37;  
(c) conservation and promotion of biological resources;  
(d) socio -economic development of areas from where such  biological resources or knowledge 
associated thereto has been  accessed subject to any order made under section 24, in  consultation with  
the local bodies concerned;  
(e) meeting the expenses incurred for the purposes authorised  by this Act.  
33. Annual report of State Biodiversity Board .—The State Biodiversity Board shall prepare, in 
such form and at such  time in each financial year as may be prescribed, its annual report,  giving a full 
account of its activities during the previous financial year,  and submit a copy thereof to the State 
Government.  
34. Audit of accounts of State Biodiversity Board .—The accounts of the State Biodiversity Board  
shall be maintained and  audited in such manner as may, in consultation with the  Accountant -General of 
the State, be prescribed and the State  Biodiversity Board shall furnish, to the State Government, before 
such date as may be prescribed, its audited copy  of accounts together with  auditor’ s report thereon.  
35. Annual r eport of State Biodiversity Board to be laid before State  Legislature .—The State 
Government shall cause the annual report and auditor's  report to be laid, as soon as may be after they are 
received, before the  House of State Legislature.  
CHAPTER IX  
DUTIES  OF THE  CENTRAL AND  THE STATE  GOVERNMENTS  
36. Central Government to develop N ational strategies plans,  etc., for conservation, etc., of 
biological diversity .—(1) The Central Government shall  develop national strategies, plans,  programmes 
for the conservation and promotion and sustainable use  of biological diversity including measures for 
identification and  monitoring of areas rich in biological resources, promotion of in situ , and ex situ , 14 
 conservation of biological resources, incentives for  research, training and public education to increase 
awareness with  respect to biodiversity.  
(2) Where the Central Government has reason to believe that any area  rich in biological diversity, 
biological resources and their habitats is  being threatened by overuse, abuse or neglect, it shall issue 
directives  to the concerned State Government to take immediate ameliorative  measures, offering such 
State Government any technical and other  assistance that is po ssible to be provided or needed.  
(3) The Central Government shall, as far as practicable wherever it deems  appropriate, integrate the 
conservation, promotion and sustainable use  of biological diversity into relevant sectoral or cross -sectoral 
plans,  progra mmes and policies.  
(4) The Central Gover nment shall undertake measures, — 
(i) wherever necessary, for assessment of environmental impact of  that project which is likely to 
have adverse effect on biological  diversity,  with a view to avoid or minimis e such ef fects and  where 
appropriate provide for public participation in such  assessment;  
(ii) to regulate, manage or control the risks associated with the use  and release of living modified 
organisms resulting from  biotechnology likely to have adverse impact on th e conservation  and 
sustainable use of biological diversity and human health.  
(5) The Central Government shall endeavour to respect and protect the  knowledge of local people 
relating to biological diversity, as  recommended by the National Biodiversity Autho rity through such  
measures, which may include registration of such knowledge at the  local, State or national levels, and 
other measures for protection,  including sui generis system.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “ex situ conservation ” means the conservation of components of  biological diversity outside 
their natural habitats;  
(b) “in situ conservation ” means the conservation of ecosystems  and natural habitats and the 
maintenance and recovery of viable  populations of species in their na tural surroundings and, in the  
case of domesticated or cultivated species, in the surroundings  where they have developed their 
distinctive properties.  
37. Biodiversity heritage sites .—(1) Without prejudice to any other law for the time being in force, 
the State  Government may, from time to time in consultation with the loca l bodies, notify in the Official 
Gazette, areas of biodiversity importance  as biodiversity heritage sites under this Act.  
(2) The State Government, in consultation with the Central Govern ment,  may frame rules for the 
management and conservation of all the  heritage sites.  
(3) The State Government shall frame schemes for compensating or  rehabilitating any person or 
section of people economically affected by  such notification.  
38. Power of Central Government to notify threatened species .—Without prejudice to the 
provisions of any other law for the time being  in force, the Central Government, in consultation with the 
concerned  State Government, may from time to  time notify any species which i s on  the verge of 
extinction or likely to become extinct in the near future as a  threatened species and prohibit or regulate 
collection thereof for any  purpose and take appropriate steps to rehabilitate and preserve those  species.  
39. Power of Central Government to designate repositories .—(1) The Central Government may, 
in consultation with the National  Biodiversity Authority, designate institutions as repositories under this  
Act for different categories of biological resources.  
(2) The repositories sha ll keep in safe custody the biological material  including voucher specimens 
deposited with them.  
(3) Any new tax  on discovered by any person shall be notified to the  repositories or any institution 
designated for this purpose and he shall  deposit the vouch er specimens with such repository or institution.  
40. Power of Central Government to exempt certain biological resources .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in this Act, the Central  Government may, in consultation with the National 15 
 Biodiversity  Authority, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare that the  provisions of this Act shall 
not apply to any items, including biological  resources normally traded as commodities.  
CHAPTER X 
BIODIVERSITY  MANAGEMENT  COMMITTEES  
41. Constitution of Biodiversity Mana gement Committee .—(1) Every local body shall constitute a 
Biodiversity Management Committee  within its area for the purpose of promoting conservation, 
sustainable  use and documentation of biological diversity including preservation of  habitats, conservation 
of land races, folk varieties and cultivars,  domesticated stocks and breeds of animals and microorganisms 
and chronicling of knowledge relating to biological diversity.  
Explanation .—For th e purposes of this sub -section,— 
(a) “cultivar” means a  variety of plant that has originated and  persisted under cultivation or was 
specifically bred for the  purpose of cultivation;  
(b) “folk variety ” means a cultivated variety of plant that was  developed, grown and exchanged 
informally among farmers;  
(c) “landrace” means primitive cultivar that was grown by ancient farmers and their successors.  
(2) The National Biodiversity Authority and the State Biodiversity Boards  shall consult the 
Biodiversity Management Committees while taking  any decision relating to the  use of biological 
resources and knowledge  associated with such resources occurring within the territorial  jurisdiction of the 
Biodiversity Management Committee.  
(3) The Biodiversity Management Committees may levy charges by way of  collection fees from any  
person for accessing or collecting any  biological resource for commercial purposes from areas falling 
within  its territorial jurisdiction.  
CHAPTER XI 
LOCAL  BIODIVERSITY  FUND 
42. Grants to Local Biodiversity Fund .—The State Government may, after due appropriation made 
by State  Legislature by law in this behalf, pay to the Local Biodiversity Funds by  way of grants or loans 
such sums of money as the State Government  may think fit for being utilis ed for the purposes of this Act.  
43. Constitution of Local  Biodiversity Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a Fund to be called the 
Local Biodiversity  Fund at every area notified by the State Government where any  institution of                     
self-government is functioning and there shall be credited  thereto— 
(a) any grants and loans made under section 42;  
(b) any grants or loans made by the National Biodiversity Authority;  
(c) any grants or loans made by the State Biodiversity Boards;  
(d) fees referred to in sub -section ( 3) of section 41 received by the Biodiversity Management 
Committees;  
(e) all sums received by the Local Biodiversity Fund from such other  sources as may be decided 
upon by the State Government.  
44. Application of Local Biodiversity Fund .—(1) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), the 
management and the  custody of the Local Biodiversity Fund and the purposes for which such  Fund shall 
be applied, be in the manner as may be prescribed by the  State Government.  
(2) The Fund shall be used for conservation and promotion of biodiversity  in the areas falling within 
the jurisdiction of the concerned local body  and for the benefit of the community in so far such use is 
consistent  with conservation of biodiversity.  
45. Annual r eport of Biodiversity Management Committees .—The person holding the custody of 
the Local Biodiversity Fund shall  prepare, in such form and during each financial year at such time as  16 
 may be prescribed, its annual report, giving a full account of its  activities during the previous financial 
year, and submit a copy thereo f to the concerned local body.  
46. Audit of accounts of Biodiversity Management Committees .—The accounts of the Local 
Biodiversity Fund shall be maintained and  audited in such manner as may, in consultation with the  
Accountant -General of the State, be pres cribed and the person holding  the custody of the Local 
Biodiversity Fund shall furnish, to the  concerned local body, before such date as may be prescribed, its  
audited copy of accounts together with auditor's report thereon.  
47. Annual report, etc.,  of the  Biodiversity Management Committee to be  submitted to District 
Magistrate .—Every local body constituting a Biodiversity Management Committee  under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 41, shall cause, the annual report and  audited copy of accounts together with auditor's report 
thereon referred  to in sections 45 and 46, respectively and relating to such Committee  to be submitted to 
the District Magistrate having jurisdiction over the  area of the local body.  
CHAPTER XII 
MISCELLANEOUS  
48. National Biodiversity Auth ority to be bound by the directions given by  Central 
Government. —(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing provisions of this Act, the National  Biodiversity 
Authority shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties  under this Act, be bound by such directions on 
questions of policy as  the Central Government may give in writing to it from time to ti me: 
Provided that the National Biodiversity Authority shall, as far as  practicable, be given opportunity to 
express its views before any  direction is given  under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of  policy or not shall be final.  
49. Power of State Government to give d irections .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the State  Biodiv ersity Board shall, in the discharge of its functions and duties  
under this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy as  the State Government may give in 
writing to it from time to time:  
Provided that the State Biodiversity Board shall, as fa r as practicable,  be given an opportunity to 
express its views before any direction is  given under this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the State Government whether a question is one of  policy or not shall be final.  
50. Settlement of disputes between State Biodiversity Boards .—(1) If a dispute arises between the 
National Biodiversity Authority and a  State Biodiversity Board, the said Authority or the Board, as the 
case may be, may prefer an appeal to the Central Government within such  time as ma y be pr escribed.  
(2) Every appeal made under sub -section ( 1) shall be in such form as may  be prescribed by the 
Central Government.  
(3) The procedure for disposing of an appeal shall be such as may be  prescribed by the Central 
Government:  
Provided that before disposing of an appeal, the parties shall be given  a reasonable opportunity of  
being heard.  
(4) If a dispute arises between the State Biodiversity Boards, the Central  Government shall refer the 
same to the National Biodiversity Authority.  
(5) While adjudic ating any dispute under sub -section ( 4), the National  Biodiversity Authority shall be 
guided by the principles of natural justice  and shall follow such procedure as may be prescribed by the 
Central  Government.  
(6) The National Biodiversity Authority shall have, for the purposes of  discharging its functions under 
this section, the same powers as are  vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908                    
(5 of 1908)  in respect o f the following matters, namely :— 
(a) summoning and en forcing the attendance of any person and  examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  17 
 (c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or  documents;  
(e) reviewing its decisions;  
(f) dismissing an application for default or  deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) setting aside any order of dismissal of any application for default  or any order passed by it ex 
parte ; 
(h) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(7) Eve ry proceeding before the National Biodiversity Authority shall be  deemed to be a judicial 
proceeding within the meaning of sections 193  and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) and the National Biodiversity Authori ty shall be deemed to be a civil  court for 
all the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXV1 of the Code  of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
51. Members, officers, etc., of National Biodiversity Authority and State  Biodiversity Board 
deemed to be publi c servants .—All members, officers and other employees of the National Biodiversity  
Authority or the State Biodiversity Board shall be deemed, when acting  or purporting to act in pur suance 
of any of the provisions  of this Act, to  be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian 
Penal  Code  (45 of 1860) . 
52.  Appeal .—Any person, aggrieved by any determination of benefit sharing or order  of the National 
Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board  under this Act, may file  an appeal to the High Court 
within thirty days  from the date of communication to him, of the determination or order of  the National 
Biodiversity Authority or the State Biodiversity Board, as  the case may be:  
Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the  appellant was  prevented by sufficie nt cause 
from filing the appeal within the said  period, allow it to be filed within a further period not exceeding 
sixty  days.  
1[Provided further that nothing contained in this section shall apply on and from the commencement 
of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010  (19 of 2010) : 
Provided also that any appeal pending before the High Court, before the commencement of the 
National Green Tribunal Act, 2010  (19 of 2010) , shall continue to be heard and disposed of  by th e High 
Court as if the National Green Tri bunal had not been established  under section 3 of the National Green 
Tribunal Act, 2010 .] 
1[ 52A.  Appeal to National Green Tribunal. —Any person aggrieved by any determination of 
benefit sharing or order of the Natio nal Biodiversity Authority or a St ate Biodiversity Board under this  
Act, on or after the commencement of the National Green Tribunal Act, 2010  (19 of 2010) , may file an 
appeal to the National Green Tribunal establishment under section 3 of the National Green Tribunal Act, 
2010, in accord ance with the provisions of th at Act.]  
53. Execution of determination or order .—Every determi nation of benefit sharing or order made by 
the National  Biodiversity Authority or a State Biodiversity Board under this Act or t he order made by the 
High Court in any appeal against any determination  or order of the National Biodiversity Authority or a 
State Biodiversity  Board shall, on a certificate issued by any officer of the National  Biodiversity 
Authority or a State Biodiversi ty Board or the Registrar of  the High Court, as the case may be, be deemed 
to be decree of the  civil court and shall be executable in the same manner as a decree of  that court.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section and section 52, the expression  “State Biodiversity 
Board” includes the person or group of persons to whom  the powers or functions under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 22 have been  delegated under the proviso to that sub -section and the certificate relating to  such 
person or group of persons under this section shall be issued by such  person or group of persons, as the 
case may be.  
54. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit,  prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the  Central Government or the State Government or any  officer of the  Central Government  or 
State Government or any member, officer  or employee of the National Biodiversity Authority or the  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act of 19 of 2 010, s. 36 and Schedule III (w. e. f. 18 -10-2010).  
 18 
 State  Biodiversity Board for anything which is in good faith done or intended  to be done under this Act or 
the rules or regulations made thereunder.  
55.  Penalties .—(1) Whoever contravenes or attempt s to contraven e or abets the contravention of the 
provisions  of section 3 or section 4 or section 6 shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to five years, or with fine  which may extend to ten lakh rupees and where the damage caused  
exceeds ten  lakh rupees such fine may commensurate with the  damage caused, or with both.  
(2) Whoever contravenes or attempts to contrave ne or abets the  contravention of the provisions of 
section 7 or any order made under  sub-section ( 2) of section 24 shall be punishable with imprisonment for  
a term which may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend  to five lakh rupees, or with both.  
56. Penalty for contravention of d irections or orders of Central Government,  State 
Government, National Biodiversity Authority and State Biodiversity  Boards .—If any person 
contravenes any direction given or order made by the  Central Government, the State Government, the 
National Biodiversity  Authority or the State Biodiversity Board for which no punishment has  been 
separately provided under this Act, he shall be punished with a  fine which may extend to one lakh rupees 
and in case of a second or  subse quent offence, with fine which may extend to two lakh rupees and  in the 
case of continuous contravention with additional fine which may  extend to two lakh rupees every day  
during which the default continues.  
57. Offences by companies —(1) Where an offence o r contravention under this Act has been 
committed  by a company, every person who at the time the offence or  contravention was committed was 
in charge of, and was responsible to,  the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well  
as the com pany, shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence or  contravention and shall be liable to be 
proceeded against and punished  accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any  such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves  that the offence or contravention was committed without his 
knowledge  or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the commission of  such offence or 
contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an  offence or contravention under 
this Act has been committed by a  company and it is proved that the offence or contravention has been  
committed with the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any  neglect on the part of any director, 
manager , secretary or other officer  of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall  
also be deemed to be guilty of the offence or contravention and shall  be liable to be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the pur poses of this section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or  other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
58. Offences to be cognizable and non -bailable .—The offences under this Act shall be cognizable 
and non -bailable.  
59. Act to have effect in addition to other Acts .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, 
and not in derogation  of, the provisions in any other law, for the time being in force, relating  to forests or 
wildlife.  
60. Power of Central Government to give  directions to State Government .—The Central 
Government may give directions to any State Government  as to the carrying into execution in the State of 
any of the provisions of  this Act or of any ru le or regulation or order made thereunder.  
61. Cognizance of offences .—No Court shall take cognizance of any offence under this Act except 
on a complaint made by — 
(a) the Central Government or any authority or officer authorised  in this behalf by that 
Government; or  19 
 (b) any benefit claimer who has given notice of not less than thirty  days in the prescribed manner, 
of such offence and of his  intention to make a complaint, to the Central Government or the  authority 
or officer authorised  as aforesaid.  
62. Power of Central Government to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may,  by 
notification in the Official Gazette,  make rules for carrying out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, suc h rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely:— 
(a) terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and  members under section 9;  
(b) powers and duties of the Chairperson under section 10;  
(c) procedure under sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 12 in regard to  transaction of business at meetings;  
(d) form of application and payment of fees for undertaking certain  activities under                         
sub-section ( 1) of section 19;  
(e) the form and manner of making an application under sub-section  (2) of section 19;  
(f) form of application and the manner for transfer of biological  resource or knowledge under             
sub-section ( 2) of section 20;  
(g) form in which, and the time of each financial year at which, the  annual report of the  National 
Biodiversity Authority shall be  prepared and the date before which its audited copy of accounts  
together with auditor's report thereon shall be furnished under  section 28;  
(h) form in which the annual statement of account shall be prepared  under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 29;  
(i) the time within which and the form in which, an appeal may be  preferred, the procedure for 
disposing of an appeal and the  procedure for adjudication, under section 50;  
(j) the additional matter in which the National Biodi versity Authority  may exercise powers of the 
civil court under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 6) of section 50;  
(k) the manner of giving notice under clause ( b) of section 61;  
(1) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in  respect of which provision is to 
be made, by rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this section and every regulation made under  this Act  shall be laid, as soon 
as may b e after it is made, before each  House of Parliament, while it i s in session or a total period of thirty  
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more  successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session  immediately following t he session or the successive sessions  aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or  regula tion or both Houses agree that the rule or regulation 
should not  be made, the rule or regulation shall thereafter have effect only in such  modified form or be of 
no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that  any such modification or annulment shall be w ithout 
prejudice to the  validity of anything previously done under that rule or regulation.  
63. Power of State Government to make rules .—(1) The State Government may, by notification in 
the Official Gazette,  make rules for carrying out the purposes of this  Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters,  namely:— 
(a) the other functions to be performed by the State Biodiversity  Board under clause ( c) of section 
23; 
(b) the form in which the prior intimation shall be given under  sub-section ( 1) of section 24;  
(c) the form in which, and the time of each financial year at which,  the annual report shall be 
prepared under section 33;  20 
 (d) the manner of maintain ing and auditing the accounts of the  State Biodiversity Board and the 
date before which its audited  copy of the accounts together with auditor's report thereon shall  be 
furnished under section 34;  
(e) management and conservation of national heritage sites under  section 37;  
(f) the manner of management and custody of the Local  Biodiversity Fund and the purposes for 
which such Fund shall  be applied under sub -section ( 1) of section 44;  
(g) the form of annual report and the time at which such report shall  be pr epared during each 
financial year under section 45;  
(h) the manner of maintaining and auditing the accounts of the  Local Biodiversity Fund and the 
date before which its audited  copy of the accounts together with auditor's report thereon shall  be 
furnished under section 46;  
(i) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified.  
(3) Every rule made by the State Gover nment under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after 
it is made, before each House of the  State Legislature where it consists of two Houses, or where such  
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
64. Power to make regulations. —The National Biodiversity Authority shall, with the previous 
approval of  the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make  regulations for carrying 
out the purposes of this Act.  
65. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the  Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions  of this Act, remo ve 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period  of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be,  after it is made, before each 
House of Parli ament.  
 
--------------------------The Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003--------------------------
1 
 THE CENTRA L VIGILANCE COMMISSION ACT, 2003  
_____________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_____________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIM INARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION  
3. Constitution of Central Vigilance Commission.  
4. Appointment of Central Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners.  
5. Terms and other conditions of service of Central Vigilance Commissioner.  
6. Removal of Central Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioner.  
7. Power to make rules by Central Government for staff.  
 
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION  
8. Functions and powers of Central Vigilance Commission.  
8A. Action on preliminary inquiry in relation to public servants.  
8B. Action on investigation in relation to public servants.  
9. Proceedings of Commission.  
10. Vigilance Commissioner to act as Central Vigilance Commissioner in certain circumstances.  
11. Power relating to inquiries.  
11A. Director of Inquiry for maki ng preliminary inquiry.  
12. Proceedings before Commission to be judicial proceedings.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
EXPENSES AND ANNUAL REPORT  
13. Expenses of Commission to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.  
14. Annual report.  
 
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
16. Central Vigilance Commissioner, Vigilance Commissioner and staff to be public servants.  
17. Report of any inquiry made on reference by Commission to be forwarded to that Commission.  
18. Power to call for information.  
19. Consultation with Commissi on in certain matters.  2 
 SECTIONS  
20. Power to make rules.  
21. Power to make regulations.  
22. Notification, rule, etc., to be laid before Parliament.  
23. Power to remove difficulties.  
24. Provisions relating to existing Vigilance Commission.  
25. Appointments, etc., of officers of D irectorate of Enforcement.  
26. Amendment of Act 25 of 1946.  
27. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE.  
  3 
 THE CENTRA L VIGILANCE COMMISSION ACT, 2003  
ACT NO. 45 OF 2003  
[11th September , 2003.]  
An Act to provide for the constitution of a Central Vigilance Commission to inquire or cause 
inquiries to be conducted into offences alleged to have been committed under the Prevention 
of Corruption Act, 1988 by certain categories of public servants of the Central Government, 
corporations established by or under any Central Act, G overnment companies, societies and 
local authorities owned or controlled by the Central Government and for matters connected 
therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER  I 
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title .—This Act may be called the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Central Vigilance Commissioner ” means the Central Vigilance Commissioner appointed 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 4;  
(b) “Commission ” means the Central Vigilance Commission constituted under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 3;  
(c) “Delhi Special Police Establishment ” means the Delhi Special  Police Establishment 
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 2 of the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946   
(25 of 1946);  
(d) “Government company ” means a Government company within the meaning of the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
1[(da) “Lokpal” means the Lokpal established under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 of the Lokpal 
and Lokayuktas Act, 2013  (1 of 2014) ;] 
(e) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(f) “Vigilance Commissioner ” means a Vigilance Commissioner appoint ed under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 4.  
CHAPTER II  
THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION  
3. Constitution of Central Vigilance Commission .—(1) There shall be constituted a body to be 
known as the Central Vigilance Commission to exercise the powers conferred upon, and to perform the 
functions assigned to it under this Act and the Central Vigilance Commission constituted under                    
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the Central Vigilance Commission Ordinance, 1999  (Ord. 4 of 1999) which 
ceased to operate, and continued under the Government of India in the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and  Training) Resolution No. 371/20/99 -AVD. III, 
dated the 4th April, 1999 as amended vide Resolution of even number, dated the 13th August, 2002 shall 
be deemed to be the Commission constituted under this Act.  
(2) The Commission sh all consist of — 
(a) a Central Vigilance Commissioner  —   Chairperson;  
(b) not more than two Vigilance Commissioners  —   Members.  
(3) The Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners shall be appointed from 
amongst persons — 
(a) who have been or are in an All -India Service or in any civil service of the Union or in a civil 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2014, s. 58 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 16 -1-2014).  4 
 post under the Union having knowledge and experience in the matters relating to vigilance, policy  
making and administration including police administration; or  
(b) who have held office or are holding office in a corporation established by or under any 
Central Act or a Government company owned or controlled by the Central Government and persons 
who have expertise and experience in finance including insurance and b anking, law, vigilance and 
investigations:  
Provided that , from amongst the Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners, 
not more than two persons shall belong to the category of persons referred to either in clause (a) or clause 
(b). 
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a Secretary to the Commission on such terms and 
conditions as it deems fit to exercise such powers and discharge such duties as the Commission may by 
regulations specify in this behalf.  
(5) The Central Vigilance Commi ssioner, the other Vigilance Commissioners and the Secretary to the 
Commission appointed under the Central Vigilance Commission Ordinance, 1999  (Ord. 4 of 1999) or the 
Resolution of the Government of India in the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances an d Pensions 
(Department of Personnel and Training) Resolution No. 371/20/99 -AVD. III, dated the 4th April, 1999 as 
amended vide Resolution of even number, dated the 13th August, 2002 shall be deemed to have been 
appointed under this Act on the same terms an d conditions including the term of office subject to which 
they were so appointed under the said Ordinance or the Resolution, as the case may be.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, the expression “term of office ” shall be construed 
as the term of office with effect from the date the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance 
Commissioner has entered upon his office and continued as such under this Act.  
(6) The headquarters of the Commission shall be at New De lhi. 
4. Appointment of Central Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioners .—(1) The 
Central Vigilance Commissioner and the Vigilance Commissioners shall be appointed by the President by 
warrant under his hand and seal:  
Provided that every appointmen t under this sub -section shall be made after obtaining the 
recommendati on of a Committee consisting of — 
(a) the Prime Minister       —  Chairperson;  
(b) the Minister of Home Affairs     —  Member;  
(c) the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the People  —  Member.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “the Leader of the Opposition in the House of the 
People” shall, when no such Leader has been so recognis ed, include the Leader of the single largest group 
in opposition of the Government in the House of the People.  
(2) No appointment of a Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commissioner shall be 
invalid merely by reason of any vacancy in the Committee.  
5. Terms and other conditions of service of Central Vigilance Commissioner .—(1) Subject to the 
provisions of sub -sections ( 3) and (4), the Central Vigilance Commissioner shall hold office for a term of 
four years from the date on which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of sixty -five years, 
whichever is earlier. The Central Vigilance Commissioner, on ceasing to hold the office, shall be 
ineligible for reappointment in the Commission.  
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub -sections (3) and (4), every Vigilance Commissioner shall hold 
office for a term of four years from the date on which he enters upon his office or till he attains the age of 
sixty -five years, whichever is earlier:  
Provided that every Vigilance Commissioner, on ceasing to hold the office, shall be eligible for 
appointment as the Central Vigilance Commissi oner in the manner specified in sub -section ( 1) of section 
4: 
Provided further that the term of the Vigilance Commissioner, if appointed as the Central Vigilance 
Commissioner, shall not be more than four years in aggregate as the Vigilance Commissioner and  the 
Central Vigilance Commissioner.  5 
 (3) The Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commissioner shall, before he enters upon 
his office, make and subscribe before the President, or some other person appointed in that behalf by him, 
an oath or affir mation according to the form set out for the purpose in Schedule to this Act.  
(4) The Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commissioner may, by writing under his 
hand addressed to the President, resign his office.  
(5) The Central Vigilance Commiss ioner or a Vigilance Commissioner may be removed from his 
office in the manner provided in section 6.  
(6) On ceasing to hold office, the Central Vigilance Commissioner and every other Vigilance 
Commissioner sh all be ineligible for — 
(a) any diplomatic assignment, appointment as administrator of a Union territory and such other 
assignment or appointment which is required by law to be made by the President by warrant under his 
hand and seal;  
(b) further employment to any office of profit under the Government of India or the Government 
of a State.  
(7) The salary and allowances payable to and the other conditions of s ervice of— 
(a) the Central Vigilance Commissioner shall be the same as those of the Chairman of the Union 
Public Service Commission;  
(b) the Vigilance Commissioner shall be the same as those of a Member of the Union Public 
Service Commission:  
Provided that if the Central Vi gilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner is, at the time of 
his appointment, in receipt of a pension (other than a disability or wound pension) in respect of any 
previous service under the Government of India or under the Government of a State, h is salary in respect 
of the service as the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner shall be reduced by 
the amount of that pension including any portion of pension which was commuted and pension equivalent 
of other forms of retirement b enefits excluding pension equivalent of retirement gratuity:  
Provided further that if the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner is, at the 
time of his appointment, in receipt of retirement benefits in respect of any previous service rendered in a 
corporation established by or under any Central Act or a Government company owned or controlled by 
the Central Government, his salary in respect of the service as the Central Vigilance Commissioner or, as 
the case may be, the Vigilance Commis sioner shall be reduced by the amount of pension equivalent to the 
retirement benefits:  
Provided also that the salary, allowances and pension payable to, and the other conditions of service 
of, the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commission er shall not be varied to his 
disadvantage after his appointment.  
6. Removal of Central Vigilance Commissioner and Vigilance Commissioner .—(1) Subject  to the 
provisions of sub -section ( 3), the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner shall 
be removed from his office only by order of the President on the ground of proved misbehaviour or 
incapacity after the Supreme Court, on a reference made to it by the President, has, on inquiry, reported 
that the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any  Vigilance Commissioner, as the case may be, ought on 
such ground be removed.  
(2) The President may suspend from office, and if deem necessary prohibit also from attending the 
office during inquiry, the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commi ssioner in respect of 
whom a reference has been made to the Supreme Court under sub -section ( 1) until the President has 
passed orders on receipt of the report of the Supreme Court on such reference.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the President may by order remove from 
office the Central Vigilance Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner if the Central Vigilance 
Commissioner or such Vigilance Com missioner, as the case may be, — 
(a) is adjudged an insolvent; or  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  6 
 (c) engages during his term of office in any paid employment outside the duties of his office; or  
(d) is, in the opinion of the President, unfit to continue in office by reason of infirmity of mind or 
body; or  
(e) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect prejudicially his functions as 
a Central Vigilance Commissioner or a Vigilance Commissioner.  
(4) If the Central Vigilance  Commissioner or any Vigilance Commissioner is or becomes in any way, 
concerned or interested in any contract or agreement made by or on behalf of the Government of India or 
participates in any way in the profit thereof or in any benefit or emolument arisi ng therefrom otherwise 
than as a member and in common with the other members of an incorporated company, he shall, for the 
purposes of sub -section ( 1), be deemed to be guilty of misbehaviour.  
7. Power to make rules by Central Government for staff .—The Cent ral Government may, in 
consultation with the Commission, make rules with respect to the number of members of the staff of the 
Commission and their conditions of service.  
CHAPTER III  
FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF THE CENTRAL VIGILANCE COMMISSION  
8. Functions and powers of Central Vigilance Commission .—(1) The functions and powers of the 
Commission shall be to— 
(a) exercise superintendence over the functioning of the Delhi Special Police Establishment in so 
far as it relates to the investigation of offences alleged  to have been committed under the Prevention 
of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988) or an offence with which a public servant specified in                   
sub-section ( 2) may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974),  be charged at the same 
trial;  
(b) give directions to the Delhi Special Police Establishment for the purpose of discharging the 
responsibility entrusted to it under sub -section  (1) of section 4 of the Delhi Special Police 
Establishment Act, 1946  (25 of 1946):  
Provided that while exercising the powers of superintendence under clause ( a) or giving 
directions under this clause, the Commissions shall not exercise powers in such a manner so as to 
require the Delhi Special Police Establishment to investigate or dispose of any case in a particular 
manner;  
(c) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made on a reference made by the Central 
Government wherein it is alleged that a public servant being an employee of the Central Government 
or a corporation established by or under an y Central Act, Government company, society and any local 
authority owned or controlled by that Government, has committed an offence under the Prevention of 
Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  or an offence with which a public servant may, under the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974), be charged at the same trial;  
(d) inquire or cause an inquiry or investigation to be made into any complaint against any official 
belonging to such category of officials specified in sub -section ( 2) wherein it is alleged that he has 
committed an offence under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988)  and an offence with 
which a public servant specified in sub -section ( 2) may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974), be charged at the same t rial; 
(e) review the progress of investigations conducted by the Delhi Special Police Establishment 
into offences alleged to have been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988                 
(49 of 1988)  or the public servant may, under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974),  be 
charged at the same trial;  
(f) review the progress of applications pending with the competent authorities for sanction of 
prosecution under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988);  
(g) tender adv ice to the Central Government, corporations established by or under any Central 
Act, Government companies, societies and local authorities owned or controlled by the Central 
Government on such matters as may be referred to it by that Government, said Gover nment 
companies, societies and local authorities owned or controlled by the Central Government or 
otherwise;  7 
 (h) exercise superintendence over the vigilance administration of the various Ministries of the 
Central Government or corporations established by o r under any Central Act, Government 
companies, societies and local authorities owned or controlled by that Government:  
Provided that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorise the Commission to 
exercise superintendence over the Vigilance  administration in a manner not consistent with the 
directions relating to vigilance matters issued by the Government and to confer power upon the 
Commission to issue directions relating to any policy matters;  
(2) The persons referred to in clause (d) of sub-section ( 1) are as follows: — 
(a) members of All -India Services serving in connection with the affairs of the Union and Group 
'A' officers of the Central Government;  
(b) such level of officers of the corporations established by or under any Central Act, Government 
companies, societies and other local authorities, owned or controlled by the Central Government, as 
that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this behalf:  
Provided that till such time a notification is issued under  this clause, all officers of the said 
corporations, companies, societies and local authorities shall be deemed to be the persons referred to 
in clause (d) of sub -section ( 1). 
1[(c) on a reference made by the Lokpal under the proviso to sub -section ( 1) of section 20 of the 
Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013  (1 of 2014) , the persons referred to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) 
shall also include — 
(i) members of Group B, Group C and Group D services of the Central Government;  
(ii) such level of officials or staf f of the corporations established by or under any Central Act, 
Government companies, societies and other local authorities, owned or controlled by the Central 
Government, as that Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify in this 
beha lf: 
Provided that till such time a notification is issued under this clause, all officials or staff of the said 
corporations, companies, societies and local authorities shall be deemed to be the persons referred in 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1).] 
 1[8A. Action on preliminary inquiry i n relation to public servants. —(1) Where, after the 
conclusion of the preliminary inquiry relating to corruption of public servants belonging to Group C and 
Group D officials of the Central Government, the findings of the Commission disclose, after giving an 
opportunity of being heard to the public servant, a prima facie  violation of conduct rules relating to 
corruption under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988  (49 of 1988) by such public servant, the 
Commission shall proceed with one or more of  the following actions, namely: — 
(a) cause  an investigation by any agency or the Delhi Special Police Establishment, as the case 
may be;  
(b) initiation of the disciplinary proceedings or any other appropriate action against the concerned 
public servant by the competent authority;  
(c) closure of th e proceedings against the public servant and to proceed against the complainant 
under section 46 of the Lokpal and Lokayuktas Act, 2013  (1 of 2014) . 
(2) Every preliminary inquiry referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall ordinarily be completed within a 
period of ninety days and for reasons to be recorded in writing, within a further period of ninety days 
from the da te of receipt of the complaint.  
8B. Action on investigation in relation to public servants .—(1) In case the Commission decides to 
proceed to investigate into the complaint under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) of section 8A, it shall direct 
any agency (including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) to carry out the investigation as 
expeditiously as possible and complete the investigation withi n a period of six months from the date of its   
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2014, s. 58 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 16 -1-2014).  8 
 order and submit the investigation report containing its findings to the Commission:  
Provided that the Commission may extend the said period by a further period of six months for the 
reasons to be recorded in  writing.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973                  
(2 of 1974), any agency (including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) shall, in respect of cases 
referred to it by the Commission, submit the investigation report to the Commission.  
(3) The Commission shall consider every report received by it under sub -section ( 2) from any agency 
(including the Delhi Special Police Establishment) and may d ecide as to — 
(a) file charge -sheet or closure  report before the Special Court against the public servant;  
(b) initiate the departmental proceedings or any other appropriate action against the concerned 
public serva nt by the competent authority.]  
9. Proceedings of Commission .—(1) The  proceedings of the Commission shall be conducted at its 
headquarters.  
(2) The Commission may, by unanimous decision, regulate the procedure for transaction of its 
business as also allocation of its business amongst the Central Vigilance Commissioner and o ther 
Vigilance Commissioners.  
(3) Save as provided in sub -section ( 2), all business of the Commission shall, as far as possible, be 
transacted unanimously.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 3), if the Central Vigilance Commissioner and other 
Vigilance Commissioners differ in opinion on any matter, such matter shall be decided according to the 
opinion of the majority.  
(5) The Central Vigilance Commissioner, or, if for any reason he is unable to attend any meeting of 
the Commission, the senior -most Vigilance Commissioner present at the meeting, shall preside at the 
meeting.  
(6) No act or proceeding of the Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect in the constitution of, the Commission; or  
(b) any defect in t he appointment of a person acting as the Central Vigilance Commissioner or as 
a Vigilance Commissioner; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the merits of the case.  
10. Vigilance Commissioner to act as Central Vigilance Commissioner in certain 
circumstances .—(1) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Central Vigilance 
Commissioner by reason of his death, resignation or otherwise, the President may, by notification, 
authorise one of the Vigilanc e Commissioners to act as the Central Vigilance Commissioner until the 
appointment of a new Central Vigilance Commissioner to fill such vacancy.  
(2) When the Central Vigilance Commissioner is unable to discharge his functions owing to absence 
on leave or o therwise, such one of the Vigilance Commissioners as the President may, by notification,  
authorise  in this behalf, shall discharge the functions of the Central Vigilance Commissioner until the date 
on which the Central Vigilance Commissioner resumes his du ties. 
11. Power relating to inquiries .—The Commission shall, while conducting any inquiry referred to in 
clauses ( b) and ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 8, have all the powers of a civil court trying a suit under 
the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1 908) and in particular, in respect of the following matters, 
namely:— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person from any part of India and examining 
him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of any document;  
(c) receiving  evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning any public record or copy thereof from any court or office;  9 
 (e) issuing commissions for the examination of wi tnesses or other documents; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
1[11A. Director of Inquiry f or making preliminary inquiry. —(1) There shall be a Director of 
Inquiry, not below the rank of Joint Secretary to the Government of India, who shall be appointed by the 
Central Government for conducting preliminary inquiries referred to the Commis sion by the Lokpal.  
(2) The Central Government shall provide the Director of Inquiry such officers and employees as may 
be required for the discharge of his functions under this Act.]  
12. Proceedings before Commission to be judicial proceedings .—The Commission shall be 
deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and every proceeding before the Commission shall be deemed to be a 
judicial proceeding within the meaning of  sections 193 and 228 and for the purposes of section 196 of the 
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).  
CHAPTER IV  
EXPENSES AND ANNUAL REPORT  
13. Expenses of Commission to be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India .—The expenses of 
the Commission, including any  salaries, allowances and pensions payable to or in respect of the Central 
Vigilance Commissioner, the Vigilance Commissioners, Secretary and the staff of the Commission, shall 
be charged on the Consolidated Fund of India.  
14. Annual report .—(1) It shall b e the duty of the Commission to present annually to the President a 
report as to the work done by the Commission within six months of the close of the year under report.  
(2) The report referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall contain a separate part on the fun ctioning of the 
Delhi Special Police Establishment in so far as it relates to sub -section ( 1) of section 4 of the Delhi 
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946).  
(3) On receipt of such report, the President shall cause the same to be laid before  each House of 
Parliament.  
CHAPTER V  
MISCELLANEOUS  
15. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall 
lie against the Commission, the Central Vigilance Commissioner, any Vigilance Commissioner, the 
Secretary or against any staff of the Commission in respect of anything which is in good faith done or 
intended to be done under this Act.  
16. Central Vigilance Commissioner, Vigilance Commissioner and staff to be public servants .—
The Central Vigilance Commissioner,  every Vigilance Commissioner, the Secretary and every staff of the 
Commission shall be deemed to be a public servant within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal 
Code (45 of 1860).  
17. Report of any inquiry made on reference by Commission to be fo rwarded to that 
Commission .—(1) The report of the inquiry undertaken by any agency on a reference made by the 
Commission shall be forwarded to the Commission.  
(2) The Commission shall, on receipt of such report and after taking into consideration any other  
factors relevant thereto, advise the Central Government and corporations established by or under any 
Central Act, Government companies, societies and local authorities owned or controlled by that 
Government, as the case may be, as to the further course of  action.  
(3) The Central Government and the corporations established by or under any Central Act, 
Government companies, societies and other local authorities owned or controlled by that Government, as 
the case may be, shall consider the advice of the Commission and take appropriate action:  
Provided that where the Central Government, any corporation established by or under any Central 
Act, Government company, society or local authority owned or controlled by the Central Government, as 
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 1 of 2014, s. 58 and the Schedule (w.e.f. 16 -1-2014).  10 
 the case may be, d oes not agree with the advice of the Commission, it shall, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, communicate the same to the Commission.  
18. Power to call for information .—The Commission may call for reports, returns and statements 
from the Central Govern ment or corporations established by or under any Central Act, Government 
companies, societies and other local authorities owned or controlled by that Government so as to enable it 
to exercise general supervision over the vigilance and anti -corruption work in that Government and in the 
said corporations, Government companies, societies and local authorities.  
19. Consultation with Commission in certain matters .—The Central Government shall, in making 
any rules or regulations governing the vigilance or discipl inary matters relating to persons appointed to 
public services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or to members of the All -India 
Services, consult the Commi ssion.  
20. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification i n the Official Gazette, 
make rules for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the number of members of the staff and their conditions of service under section 7;  
(b) any other power of the civil court to be prescribed under clause ( f) of section 11; and  
(c) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
21. Power t o make regulations .—(1) The Commission may, with the previous approval of the 
Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with this 
Act and the rules made thereunder to provide for all matters for which provision is expedient for the 
purposes of giving effect to the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such regulations may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the duties and the powers of the Secretary under sub -section ( 4) of section 3; and  
(b) the procedure to be followed by the Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 9.  
22. Notification, rule, etc., to be laid before Parliament .—Every notification issued un der clause 
(b) of sub -section ( 2) of section 8 and every rule made by the Central Government and every regulation 
made by the Commission under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is issued or made, before 
each House of Parliament, while it i s in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised 
in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the notification or the rule or the regulation, or both Houses agree that the notification or the rule or the 
regulation should not be made, the notification or the rule or the regulation shall thereafter have effect 
only in s uch modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification 
or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that notification 
or rule or regulation.  
23. Power to remove difficu lties.—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, remove 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of  a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall, as soon as may be after it is made, be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
24. Provisions relating to existing Vigilance Commission .—With eff ect from the constitution of the 
Commission under sub -section ( 1) of section 3, the Central Vigilance Commission set up by the 
Resolution of the Government of India in the Ministry of Home Affairs No. 24/7/64 -AVD, dated the 11th 
February,  1964   (hereafte r referred to in this section as the existing Vigilance Commission) shall, insofar   11 
 as its functions are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, continue to di scharge the said 
functions and — 
(a) all actions and decisions taken by the Vigilance Commission insofar as such actions and 
decisions are relatable to the functions of the Commission constituted under this Act shall be deemed 
to have been taken by the Commission;  
(b) all proceedings pending bef ore the Vigilance Commission, insofar as such proceedings relate 
to the functions of the Commission, shall be deemed to be transferred to the Commission and shall be 
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this Act;  
(c) the employees of the Vigilan ce Commission shall be deemed to have become the employees 
of the Commission on the same terms and conditions;  
(d) all the assets and liabilities of the Vigilance Commission shall be transferred to the 
Commission.  
25. Appointments, etc., of officers of Dir ectorate of Enforcement .—Notwithstanding anything 
contained in the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999) or any other law for the time 
being in force ,— 
(a) the  Central Government shall appoint a Director of Enforcement in the Directorate of 
Enforcement in the Ministry of Finance on the recommendation  of the Committee consisting of — 
(i) the Central Vigilance Commissioner  — Chairperson;  
(ii) Vigilance Commissioners  — Members;  
(iii) Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Ministry of Home Affairs in the 
Central Government  — Member;  
(iv) Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Ministry of Personnel in the 
Central Government  — Member;  
(v) Secretary to the Government of India in -charge of the Department of Revenue, Ministry 
of Finance in the Central Government  — Member;  
(b) while making a recommendation, the Committee shall take into consideration the integrity and 
experience of t he officers eligible for appointment;  
(c) no person below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India shall be eligible 
for appointment as a Director of Enforcement;  
(d) a Director of Enforcement shall continue to hold office for a period o f not less than two years 
from the date on which he assumes office;  
(e) a Director of Enforcement shall not be transferred except with the previous consent of the 
Committee referred to in clause ( a); 
(f) the Committee referred to in clause ( a) shall, in co nsultation with the Director of Enforcement, 
recommend officers for appointment to the posts above the level of the Deputy Director of 
Enforcement and also recommend the extension or curtailment of the tenure of such officers in the 
Directorate of Enforcem ent; 
(g) on receipt of the recommendation under clause ( f), the Central Government shall pass such 
orders as it thinks fit to give effect to the said recommendation.  
26. Amendment of Act 25 of 1946 .—In the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946, — 
(a) after section 1, the following section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“1A. Interpretation section .—Words and expressions used herein and not defined but 
defined in the Central Vigilance Commission Act, 2003  (45 of 2003) , shall have the meanings, 
respectivel y, assigned to them in that Act. ”; 
(b) for section 4, the following sections shall be substituted, namely: — 
“4. Superintendence and administration of Special Police Establishment .—(1) The 
superintendence of the Delhi Special Police Establishment in so far as it relates to investigation of 12 
 offences alleged to have been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988                      
(49 of 1988), shall vest in the Commission.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), the superintendence o f the said police 
establishment in all other matters shall vest in the Central Government.  
(3) The administration of the said police establishment shall vest in an officer appointed in 
this behalf by the Central Government (hereinafter referred to as the Director) who shall exercise 
in respect of that police establishment such of the powers exercisable by an Inspector -General of 
Police in respect of the police force in a State as the Central Government may specify in this 
behalf.  
4A. Committee for appointm ent of Director .—(1) The Central Government shall appoint 
the Director on the recommendation of the Committee consisting of — 
(a) the Central Vigilance Commissioner  — Chairperson;  
(b) Vigilance Commissioners  — Members;  
(c) Secretary to the Government of India in -
charge of the Ministry of Home Affairs in the 
Central Government  — Member;  
 
(d) Secretary (Coordination and Public 
Grievances) in  the Cabinet Secretariat  — Member.  
 
(2) While making any recommendation under sub -section ( 1), the Committee shall take into 
consideration the views of the outgoing Director.  
(3) The Committee shall recommend a panel of officers — 
(a) on the basis of seniority, integrity and experience in the investigation of anti -
corruption cases; and  
(b) chosen from amongst officers b elonging to the Indian Police Service constituted 
under the All -India Services Act, 1951 (61 of 1951) , 
for being considered for appointment as the Director.  
4B. Terms and conditions of service of Director .—(1) The Director shall, notwithstanding 
anything t o the contrary contained in the rules relating to his conditions of service, continue to 
hold office for a period of not less than two years from the date on which he assumes office.  
(2) The Director shall not be transferred except with the previous consen t of the Committee 
referred to in sub -section ( 1) of section 4A.  
4C. Appointment for posts of Superintendent of Police and above, extension and 
curtailment of their tenure, etc .—(1) The Committee referred to in section 4A shall, after 
consulting the Direct or, recommend officers for appointment to the posts of the level of 
Superintendent of Police and above and also recommend the extension or curtailment of the 
tenure of such officers in the Delhi Special Police Establishment.  
(2) On receipt of the recommendation under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall 
pass such orders as it thinks fit to give effect to the said recommendation. ”; 
(c) after section 6, the following section shall be inserted, namely: — 
“6A. Approval of Central Government to conduct inquiry or investigation .—(1) The 
Delhi Special Police Establishment shall not conduct any inquiry or investigation into any offence 
alleged to have been committed under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988) 
except with the previous a pproval of the Central Government where such allegation relates to — 
(a) the employees of the Central Government of the level of Joint Secretary and above; 
and 
(b) such officers as are appointed by the Central Government in corporations established 
by or un der any Central Act, Government companies, societies and local authorities owned or 
controlled by that Government.  13 
 (2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), no such approval shall be 
necessary for cases involving arrest of a person on the spot on the charge of accepting or 
attempting to accept any gratification other than legal remuneration referred to in clause ( c) of the 
Explanation  to section 7 of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (49 of 1988). ”. 
27. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Government of India in the Ministry of Personnel, Public 
Grievances and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training) Resolution No. 371/20/99 -AVD. III, 
dated the 4th April, 1999 as amended vide Resolution of even number, dated the 13th August, 200 2 is 
hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal and the cesser of operation of the Central Vigilance Commission 
Ordinance, 1999  (Ord. 4 of 1999), anything done or any action taken under the said Resolution and the 
said Ordinance including the appoint ments made and other actions taken or anything done or any action 
taken or any appointment made under the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 1946  (25 of 1946) and 
the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973  (46 of 1973) as amended by the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been made or done or taken under this Act or the Delhi Special Police Establishment Act, 
1946 and the Foreign Exchange Regulation Act, 1973 as if the amendments made in those Acts by this 
Act were in force at all material times.   14 
  
 
 
THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 5 (3)] 
Form of oath or affirmation to be made by the Central Vigilance Commissio ner or Vigilance 
Commissioner: — 
“I, A. B., having been appointed Central Vigilance Commissioner (or Vigilance Commissioner)  
of the  Central Vigilance Commission  do                           
                  that I will bear true faith and 
allegiance to the Constitution of India as by law established, that I will uphold the sovereignty and 
integrity of India, that I will duly and faithfully and to the best of my ability, knowledge and 
judgment perform the duties of my office without fear or favour, affection or ill -will and that I will 
uphold the constitution and the laws. ”. 
 
--------------------------The Cigarettes and Other Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 2003--------------------------
1 
 THE CIGARE TTES AND OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS  (PROHIBITION OF  
ADVERTISEMENT AND REGULATION OF TRADE AND COMMERCE, PRODUCTION, 
SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 2003  
––––––––  
ARRENGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
––––––––  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement . 
2. Declaration as to expediency of control by the Union . 
3. Definitions.  
4. Prohibition of smoking in a public place . 
5. Prohibition of advertisement of cigarettes and other tobacco products.  
6. Prohibition on sale of cigarette or other tobacco products to a person below the age of eighteen 
years and in particular area.  
7. Restrictions on trade and commerce in, and production, supply and distribution of cigarettes and   
other tobacco products.  
8. Manner in which specified warning shall be made.  
9. Language in which the specified warning shall be expressed.  
10. Size of letters and figures . 
11. Testing laboratory for nicotine and tar contents.  
12. Power of entry and search.  
13. Power to s eize. 
14. Confiscation of package.  
15. Power to give option to pay costs in lieu of confiscation.  
16. Confiscation not to interfere with other punishments.  
17. Adjudication . 
18. Giving opportunity to the owner of s eized packages.  
19. Appeal.  
20. Punishment for failure to give specified warning and nicotine and tar contents.  
21. Punishment for smoking in certain places.  
22. Punishment for advertisement of cigarettes and tobacco products . 
23. Forfeiture of advertisement and advertisement material.  
24. Punishment for sale of cigarettes or any other tobacco products in certain places  or to persons 
below the age of eighteen years.  
25. Prevention, detention and place of trial of offences under sections 4 and 6.  
  2 
 SECTIONS  
26. Offences by companies.  
27. Offences to be bailable . 
28. Composition of offences.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
30. Power to add any tobacco products in the Schedule.  
31. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
32. Act not to apply to cigarettes of other tobacco products which are exported.  
33. Repeal and savings.  
THE SCHEDULE .   3 
  
THE CIGARETTES AND OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS (PROHIBITION OF  
ADVERTISEMENT AND REGULATION OF TRADE AND COMMERCE, PRODUCTION, 
SUPPLY AND DISTRIBUTION) ACT, 2003  
ACT NO. 34 OF 2003  
[18th May , 2003.]  
An Act to prohibit the advertisement of, and to provide for the regulation of trade and commerce 
in, and production, supply and distribution of, cigarettes and other tobacco products and for 
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
WHEREAS , the Resolution passed by the 39th World Health Assembly (WHO), in its Fourteenth  
Plenary meeting held on the 15th May, 1986 urged the member States of WHO which have not yet done 
so to implement the measures to ensure that effective protection i s provided to non -smokers from 
involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke and to protect children and young people from being addicted to 
the use of tobacco;  
AND WHEREAS , the 43rd World Health Assembly in its Fourteenth Plenary meeting held on the 17th 
May, 1990 , reiterated the concerns expressed in the Resolution passed in the 39th World Health 
Assembly and urged Member States to consider in their tobacco con trol strategies plans for legislation 
and other effective measures for protecting their citizens with spe cial attention to risk groups such as 
pregnant women and children from involuntary exposure to tobacco smoke, discourage the use of tobacco 
and impose progressive restrictions and take concerted action to eventually eliminate all direct and 
indirect advert ising, promotion and sponsorship concerning tobacco;  
AND WHEREAS , it is considered expedient to enact a comprehensive law on tobacco in the public 
interest an d to protect the public health;  
AND WHEREAS , it is expedient to prohibit the consumption of cigare ttes and other tobacco products 
which are injurious to health with a view to achieving improvement of public health in general as 
enjoined by article 47 of the Constitution;  
AND WHEREAS , it is expedient to prohibit the advertisement of, and to provide for regulation of trade 
and commerce, production, supply and distribution of, cigarettes and other tobacco products and for 
matters connected t herewith or incidental thereto:  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fourth Year of the  Republic of India as foll ows:– 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .–(1) This Act may be called the Cigarettes and Other 
Tobacco Products (Prohibition of Advertisement and Regulation of Trade and Commerce, Production, 
Supp ly and Distribution) Act, 2003.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint and different dates may be appointed for di fferent provisions of this Act.  
2. Declaration as to e xpediency of control by the Union –It is hereby declared that it is expedient in 
the public interest that the Union should take under it s control the tobacco industry.  
  
                                                           
1. 1st December, 2007, sub-sections ( 1), (2), (3) and ( 4) of sec. 7, ss. 8, 9, 10 and 20, vide notification No. S.O. 1955 (E), dated 
16th November, 2007 , see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec 3( ii). 4 
 3. Definitions. –In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, – 
(a) "advertisement" includes any visible representation by way of notice, circular, label, wrapper 
or other document and also includes any announcement made orally or by any means of producing or 
transmitt ing light, sound, smoke or gas;  
(b) "cigarette" include s,– 
(i) any roll of tobacco wrapped in paper or in any other su bstance not containing tobacco,  
(ii) any roll of tobacco wrapped in any substance containing tobacco, which, by reason of its 
appearance, the type of tobacco used in the filter, or its packagin g and labelling is likely to be 
offered to, or purchased by, consumers as cigarette, but does not in clude beedi , cheroot and cigar;  
(c) "distribution" includes distribution by way of samp les, whether free or otherwise;  
(d) "export ", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means taking out of India 
to a place outside India;  
(e) "foreign language" means a language which is neither an Indian lan guage nor the English 
language;  
(f) "import", with its grammatical variati ons and cognate expressions, means bringing into India 
from a  place outside India;  
(g) "Indian language" means a language specified in the Eighth Schedule to the Constitution, and 
include s any dialect of such language;  
(h) "label" means any written, marked , stamped, printed or graphic matter, affixed to, or 
appear ing upon, any package;  
(i) "package" includes a wrapper, box, carton, tin or other container;  
(j) "prescribed" means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(k) "production", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, includes the making of 
cigarettes, cigars, cheroots, beedis, cigarette tobacco, pipe tobacco, hookah  tobacco, chewing tobacco, 
pan masala  or any chewing material having tobacco as one of its ingredients (by whatever name  
called) or snuff and shall include – 
(i) packing, labelling or re-labelling, of containers;  
(ii) re-packing from bulk p ackages to retail packages; and  
(iii) the adoption of any other method to render the tobacco product marketable;  
(l) "public place" means any place to which the public have access, whether as of right or not, and 
includes auditorium, hospital buildings, railway waiting room, amusement centres, restaurants, public 
offices, court buildings, educational institutions, libr aries, public conveyances and the like which are 
visited by general public but d oes not include any open space;  
(m) "sale", with its grammatical variations and cognate expressions, means any transfer of 
property in goods by one person to another, whether f or cash or on credit, or by way of exchange, and 
whether wholesale or retail, and includes an agreement for sal e, and offer for sale and exposure for 
sale; 
(n) "smoking", means smoking of tobacco in any form whether in the form of cigarette, cigar, 
beedis or otherwise with the aid of a pipe, wr apper or any other instruments;  5 
 (o) "specified warning" means such warnings against the use of cigarettes or other tobacco 
products to be printed, painted or inscribed on packages of cigarettes or other tobacco produc ts in 
such form and manner as may be prescribe d by rules made under th is Act;  
(p) "tobacco products" means the prod ucts specified in the Schedule.  
4. Prohibition of smoking in a public place .–No person s hall smoke in any public place:  
Provided that in a hotel having thirty rooms or a restaurant having seating capacity of thirty persons 
or more and in the airports, a separate provision for sm oking area or space may be made.  
5. Prohibition of advertisement of cigarettes and other tobacco products. –(1) No pe rson engaged 
in, or purported to be engaged in the production, supply or distribution of cigarettes or any other tobacco 
products shall advertise and no person having control over a medium shall cause to be advertised 
cigarettes or any other tobacco produc ts through that medium and no person shall take part in any 
advertisement which directly or indirectly suggests or promotes the use or consumption of cigarettes  or 
any other tobacco products.  
(2) No person, for any direct or indirect pecuniary benef it, sha ll– 
(a) display, cause to display, or permit or authorise to display any advertisement of cigarettes o r 
any other tobacco product; or  
(b) sell or cause to sell, or permit or authorise to sell a film or video tape containing 
advertisement of cigarettes o r any other tobacco product; or  
(c) distribute, cause to distribute, or permit or authorise to distribute to the public any leaflet, 
hand -bill or document which is or which contains an advertisement of cigarettes o r any other tobacco 
product; or  
(d) erect, exhibit, fix or retain upon or over any land, building, wall, hoarding, frame, post or 
structure or upon or in any vehicle or shall display in any manner whatsoever in any place any 
advertisement of cigarette s or any other tobacco product:  
Provided that this sub -section shall not apply in relation to – 
(a) an advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco product in or on a package containing 
cigarette s or any other tobacco product;  
(b) advertisement of cigarettes or any other tobacco produ ct which is displayed at the entrance or 
inside a warehouse or a shop where cigarettes and any other tobacco products are of fered for 
distribution or sale.  
(3) No person, shall, under a contract or otherwise promote or agree to promote the use or 
consumpti on of– 
(a) cigarettes o r any other tobacco product; or  
(b) any trade mark or brand name of cigarettes or any other tobacco product in exchange for a 
sponsorship, gift, prize or scholarship given or agreed  to be given by another person.  
6. Prohibition on sa le of cigarette or other tobacco products to a person below the age of 
eighteen years and in particular area. –No person shall sell, offer for sale, or permit sale of, cigarett e or 
any other tobacco product – 
(a) to any person who is under eighteen years of age, and  
(b) in an area within a radius of one hundred yards of any educational institution.  
7. Restrictions on trade and commerce in, and production, supply and distribution of cigarettes 
and other tobacco products. –(1) No person shall, directly or indire ctly, produce, supply or distribute 6 
 cigarettes or any other tobacco products unless every package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products 
produced, supplied or distributed by him bears thereon, or on its label 1[such specified warning including 
a picto rial warning as may be prescribed.]  
(2) No person shall carry on trade or commerce in cigarettes or any other tobacco products unless 
every package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products sold, supplied or distributed by him bears 
thereon, or on it s label, the specified warning.  
(3) No person shall import cigarettes or any other tobacco products for distribution or supply for a 
valuable consideration or for sale in India unless every package of cigarettes or any other tobacco 
products so imported by h im bears thereon, or on it s label , the specified warning.  
(4) The specified warning shall appear on not less than one of the largest panels of the package in 
which cigarettes or any other tobacco products have been packed for distribution, sale or suppl y for a 
valuable consideration.  
(5) No person shall, directly or indirectly, produce, supply or distribute cigarettes or any other 
tobacco products unless every package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products produced, supplied or 
distributed by him indi cates thereon, or on its labe l, the nicotine and tar contents on each cigarette or as 
the case may be on other tobacco products along with the maxi mum permissible limits thereof:  
Provided that the nicotine and tar contents shall not exceed the maximum perm issible quantity thereof 
as may be prescribe d by rules made under this Act.  
8. Manner in which specified warning shall be made. –(1) The specified warning on a package of 
cigarettes or any other tobacco products shal l be– 
(a) legible and prominent;  
(b) con spicuous as to size and colour;  
(c) in such style or type of lettering as to be boldly and clearly presented in distinct contrast to 
any other type, lettering or graphic material used on the package or its label and shall be printed, 
painted or inscribed on  the package in a colour which contrasts conspicuously with the backgroun d of 
the package or its labels.  
(2) The manner in which a specified warning shall be printed, painted or inscribed on a package of 
cigarettes or any other tobacco products shall be su ch as may be specified in  the rules made under this 
Act. 
(3) Every package containing cigarettes or any other tobacco products shall be so packed as to ensure 
that the specified warning appearing thereon, or on its label, is, before the package is o pened, visible to 
the consumer.  
9. Language in which the specified warning shall be expressed. –(1) Where the language used on a 
package containing cigarettes and any other tobacco products or on its label is – 
(a) English, the specified warning shall be exp ressed in the English language;  
(b) any Indian language or languages, the specified warning shall be expressed in suc h Indian 
language or languages;  
(c) both  English and one or more Indian languages, the specified warning shall be expressed in 
the English language as well as in suc h Indian language or languages;  
(d) partly English and partly any Indian language or languages, the specified warning shall be 
expressed in the English language as well as in such Indian  language or languages;  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 38 of 2007, s. 2 , for certain words (w.e.f. 24 -9-2007).  7 
 (e) any foreign language, the specified warning shall be exp ressed in the English language;  
(f) partly  any foreign language and partly English or any Indian language or languages, the 
specified warning shall be expressed in the English language as well as in suc h Indian language or 
languages.  
(2) No package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products or it s label shall contain any matter or 
statement which is inconsistent with, or detrac ts from, the specified warning.  
10. Size of letters and figures .–No specified warning or indication of nicotine and tar contents in 
cigarettes and any other tobacco products  shall be deemed to be in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act if the height of each letter or figure, or b oth the used on such warning and indication is less than the 
height as may be prescribe d by rules made under this Act.  
11. Testing laboratory f or nicotine and tar contents. –For purposes of testing the nicotine and tar 
contents in cigarettes and any other tobacco products the Central Government shall by notification in the 
Official Gazette grant recognition to such testing laboratory as that  Gover nment may deem necessary.  
12. Power of entry and search. –(1) Any police officer, not below the rank of a sub -inspector or any 
officer of State Food or Drug Administration or any other officer, holding the equivalent rank being not 
below the rank of Sub -Inspector of Police, authorise side by the Central Government or by the State 
Government may, if he has any reason to suspect that any provision of this Act has been, or is being, 
contravened, enter and search in the manner prescribed, at any reasonable time,  any factory, building, 
busines s premises or any other place, – 
(a) where any trade or commerce in cigarettes or any other tobacco products is carried on or 
cigarettes or any other tobacco products are produc ed, supplied or distributed; or  
(b) where  any advertisement of the cigarettes or any other tobacco products has been or is being 
made.  
(2) The provisions of the Code of Crim inal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , shall apply to every search 
and seizure made under this Act.  
13. Power to s eize.–(1) If any police officer, not below the rank of a sub -inspector or any officer of 
State Food or Drug Administration or any other officer, holding the equivalent rank being not bel ow the 
rank of Sub -Inspector of Police, authorised by the Central Government or by  the State Government, h as 
any reason to believe that, – 
(a) in respect of any package of cigarettes or  any other tobacco products, or  
(b) in respect of any advertisement of cigarettes  or any other tobacco products,  
the provisions of this Act have been, or are being, contravened, he may seize such package or 
advertisement mat erial in the manner prescribed.  
(2) No package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products or advertisement material seized under 
clause ( a) of sub -section ( 1) shall be retained by the officer who seized the package or advertisement 
material for a period exceeding ninety days from the date of the seizure unless the approval of the District 
Judge, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction such seiz ure was made, has be en obtained for such 
retention.  
14. Confiscation of package .–Any package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products or any 
advertisement material of cigarettes or any other tobacco products, in respect of which any provision of 
this Ac t has been or is being contravened, sha ll be liable to be confiscated:  
Provided that, where it is established to the satisfaction of the court adjudging the confiscation that 
the person in whose possession, power or control an y such package of cigarettes o r any other tobacco 
products is found is not responsible for the contravention of the provisions of this Act, the Court may, 8 
 instead of making an order for the confiscation of such package, make such other order authorised by this 
Act against the person gu ilty of the breach of the provisions of  this Act as it may think fit.  
15. Power to give option to pay costs in lieu of confiscation .–(1) Whenever any confiscation of any 
package of cigarettes or any other tobacco products is authorised by this Act, the cou rt adjudging it may, 
subject to such conditions as may be specified in the order adjudging the confiscation, give to the owner 
thereof an option to pay, in lieu of confiscation, costs which shall be equal to the value of the goods 
confiscated.  
(2) On payment of the costs ordered by the court, the seized packages shall be returned to the person 
from whom they were seized on condition that such person shall, before making any distribution, sale or 
supply of such pa ckages of cigarettes or other to bacco products, get the specified warning and indication 
of nicotine and tar contents inc orporated on each such package.  
16. Confiscation not to interfere with other punishments. –No confiscation made, costs ordered to 
be paid under this Act shall prevent the infli ction of any punishment to which the person affected thereby 
is liable under the provisions of this Act or under any other law.  
17. Adjudication .–Any confiscation of cigarettes or any other tobacco products may be adjudged or 
costs may be ordered  to be pai d,– 
(a) without any limit, by the principal civil court of original jurisdiction within the local limits of 
whose jurisdiction such confiscation has been made, cost s have been ordered to be paid,  
(b) subject  to such limits as may be specified by the Central Government in this behalf, by such 
other court, not below a civil court having pecuniary jurisdiction exceeding rupees five thousand, as 
the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gaz ette, authorise in this behalf.  
18. Giving opportunity to the owner of s eized packages. –(1) No order adjudging confiscation or 
directing payment of costs shall be made unless the owner or person in possession of the package of 
cigarettes or any other toba cco pr oducts has been given a no tice in writing informing him of the grounds 
on which it is proposed to confiscate such package, and giving him a reasonable opportunity of making a 
representation in writing, within such reasonable time as may be specified in the  notice, against the 
confiscation mentioned therein, and, if he so desires, of being heard personally or through a representative 
in the matter:  
Provided that, where no such notice is given within a period of ninety days from the date of the 
seizure of the  package of cigarettes or of any other tobacco products, such package shall be returned, after 
the expiry of that period, to the owner or the person from whose possession it was seized.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 1), the provisions of t he Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  
(5 of 1908) , shall, as far as may be, apply to every proceeding referred to in sub -section ( 1). 
19. Appeal. –(1) Any person, aggrieved by any decision of the court adjudging a confiscation, 
ordering the payment of costs, may  prefer an appeal to the court to which an appeal lies f rom the decision 
of such court.  
(2) The appellate court may, after giving to the appellant an opportunity of being heard, pass such 
order as it thinks fit confirming, modifying or reversing the decisi on or order appealed against or may 
send back the case with such directions as it may think fit for a fresh decision or adjudication, as the case 
may be, after taking add itional evidence, if necessary:  
Provided that an order enhancing any fine in lieu of c onfiscation or confiscating of goods of greater 
value shall not be made under this section unless the appellant has had an opportunity of making a 
representation and, if he so desires, of being heard in person or through a  representative in his defence.  
(3) No further appeal shall lie against th e order of the court of appeal.  9 
 20. Punishment for failure to give specified warning and nicotine and tar contents. –(1) Any 
person who produces or manufactures cigarettes or tobacco products, which do not contain, ei ther on the 
package or on their label, the specified warning and the ni cotin e and tar contents, shall in the case of first 
conviction be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine 
which may extend to five thousand r upees, or with both, and for the second or subsequent conviction, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years and with fine which may  extend to           
ten thousand rupees.  
(2) Any person who sells or distributes cigarettes or tobacco products which do not contain either on 
the package or on their label, the specified warning and the nicotine and tar contents shall in the case of 
first convict ion be punishable with imprisonm ent for a term, which may extend to one year, or with fine 
whic h may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both, and, for the second or subsequent conviction, 
with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with fine which may ex tend to t hree 
thousand rupees.  
21. Punishmen t for smoking in certain place s.–(1) Whoever contravenes the provisions of section 4 
shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to two hundred rupees.  
(2) An offence under this section shall be compoundable and shall be tried summarily in accordance 
with the procedure provided for summary trials in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974 ). 
22. Punishment for advertisement of cigarettes and tobacco products .–Whoever contravenes the 
provision of section 5 shall , on conviction, be punishable – 
(a) in the case of first conviction, with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or 
with fine which may extend to one th ousand rupees or with both, and  
(b) in the case of second or subsequent conviction with imprisonment for a term which may 
extend to five years and  with fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees.  
23. Forfeiture of advertisement and advertisement material. –Where any person has been 
convicted under this Act for the contravention of the provision of section 5, the advertisement and the 
advertisement  material for cigarettes and other tobacco products may be forfeited to the Government and 
such advertisement and advertisement material shall be disposed of in such manner as may be prescribe d 
by rules made under this Act.  
24. Punishment for sale of cigar ettes or any other tobacco products in certain places or to 
persons below the age of eighteen years. –(1) Any person who contravenes the provisions of section 6 
shall be guilty of an offence under this Act and shall be punishable with fine which ma y extend to two 
hundred rupees.  
(2) All offences under this section shall be compoundable and shall be tried summarily in accordance 
with the procedure provided for summary trials in the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973 ( 2 of 1974 ). 
25. Prevention, detention and place of trial of offences under sections 4 and 6. –(1) 
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the Central Government 
or the State Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, authorise one or more perso ns who 
shall be competent to act under this A ct: 
Provided that the person so authorised may, if he has reasonable ground for believing that any person 
has committed an offence under section 4 or section 6, may detain such person unless the accused person 
furnishes his name and address, and otherwise satisfies the officer detaining him that he will duly answer 
any summons or other proceedings which may be taken against him.  
(2) Any person detained under sub -section ( 1) shall forthwith be taken before Magistr ate to be dealt 
with according to law.  10 
 (3) Any person committing an offence under section 4 or section 6 shall be tribal for such offence in 
any place in which he may be or which the State Government may notify in this behalf, as well as in any 
other place  in which he is liable to be tried un der any l aw for the time being in force.  
(4) Every notification issued under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) shall be published in the Official Gazette, 
and a copy thereof shall be exhibited for information to the public in some conspicuous place or places as 
the Sta te Government may direct.  
(5) Every person authorised under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be a public servant within the 
meaning of sect ion 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
26. Offences by companies. –(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a company, 
every person who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to, the 
company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, sha ll be deemed to be 
guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was comm itted without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent  the commission of such offence . 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved t hat the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall be proceeded against and 
punished accordingly.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) "company" means a body corporate and includes a firm or ot her association of individuals; 
and  
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
27. Offences to be bailable .–Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 
1973  (2 of 1974) , an offence punishable un der this Act shall be b ailable.  
28. Composition of offences. –(1) Any offence committed under section 4 or section 6  may either 
before or after the institution of the prosecution be compounded by such officer authorised by Central 
Government or State Gover nment and for an amount which ma y not exceed two hundred rupees.  
(2) Where an offence has been compounded under sub-section ( 1), the offender, if in custody, shall be 
discharged and no further proceedings shall be taken against him in respect of such offence.  
29. Protection of action taken in good faith. –No suit, prosecution or other legal proceeding shall lie 
again st the Central Government or any State Government or any officer of the Central Government or any 
State Government for anything which is in good fa ith done or inte nded to be done under this Act.  
30. Power to add any tobacco products in the Schedule. –The Ce ntral Government, after giving by 
notification in the Official Gazette, not less than three months' notice of its intention so to do, may, by 
like notification, add any other tobacco product in respect of which it is of opinion that advertisements are 
to be prohibited and its production, supply and distribution is required to be regulated under this Act, and 
thereupon the Schedule shall in its application to such products be de emed to be amended accordingly.  
31. Power of Central Government to make rules. –(1) The Central Government may, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
  11 
 (2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, nam ely:– 
(a) specify the form and manner in which warning shall be given in respect of cigarettes or other 
tobacco products under clause ( o) of section 3;  
(b) specify  the maximum permissible nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes or other tobacco 
products under the proviso to sub -section ( 5) of section 7;  
(c) specify the manner in which the specified warning shall be inscribed on each package of 
cigarettes or other to bacco products or its label under sub -section ( 2) of section 8;  
(d) specify the height of the letter or figure or both to be used in specified warning or to indicate 
the nicotine and tar contents in cigarettes or other tob acco products under section 10;  
(e) provide for the manner in which entry into and search of any premises is to be conducted and 
the manner in which the seizure of any package of cigarettes or other tobacco products shall be made 
and the manner in which s eizure list shall be prepared an d delivered to the person from whose 
custody any package of cigarettes or other to bacco products has been seized;  
(f) provide for any other matter which is require d to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act and every notification made under section 30 shall be laid, as soon 
as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of 
thirty days which may be comprised in one se ssion  or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before 
the e xpiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both 
Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or both Houses agree that the rule or 
notification should not be made, the rule or notific ation shall thereafter have effect only in such modified 
form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be 
without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done u nder that rule or notificatio n. 
32. Act not to apply to cigarettes of other tobacco products which are exported. –Nothing 
contained in this Act shall apply to any cigarette or other tobacco products or package of cigarettes or 
other toba cco products which is exported:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise the export of any package of 
cigarettes or other tobacco products, not containing the specified warning and indication of nicotine and 
tar contents to any c ountry if the law in force in th at country requires that the same or similar warning and 
nicotine and tar contents shall be specified on each package of cigarettes or ot her tobacco products.  
Explanation. –For the purpose of this section, any cigarette or other tobacco products or package o f 
cigarettes or other tobacco products shall be deemed to be exported before the commencement of this Act, 
if the necessary s teps for export have already bee n taken notwithstanding that the actual export has not 
taken  place.  
33. Repeal and savings. –(1) The  Cigarettes (Regulation of Production, Supply and Distribution) Act, 
1975  (49 of 1975),  is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken under the provisions of the 
aforesaid Act, shall, in so far as such thing or acti on is not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be 
deemed to have been do ne or taken under the pro visions of this Act as if the said provisions were in force 
when such thing was done or such action was taken and shall continue in force accordingly until 
superseded by anything done or a ny action taken under this Act.  
  12 
 THE SCHEDULE  
[See section 3(p)] 
1. Cigarettes  
2. Cigars  
3. Cheroots  
4. Beedis  
5. Cigarette tobacco, pipe tobacco and hookah  tobacco  
6. Chewing tobacco  
7. Snuff  
8. Pan masala  or any che wing material having tobacco as one of its ingredients (by whatever name 
called).  
9. Gutka  
10. Tooth powder containing tobacco.  
--------------------------The Competition Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE COMPETITION ACT, 2002  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short t itle, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN AGREEMENTS, ABUSE OF  DOMINANT POSITION AND REGULATION OF 
COMBINATIONS  
Prohibition of agreements  
3. Anti-competitive agreements . 
Prohibition of abuse of dominant position  
4. Abuse of dominant position . 
Regulation of combinations  
5. Combination.  
6. Regulation of combinations.  
CHAPTER III  
COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA  
7. Establi shment of Commission.  
8. Composition of Commission.  
9. Selection Committee for Chairper son and Me mbers  of Commission . 
10. Term of office of Chairperson and other Members.  
11. Resignation, removal  and suspension of Chairperson and other Members . 
12. Restriction on employ ment of Chairperson and other Members in certain cases . 
13. Adminis trative powers of Chairpers on. 
14. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and o ther 
Members . 
15. Vacancy, etc. , not to invalid ate proceedings of Commission.  
16. Appointm ent of Di rector General, etc.  
17. Appointment of Secretary, experts, professionals and office rs and other employees of 
Commission . 
 
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF COMMISSION  
18. Duties o f Commission.  
19. Inquiry into certain agreements and do minant position of enterprise.  
20. Inquiry i nto combination by commission.  
21. Reference by statutory authority.  
21A. Reference by Commission.  
22. Meetings of Commission . 
  2 
 SECTIONS  
23. [Omitted .] 
24. [Omitted .] 
25. [Omitted .] 
26. Procedure  for inquiry under section 19.  
27. Orders by Commission after inquiry into agreements or abuse of dominant position . 
28. Division of enterpri se enjoying dominant position.  
29. Procedure for  investigation of combination s. 
30. Inquiry into disclosures  under  sub-section ( 2) of section 6.  
31. Orders of Commission on certain combi nations.  
32. Acts taking place outside India but having an effect on competition in India . 
33. Power to issue interim orders.  
34. [Omitted .] 
35. Appearance before Commission.  
36. Power of Com mission to regulate its own procedure . 
37. [Omitted .] 
38. Rectification of orders.  
39. Execution of orders of Commiss ion imposing monetary penalty.  
40. [Omitted .] 
 
CHAPTER V  
DUTIES OF DIRECTOR GENERAL  
41. Director General  to investigate contravention s. 
 
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
42. Contrave ntion of orders of Commission.  
42A.  Compensation in case of contravention of orders of Commission.  
43. Penalty for failure to comply with directions of C ommission and Director General . 
43A. Power to impose penalty for non -furnishing of information  on combinations . 
44. Penalty for making false sta tement or omission to furnish material information . 
45. Penalty for offence s in relation to furnishing of i nformation.  
46. Power to impose lesser penalty.  
47. Crediting sums realised by way  of penalties to Consolidated Fund of  India . 
48. Contravention by companies.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
COMPETITION ADVOCACY  
49. Competition advocacy.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
50. Grants by Central Government . 
51. Constitution of Fund.  
52. Accounts and audit. 
53. Furnishing of return s, etc. , to Central Government.  
  3 
 CHAPTER VIIIA  
APPELLATE TRIBUNAL  
SECTIONS   
 53A. Appellate Tribunal.  
 53B.  Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.  
 53C.  [Omitted .] 
 53D. [Omitted .] 
 53E. [Omitted .] 
      53F. [Omitted.] 
53G.  [Omitted .] 
53H.  [Omitted .] 
53-I. [Omitted .] 
53J. [Omitted .] 
53K.  [Omitted .] 
53L. [Omitted .] 
53M. [Omitted .] 
53N.  Awarding compensation.  
53-O. Procedure  and powers of Appellate Tribu nal. 
53P. Execution of  orders of Appellate Tribunal.  
53Q.  Contravention of  orders of Appellate Tribunal.  
53R.  [Omitted .] 
53-S. Right to legal representation.  
53T. Appeal to Supreme Court.  
53U.  Power to Punish for contempt.  
 
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
54. Power to exempt.  
55. Power of Central G overnment to issue directions.  
56. Power of Central G overnment to supersede Commission.  
57. Restriction on disclosure of information . 
58. Chairperson, Members,  Director General, Secretary, officers and other employees, etc., to be 
public servants.  
59. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
60. Act to have overriding effect.  
61. Exclusion of  jurisdiction of civil courts.  
62. Applicat ion of other laws not barred.  
63. Power to make rules.  
64. Power to make regulations.  
65. Power to remove difficulties.  
66. Repeal and saving.  
 
  4 
 THE COMPETITION ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 12 OF 2003  
[13th January , 2003.]  
An Act to provide, keeping in view of the economic development of the country, for the 
establishment of a Commission to prevent practices having adverse effect on competition, to 
promote and sustain competition in markets, to protect the interests of consumers and to 
ensure freedom of trade carried on by other participants in markets, in India, and for matters 
connected therewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the Republic of India as  follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Competition Act, 2002.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may,  by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this  Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this  Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that  provision.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “acquisition ” means, directly or indirectly, acquiring or agreeing to  acquire — 
(i) shares, voting rights or assets of any enterprise; or  
(ii) control over management or control over assets of any enterprise;  
(b) “agreement ” includes any arrangement or understanding or action in  concert, — 
(i) whether or not, such arrangement, understanding or action is  formal or in writing; or  
(ii) whether or not such arrangement, understanding or action is  intended to be enforceable by 
legal proceedings;  
2[ 3[(ba) "Appellate Tribunal" means the National Company Law Appellate Tribunal referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) of section 53A; ]] 
(c) “cartel ” includes an association of producers,  sellers, distributors, traders  or service providers 
who, by agreement amongst themselves, limit, control  or attempt to control the production, 
distribution, sale or price of, or, trade  in goods or provision of services;  
(d) “Chairperson ” means the Chairpe rson of the Commission appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 8;  
(e) “Commission ” means the Competition Commission of India established  under sub -section  (1) 
of section 7;  
(f) “consumer ” means any person who — 
(i) buys any goods for a consideration whic h has been paid or  promised or partly paid and 
partly promised, or under any system of  deferred payment and includes any user of such goods 
                                                             
1. 31st March, 2003 , vide Notification No. S.O. 340(E), dated 3 1st March 2003  in respect of [s. 1, cls. ( d), (g), (j), (k), (l) 
and ( n) of s. 2, ss. 8, 9, 10, 14, 16, 17, sub -sec. ( 1) of s. 63 and  cls. (a), (b), (d), (e), (f) and ( g) of sub -sec. ( 2) of s. 63];  
19th June, 2003 , vide Notification no.  S.O. 715(E), dated 19 th June 2003 in respect of [s. 2 {except cls.  (d), (g), (j), (k), (l) 
and ( n)}, ss. 7, 11, 12, 13, 15, 22, 23, 36, 49, 50, 51, 52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, s. 63 {except cls. ( a), (b), 
(d), (e), (f), (g) and ( n) of sub -sec. ( 2)}, 64 and 65] 
20th May, 2009, vide Notification No. S.O. 1241(E), dated 15 th May 2009 in respect of [s. 3, 4, 18, 19, 21, 26, 27, 28, 32, 
33, 35, 38, 39, 41, 42, 43, 45, 46, 47, 48, 54, 55 and 56.]  
2. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 2 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 171 , for clause ( ba) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  5 
 other than  the person who buys such goods for consideration paid or  promised or partly paid or 
partly promised, or u nder any system  of deferred payment when such use is made with the 
approval of  such person, whether such purchase of goods is for resale or for any  commercial 
purpose or for personal use;  
(ii) hires or avails of any services for a consideration which has been  paid or promised or 
partly paid and partly promised, or under any  system of deferred payment and includes any 
beneficiary of such  services other than the person who hires or avails of the services  for 
consideration paid or promised, or partly paid and  partly  promised, or under any system of 
deferred payment, when such  services are availed of with the approval of the first -mentioned  
person whether such hiring or availing of services is for any  commercial purpose or for personal 
use; 
(g) “Director Genera l” means the Director General appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of section 16 
and includes any Additional, Joint, Deputy  or Assistant Directors General appointed under that 
section;  
(h) “enterprise ” means a person or a department of the Government,  who or wh ich is, or has been, 
engaged in any activity, relating to the production,  storage, supply, distribution, acquisition or control 
of articles or goods,  or the provision of services, of any kind, or in investment, or in the business  of 
acquiring, holding, und erwriting or dealing with shares, debentures or  other securities of any other 
body corporate, either directly or through one  or more of its units or divisions or subsidiaries, whether 
such unit or  division or subsidiary is located at the same place where t he enterprise is  located or at a 
different place or at different places, but does not include any  activity of the Government relatable to 
the sovereign functions of the Government  including all activities carried on by the departments of 
the Central  Govern ment dealing with atomic energy, currency, defence and space.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, — 
(a) “activity ” includes profession or occupation;  
(b) “article ” includes a new article and “service ” includes a new  service;  
(c) “unit” or “division ”, in relation to an enterprise, includes — 
(i) a plant or factory established for the production, storage, supply,  distribution, 
acquisition or control of any article or goods;  
(ii) any branch or office established for the provision of any service ; 
(i) “goods ” means goods as defined i n the Sale of Goods Act, 1930 (8  of 1930) and includes — 
(A) products manufactured, processed or mined;  
(B) debentures,  stocks and shares after  allotment;  
(C) in relation to goods supplied, distributed or controlled in  India,  goods imported into India;  
(j) “Member ” means a Member of the Commission appointed under  sub-section ( 1) of section 8 
and includes the Chairperson;  
(k) “notification ” means a notification pub lished in the Official Gazette;  
(l) “person ” includes — 
(i) an individual;  
(ii) a Hindu undivided family;  
(iii) a company;  
(iv) a firm;  
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether  incorporated or no t, in India or 
outside India;  
(vi) any corporation established by or under any Central, State or Provincial  Act or a 
Government company as defined in section 617 of  the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  6 
 (vii) any body corporate incorporated by or under the laws of a  country outside India;  
(viii) a co -operative society registered under any law relati ng to co -operative  societies;  
(ix) a local authority;  
(x) every artificial juridical person, not falling within any of the preceding  sub-clauses;  
(m) “practice ” includes any practice relating to the carrying on of any trade  by a person or an 
enterprise;  
(n) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(o) “price ”, in relation to the sale of any goods or to the performance of any  services, includes 
every valuable consideration, whether direct or indirect,  or deferred, and includes any consideration 
which in effect relates to the  sale of any goods or to the performance of any services although  
ostensibly relating to any other matter or thing;  
(p) “public financial institution ” means a public financial institution specified  under section 4A of 
the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) and includes a  State Financial, Industrial or Investment 
Corporation;  
(q) “regulations ” means the regulations made by the Commission under  section 64;  
(r) “relevant market ” means the market which may be determined by the  Commission with 
reference to the relevant product market or the relevant  geographic market or with reference to both 
the markets;  
(s) “relevant geographic market ” means a market comprising the area  in which the conditions of 
competition for supply o f goods or provision of  services or demand of goods or services are distinctly 
homogenous and  can be distinguished from the conditions prevailing in the neighbouring  areas;  
(t) “relevant product market ” means a market comprising all those products  or servi ces which are 
regarded as interchangeable or substitutable by the  consumer, by reason of characteristics of the 
products or services, their  prices and intended use;  
(u) “service ” means service of any description which is made available to  potential users a nd 
includes the provision of services in connection with  business of any industrial or commercial matters 
such as banking,  communication, education, financing, insurance, chit funds, real estate,  transport, 
storage, material treatment, processing, supply of electrical or  other energy, boarding, lodging, 
entertainment, amusement, construction,  repair, conveying of news or information and advertising;  
(v) “shares ” means shares in the share capital of a company carrying  voting rights and includes — 
(i) any sec urity which entitles the holder to receive shares with  voting rights;  
(ii) stock except where a distinction between stock and share is  expressed or implied;  
(w) “statutory authority ” means any authority, board, corporation, council,  institute, university o r 
any other body corporate, established by or under  any Central, State or Provincial Act for the 
purposes of regulating  production or supply  of goods or provision of any services or markets  therefor 
or any matter connected therewith or incidental thereto;  
(x) “trade ” means any trade, business, industry, profession or occupation  relating to the 
production, supply, distribution, storage or control of goods  and includes the provision of any 
services;  
(y) “turnover ” includes value of sale of goods or services;  
(z) words and expressions used but not defined in this Act and defined in the  Companies Act, 
1956 (1 of 1956) shall have the same meanings  respectively assigned to them in that Act.  
  7 
 CHAPTER II  
PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN AGREEMENTS, ABUSE OF DOMINANT  POSITION  AND REGULATION OF  
COMBINATIONS  
Prohibition of agreements  
3. Anti-competitive agreements .—(1) No enterprise or association of enterprises or person or 
association of  persons shall enter into any agreement in respect of production, supply,  distribution, 
storage, acquisition or control of goods or provision of  services, which causes or is likely to cause an 
appreciable adverse effect on  competition within India.  
(2) Any agreement entered into in contravention of the provisions contained  in sub -section ( 1) shall 
be void.  
(3) Any agreement entered into between enterprises or associations of  enterprises or persons or 
associations of persons or between any person and  enterprise or practice carried on, or decision taken by, 
any association  of enterprises or asso ciation of persons, including cartels, engaged in identical  or similar 
trade of goods or provision of services, which — 
(a) directly or indirectly determines purchase or sale prices;  
(b) limits or controls production, supply, markets, technical development,  investment or provision 
of services;  
(c) shares the market or source of production or provision of services by  way of allocation of 
geographical area of market, or type of goods or  services, or number of customers in the market or 
any other similar  way;  
(d) directly or indirectly results in bid rigging or collusive bidding,  
shall be presumed to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply to any  agreement entered into by way 
of joint ven tures if such agreement  increases efficiency in production, supply, distribution, storage,  
acquisition or control of goods or provision of services.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, “bid rigging ” means any agreement,  between 
enterprises o r persons referred to in sub -section ( 3) engaged in  identical or similar production or trading 
of goods or provision of services, which  has the effect of eliminating or reducing competition for bids or 
adversely affecting  or manipulating the process for bi dding . 
(4) Any agreement amongst enterprises or persons at different stages or levels  of the production chain 
in different markets, in respect of production,  supply, distribution, storage, sale or price of, or trade in 
goods or provision  of services, including — 
(a) tie-in arrangement;  
(b) exclusive supply agreement;  
(c) exclusive distribution agreement;  
(d) refusal to deal;  
(e) resale price maintenance,  
shall be an agreement in contravention of sub -section ( 1) if such agreement causes  or is likely to cause an 
appreciable adverse effect on competition in India.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub -section, — 
(a) “tie-in arrangement ” includes any agreement requiring a purchaser of  goods, as a condition of 
such purchase, to purchase some other goods;  
(b) “exclusive supply agreement ” includes any agreement restricting in any  manner the purchaser 
in the course of his trade from acquiring or  otherwise dealing in any goods other than those of the 
seller or any other  person;  8 
 (c) “exclusive distribution agreement ” includes any agreement to limit, restrict  or withhold the 
output or supply of any goods or allocate any area or  market for the disposal or sale of the goods;  
(d) “refusal to deal ” includes any agreement which restricts, or is likely to  restrict,  by any method 
the persons or classes of persons to whom goods  are sold or from whom goods are bought;  
(e) “resale price maintenance ” includes any agreement to sell goods on  condition that the prices 
to be charged on the resale by the purchaser  shall be th e prices stipulated by the seller unless it is 
clearly stated that  prices lower than those prices may be charged.  
(5) Nothing contained in this section shall restrict — 
(i) the right of any person to restrain any infringement of, or to impose  reasonable con ditions, as 
may be necessary for protecting any of his  rights which have been or may be conferred upon him 
under — 
(a) the Copyright Act, 1957 (14 of 1957);  
(b) the Patents Act, 1970 (39 of 1970);  
(c) the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act, 1958 (43 of 1958) o r the Trade Marks Act, 1999 
(47 of 1999);  
(d) the Geographical Indications of Goods (Registration and Protection)  Act, 1999                       
(48 of 1999);  
(e) the Designs Act, 2000 (16 of 2000);  
(f) the Semi -conductor Integrated Circuits Layout -Design  Act, 2000 (37  of 2000);  
(ii) the right of any person to export goods from India to the extent to which  the agreement relates 
exclusively to the production, supply, distribution or  control of goods or provision of services for 
such export.  
Prohibition of abuse of dominant position  
4. Abuse of dominant position .—1[(1) No enterprise  or group  shall abuse its dominant position.]  
(2) There shall be  an abuse of dominant position 2[under sub -section ( 1), if an enterprise or a 
group] ,— 
(a) directly or indirectly, imposes unfair or discriminatory — 
(i) condition in purchase or sale of goods or service; or  
(ii) price in purchase or sale (including predatory price) of goods or  service.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, the unfair or discriminatory condition  in purchase 
or sale of goods or service referred to in sub -clause ( i) and unfair  or discriminatory price in purchase 
or sale of goods (including predatory price) or  service referred to in sub -clause ( ii) shall not include 
such discriminatory condition or  price which may be adopted to meet the competition; or  
(b) limits or restricts — 
(i) production of goods or provis ion of services or market there for; or 
(ii) technical or scientific development relating to goods or services to the  prejudice of 
consumers; or  
(c) indulges in practice or practices resulting in denial of market access  3[in any manner]; or  
(d) makes conclusion of contracts subject to acceptance by other parties of  supplementary 
obligations which, by their nature or according to  commercial usage, have no connection with the 
subject of such contracts; or  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 3, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 3, ibid., for “under sub -section ( 1), if an enterprise ” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Ins. by s.3, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  9 
 (e) uses its dominant position in one relevant market to enter into, or protect,  other relevant 
market.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression — 
(a) “dominant position ” means a  position of strength, enjoyed by an enterprise,  in the relevant 
market, in India, which enables it to — 
(i) operate independently of competitive forces prevailing in the  relevant market; or  
(ii) affect its competitors or consumers or th e relevant market in  its favour;  
(b) “predatory price ” means the sale of goods  or provision of services, at a price which is 
below the cost, as may be determined by regulations, of  production of the goods or provision of 
services, with a view to reduce competition  or eliminat e the competitors;  
1[(c) “group ” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( b) of the Explanation to 
section 5.]  
Regulation of combinations  
5. Combination .—The acquisition of one or more enterprises by one or more persons or merger  or 
amalgamation of enterprises shall be a combination of such enterprises  and persons or enterprises, if — 
(a) any acquisition where — 
(i) the parties to the acquisition, being the acquirer and the enterprise, whose  control, shares, 
voting rights or assets have  been acquired or are being  acquired jointly have, — 
(A) either, in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees one  thousand crores or 
turnover more than rupees three thousand  crores; or  
2[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of th e value of more  than five 
hundred million US dollars or turnover more than fifteen hundred  million US dollars; or]  
(ii) the group, to which the enterprise whose control, shares, assets or  voting rights have been 
acquired or are being acquired, would belong  after the acquisition, jointly have or would jointly 
have, — 
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees four thousand crores or 
turnover more than rupees twelve thousand crores; or  
3[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the as sets of the value of more  than two 
billion US dollars  or turnover more than six billion US dollars; or]  
(b) acquiring of control by a person over an enterprise when such person has  already direct or 
indirect control over another enterprise engaged in  produ ction, distribution or trading of a similar or 
identical or substitutable  goods or provision of a similar or identical or substitutable service, if — 
(i) the enterprise over which control has been acquired along with the  enterprise over which 
the acquirer a lready has direct or indirect control  jointly have, — 
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees one thousand  crores or 
turnover more than rupees three thousand crores;  or 
  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 39  of 2007, s. 3 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
2. Item ( B) shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by s. 4 , ibid.,  to read as under:  
“(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than five hundred million US dollars, 
including at  least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover more than fifteen hundred million US dollars, 
including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India; or ”. 
3. Item ( B) shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by s. 4 , ibid., to read as under : 
 “(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than two billion US dollars, including at 
least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover more than six billion US dollars, including at least rupees fifteen 
hundred cr ores in India; or ”. 10 
 1[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of  more than five 
hundred million US dollars or turnover more than fifteen hundred  million US dollars ; or] 
(ii) the group, to which enterprise whose control has been acquired, or is being  acquired, 
would belong after the acquisition, jointly have  or would jointly  have, — 
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees four thousand crores or 
turnover more than rupees twelve thousand crores ; or 
2[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value  of more than two 
billion US dollars or turnover more than six billion US dollars; or]  
(c) any merger or amalgamation in which — 
(i) the enterprise remaining after merger or the enterprise created as a result  of the 
amalgamation, as the case may be, have, — 
(A) either in India , the assets of the value of more than rupees one  thousand crores or 
turnover more than rupees three thousand  crores; or  
3[(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of  more than five 
hundred million US dollars  or turnover more than fifteen hundred  million US dollars; or]  
(ii) the group, to which the enterprise remaining after the merger or the enterprise created as a 
result of the amalgamation, would belong after the  merger or the amalgamation, as the case may 
be, have or would have, — 
(A) either in India, the assets of the value of more than rupees four -thousand crores or 
turnover more than rupees twelve thousand  crores; or  
4[(B) in India or outside India, the assets of the value of  more than two billion US dollars 
or turnover mo re than six billion US dollars .] 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “control ” includes controlling the affairs or management by — 
(i) one or more enterprises, either jointly or singly, over another  enterprise or group;  
(ii) one or more grou ps, either jointly or singly, over another group  or enterprise;  
(b) “group ” means two or more enterprises which, directly or indirectly, are  in a position to — 
(i) exercise twenty -six per cent . or more of the voting rights in the  other enterprise; or  
(ii) appoint more than fifty per cent . of the members of the board of  directors in the other 
enterprise; or  
(iii) control the management or affairs of the other enterprise;  
                                                             
1. Item ( B) shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by Act 39 of 2007, s. 4,   to read as under:  
“(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than five hundred million US dollars, 
including at least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover more than fifteen hundred million US dollars, 
including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India; or ”. 
2. Item ( B) shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by s. 4,  ibid.,  to read as under : 
 “(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than two billion US dollars, including at 
least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover more than six billion US dollars, including at least rupees fifteen 
hundred cr ores in India; or ”. 
3. Item ( B) shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by  s. 4, ibid.,  to read as under:  
 “(B) in India or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than five hundred million US dollars, 
including at least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover more than fifteen hundred million US dollars, 
including at least rupees fifteen hundred crores in India; or ”. 
4. Item ( B) shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by  s. 4, ibid., to read as under:  
 “(B) in In dia or outside India, in aggregate, the assets of the value of more than two billion US dollars, including at 
least rupees five hundred crores in India, or turnover more than six billion US doll ars, including at least rupees fifteen 
hundred c rores in India ”. 11 
 (c) the value of assets shall be determined by taking the book value of the  assets as sh own, in the 
audited books of account of the enterprise, in the  financial year immediately preceding the financial 
year in which the date  of proposed merger falls, as reduced by any depreciation, and the value  of 
assets shall include the brand value, value of goodwill, or value  of copyright, patent, permitted use, 
collective mark, registered proprietor,  registered trade mark, registered user, homonymous 
geographical  indication, geographical  indications, design or layout -design or similar other  
commercial rig hts, if any, referred to in sub -section ( 5) of section 3.  
6. Regulation of combinations .—(1) No person or enterprise shall enter into a combination which 
causes or is  likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on competition within the  relevant market in 
India and such a combination shall be void.  
(2) Subject to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), any person or  enterprise, who or which 
proposes to enter into a combination, 1[may, at his or its option, ] give notice to the Commission, in the 
form  as may be specified, and  the fee which may be determined, by regulations, disclosing the details  of 
the proposed combination, within 2[seven  days] of — 
(a) approval of the proposal relating to merger or amalgamation, referred  to in clause ( c) of 
section 5,  by the board of directors of the  enterprises concerned with such merger or amalgamation, 
as the case  may be;  
(b) execution of any agreement or other document for acquisition referred  to in clause ( a) of 
section 5 or acquiring of control referred to in clause  (b) of that section.  
3[(2A) No combination shall come into effect until two hundred and ten days have  passed from the 
day on which the notice has been given to the Commission  under sub -section  (2) or the Commission has 
passed orders under section 31 , whichever  is earlier.]  
(3) The Commission shall, after receipt of notice under sub -section ( 2), deal  with such notice in 
accordance with the provisions contained in sections  29, 30 and 31.  
(4) The provisions of this section shall not apply to share subsc ription or  financing facility or any 
acquisition, by a public financial institution,  foreign institutional investor, bank or venture capital fund, 
pursuant to  any covenant of a loan agreement or investment agreement.  
(5) The public financial institution, f oreign institutional investor, bank or  venture capital fund, 
referred to in sub -section ( 4), shall, within seven days  from the date of the acquisition, file, in the form as 
may be specified by  regulations, with the Commission the details of the acquisition  including  the details 
of control, the circumstances for exercise of such control  and the consequences of default arising out of 
such loan agreement or  investment agreement, as the case may be.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, the expression — 
(a) “foreign institutional investor ” has the same meaning as assigned to it  in clause ( a) of the 
Explanation  to section 115AD of the Income -tax Act,  1961(43 of 1961);  
(b) “venture capital fund ” has the same meaning as assigned to it in clause  (b) of the Explanation  
to clause ( 23 FB ) of section 10 of the Income -tax Act, 1961(43 of 1961) . 
CHAPTER III  
COMPETITION COMMISSION OF INDIA  
7. Establishment of Commission .—(1) With effect from such date4 as the Central Government may, 
by notification, appoint, there shall be established, for the purposes of this Act,  a Commission to be called 
the “Competition Commission of India ”. 
(2) The Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid  having perpetual succession and 
a common seal with power, subject to  the provisions of this Act, to acquire, hold and dispose of property, 
both movable and immovable, and to contract and shall, by the said name, sue  or be sued.  
                                                             
1. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by Act 39 of 2007, s. 5 , to read as “shall”. 
2. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by s. 5, ibid., to read as “thirty days ”. 
3. Sub -section ( 2A) shall stand inserted (date to be notified) by s. 5, ibid.  
 4. 14th October, 2003, vide Notification No. S.O. 1198(E), dated 14th October, 200 3. 12 
 (3) The head office of the Commission shall be at such place * as the  Central Government may decide 
from time to time.  
(4) The Commission may establish offices at other places in India.  
1[8. Composition of Commission .—(1) The Commission shall consist of a Chairperson and not less 
than two and  not more than six other Members to be appointed by the Central  Government.  
(2) The Chairperson and every other Member shall be a person of ability,  integrity and standing and 
who has special knowledge of, and such  professional experience of not less than fifteen years in, 
international  trade, economics, business, commerce, law, finance, accountancy,  management, industry, 
public affairs or competition matters, including  competition law and policy, which in the opinion of the 
Central Government,  may be useful to the Commission.  
(3) The Chairperson and other Members s hall be whole -time Members.]  
2[9. Selection Committee for Chairperson and Members of Commission. —(1) The Chairperson 
and other Members of the Commission shall be  appointed by the Central Government from a panel of 
names  recommended by a Se lection Committee  consisting of — 
(a) the Chief Justice of India or  his nominee …… ..Chairperson;  
(b) the Secretary in the Ministry of Corporate Affairs ……… Member;  
(c) the Secretary in th e Ministry of Law and Justice ……… .Member;  
(d) two experts of repute who have special knowledge of, and professional experience in 
international trade, economics, business, commerce, law,  finance, accountancy, management, 
industry, public affairs or competition  matters including competition law and policy ……… .Members.  
(2) The term of the Sel ection Committee and the manner of selection of  panel of names shall be such 
as may be prescribed.]  
10. Term of office of Chairperson and other Members .—(1) The Chairperson and every other 
Member shall hold office as such for  a term of five years from the date on which he enters upon his office 
and shall be eligible for re -appointment:  
3[Provided that the Chairperson or other Members shall not hold office as  such after he has attained 
the age of sixty -five years .] 
(2) A vacancy caused by the resignation or removal of the Chairperson or any  other Member under 
section 11 or by death or otherwise shall  be filled by fresh appointment in accordance with the provisions 
of sections  8 and 9.  
(3) The Chairperson and every other Member shall, before entering upon  his office, make and 
subscribe to an oath of office and of secrecy in such  form, manner and before such authority, as may be 
prescribed.  
(4) In the event of the occurrence of a vacancy in the office of the  Chairperson by reason of his death, 
resignation or oth erwise, the senior -most  Member shall act as the Chairperson, until the date on which a  
new Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this Act to  fill such vacancy, enters 
upon his office.  
(5) When the Chairperson is unable to discharge hi s functions owing to  absence, illness or any other 
cause, the senior -most Member shall  discharge the functions of the Chairperson until the date on which 
the Chairperson resumes the charge of his functions.  
11. Resignation, removal and suspension of Chairp erson and other Members .—(1) The 
Chairperson or any other Member may, by notice in writing under  his hand addressed to the Central 
Government, resign his office:  
                                                             
* New Delhi, vide Notification NO. S.O. 1198(E), dated 14 th October, 2003.  
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 6, for s. 8 (w.e.f.  12-10-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 7, ibid., for s. 9 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  13 
 Provided that the Chairperson or a Member shall, unless he is permitted  by the Central Government to 
relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold  office until the expiry of three months from the date of 
receipt of such  notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his  office or until the 
expiry of his term of office,  whichever is the earliest.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central  Government may, by order, 
remove the Chairperson or any other Member  from his office if such Chairperson or Member, as the case 
may be, — 
(a) is, or at any ti me has been, adjudged as an insolvent; or  
(b) has engaged at any time, during his term of office, in any  paid employment; or  
(c) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the  Central Government, involves 
moral turpitude; or  
(d) has acquired  such financial or other interest as is likely to  affect prejudicially his functions as 
a Member; or  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in  office prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) has become physically or mentally incapabl e of acting as a Member.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 2), no Member shall  be removed from his 
office on the ground specified in clause ( d) or clause ( e) of that sub -section unless the Supreme Court, on 
a reference being made  to it in this behalf by the Central Government, has, on an inquiry, held by  it in 
accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed in this behalf  by the Supreme Court, reported that 
the Member, ought on such ground or  grounds to be removed.  
12. Restriction o n employment of Chairperson and other Members in certain cases .—The 
Chairperson and other Members shall not, for a period of 1[two years] from the date on which they cease 
to hold office, accept any  employment in, or connected with the management or administration of, any  
enterprise which has been a party to a proceeding before the Commission under  this Act:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to any employment under  the Central 
Government or a State Government or local authori ty or in any statutory  authority or any corporation 
established by or under any Central, State or Provincial  Act or a Government company as defined in 
section 617 of the Companies Act,  1956 (1 of 1956).  
2[13. Admin istrative powers of Chairperson .—The Chair person shall have the powers of general 
superintendence,  direction and control in respect of all administrative matters of the  Commission:  
Provided that the Chairperson may delegate such of his powers relating  to administrative matters of 
the Commission, a s he may think fit, to any  other Member or officer of the Commission.]  
14. Salary and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of Chairperson  and other 
Members .—(1) The salary, and the other terms and conditions of service, of the  Chairperson and other 
Members, including travelling expenses, house  rent allowance and conveyance facilities, sumptuary 
allowance and  medical facilities shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(2) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service  of the Cha irperson or a Member 
shall not be varied to his disadvantage after appointment.  
15. Vacancy, etc. , not to invalidate proceedings of Commission .—No act or proceeding of the 
Commission shall be invalid merely by reason of — 
(a) any vacancy in, or any defect i n the constitution of, the Commission; or  
(b) any defect in the appointment of a person acting as a Chairperson or as a  Member; or  
(c) any irregularity in the procedure of the Commission not affecting the  merits of the case.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 9, for “one year ” (w.e.f.12 -10-2007).  
2. Sub s. by s. 10,  ibid., for section 13  (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  14 
 16. Appointment of Director Gen eral, etc. —1[(1) The Central Government may, by notification, 
appoint a Director General  for the purposes of assisting the Commission in conducting inquiry  into 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act and for performing  such other functions as are, or may 
be, provided by or under this Act.  
(1A) The number of other Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors  General or such officers or 
other employees in the office of Director  General and the manner of appointment of such Additional, 
Joint, Deputy or  Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees shall be  such as may be 
prescribed. ] 
(2) Every Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors General or  2[such officers or other 
employees,] shall exercise his powers, and  discha rge his functions, subject to the general control, 
supervision and  direction of the Director General.  
(3) The salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of the  Director General and 
Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant Directors  General  or, 3[such officers or other employees,] shall be 
such as may be  prescribed.  
(4) The Director General and Additional, Joint, Deputy and Assistant  Directors General or 3[such 
officers or other employees,] shall be  appointed from amongst persons of integrit y and outstanding  ability 
and who have experience in investigation, and knowledge of  accountancy, management, business, public 
administration,  international trade, law or economics and such other qualifications as may be  prescribed.  
4[17. Appointment of Secretary, experts, professionals and officers and other  employees of 
Commission .—(1) The Commission may appoint a Secretary and such officers  and other employees as it 
considers necessary for the efficient  performance of its functions under this Act.  
(2) The salaries and allowances payable to , and other terms and  conditions of service of , the Secretary 
and officers and other  employees of the Commission and the number of such officers and  other 
employees shall be such as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Commission may engage, in accordance with the procedure  specified by regulations, such 
number of experts and professionals of  integrity and outstanding ability, who have special knowledge of,  
and experience in, economics, law, business or such other discip lines related to competition, as it deems 
necessary to assist the Commission  in the discharge of its functions under this Act.]  
CHAPTER IV  
DUTIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF COMMISSION  
18. Duties of Commission .—Subject to the provisions of this Act, it shall be the duty of the 
Commission to  eliminate practices having adverse effect on competition, promote and sustain  
competition, protect the interests of consumers and ensure freedom of trade  carried on by other 
participants, in markets in India:  
Provided that the Commission may, for the purpose of discharging its duties or  performing its 
functions under this Act, enter into any memorandum or  arrangement with the prior approval of the 
Central Government, with any  agency of any foreign country.  
19. Inquiry into c ertain agreements and dominant position of enterprise .—(1) The Commission 
may inquire into any alleged contravention of the  provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 3 or 
sub-section ( 1) of section 4 either on its own motion or on — 
(a) 5[receipt o f any information, in such manner and] accompanied by such  fee as may be 
determined by regulations, from any person, consumer or  their association or trade association; or  
(b) a reference made to it by the Central Government or a State  Government or a statutory 
authority.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 11, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “such other advisers, consultants and officers ,” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “such other advisers, consultants or officers ,” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
4. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for section 17 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
5. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for “receipt of a complaint ” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  15 
 (2) Without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 1), the powers  and functions of the 
Commission shall include the powers and functions  specified in sub -sections ( 3) to ( 7). 
(3) The Commission shall, while determining w hether an agreement has  an appreciable adverse effect 
on competition under section 3, have due  regard to all or any of the following factors, namely: — 
(a) creation of barriers to new entrants in the market;  
(b) driving existing competitors out of the marke t; 
(c) foreclosure of competition by hindering entry into the market;  
(d) accrual of benefits to consumers;  
(e) improvements in production or distribution of goods or provision  of services;  
(f) promotion of technical, scientific and economic development by  means of production or 
distribution of goods or provision of services.  
(4) The Commission shall, while inquiring whether an enterprise enjoys a  dominant position or not 
under section 4, have due regard to all or any of  the following factors, namely: — 
(a) market share of the enterprise;  
(b) size and resources of the enterprise;  
(c) size and importance of the competitors;  
(d) economic power of the enterprise including commercial advantages over  competitors;  
(e) vertical integration of the enterprises or sale  or service network of such  enterprises;  
(f) dependence of consumers on the enterprise;  
(g) monopoly or dominant position whether acquired as a result of any  statute or by virtue of 
being a Government company or a public  sector undertaking or otherwise;  
(h) entry barriers including barriers such as regulatory barriers, financial  risk, high capital cost of 
entry, marketing entry barriers, technical entry  barriers, economies of scale, high cost of substitutable 
goods or  service for consumers;  
(i) countervaili ng buying power;  
(j) market structure and size of market;  
(k) social obligations and social  costs;  
(l) relative advantage,  by way of the contribution to the economic  development, by the enterprise 
enjoying a dominant position having or  likely to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition;  
(m) any other factor which the Commission may consider relevant for  the inquiry.  
(5) For determining whether a market constitutes a “relevant market ” for the  purposes of this Act, the 
Commission shall have due reg ard to the “relevant  geographic market ’’ and “relevant product market ”. 
(6) The Commission shall, while determining the “relevant geographic  market ”, have due regard to 
all or any of the following factors, namely: — 
(a) regulatory trade barriers;  
(b) local specification requirements;  
(c) national procurement policies;  
(d) adequate distribution facilities;  
(e) transport costs;  
(f) language;  
(g) consumer preferences;  
(h) need for secure or regular supplies or rapid after -sales services.  16 
 (7) The Commission shal l, while determining the “relevant product market ”, have due regard to all or 
any of the following factors, namely: — 
(a) physical characteristics or end -use of goods;  
(b) price of goods or service ; 
(c) consumer preferences;  
(d) exclusion of in -house production;  
(e) existence of specialised producers;  
(f) classification of industrial products.  
20. Inquiry into combination by Commission .—(1) The Commission may, upon its own 
knowledge or information  relating to acquisition referred to in clause ( a) of section 5 or acquiring of  
control referred to in clause ( b) of section 5 or merger or amalgamation  referred to in clause ( c) of that 
section, inquire into whether such a  combination has caused or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse 
effect  on competit ion in India:  
Provided that the Commission shall not initiate any inquiry under this  sub-section after the expiry of 
one year from the date on which such  combination has taken effect.  
(2) The Commission shall, on receipt of a notice under sub -section ( 2) of section 6 1[or upon receipt 
of a reference under sub -section ( 1) of section 21 ], inquire whether a combination referred to in that 
notice or  reference has caused or is likely to cause an appreciable adverse effect on  competition in India.  
(3) Notwithsta nding anything contained in section 5, the Central Government  shall, on the expiry of a 
period of two years from the date of commencement  of this Act and thereafter every two years, in 
consultation with  the Commission, by notification, enhance or reduce, o n the basis of the  wholesale price 
index or fluctuations in exchange rate of rupee or foreign  currencies, the value of assets or the value of 
turnover, for the purposes  of that section.  
(4) For the purposes of determining whether a combination would have the effect of or is likely to 
have an appreciable adverse effect on competition  in the relevant market, the Commission shall have due 
regard to all  or any of the following factors, namely: — 
(a) actual and potential level of competition through imports in t he market ; 
(b) extent of barriers to entry into the market;  
(c) level of combination in the market;  
(d) degree of countervailing power in the market;  
(e) likelihood that the combination would result in the parties to  the combination being able to 
significa ntly and sustainably increase  prices or profit margins;  
(f) extent of effective competition likely to sustain in a market;  
(g) extent to which substitutes are available or arc likely to be available in  the market;  
(h) market share, in the relevant market, of the persons or enterprise in  a combination, 
individually and as a combination;  
(i) likelihood that the combination would result in the removal of a  vigorous and effective 
competitor or competitors in the market;  
(j) nature and extent of vertical integra tion in the market;  
(k) possibility  of a failing business;  
(l) nature and extent of innovation;  
  
                                                             
1. The words, brackets and figures  in brackets shall stand omitted (date to be notified) by Act 39 of 2007, s. 14 . 17 
 (m) relative advantage, by way of the contribution to the economic  development, by any 
combination having or likely to have  appreciable adverse effect on competition;  
(n) whether the benefits of the combination outweigh the adverse impact  of the combination, if 
any. 
21. Reference by statutory authority .—(1) Where in the course of a proceeding before any statutory 
authority an  issue is raised by any party that any decision which such statutory authority  has taken or 
proposes to take , is or would be, contrary to any of the  provisions of this Act, then such statutory 
authority may make a reference  in respect of such issue to the C ommission:  
1[Provided that any statutory authority, may, suo motu , make such a  reference to the Commission.]  
2[(2) On receipt of a reference under sub -section ( 1), the Commission shall  give its opinion, within 
sixty days of receipt of such reference, to su ch statutory authority which shall consider the opinion of the 
Commission  and thereafter, give its findings recording reasons therefor on the issues  referred to in the 
said opinion.]  
3[21A. Reference by Commission .—(1) Where in the course of a proceeding before the Commission 
an issue is raised by any party that any decision which, the Commission  has taken during such proceeding 
or proposes to take, is or would be  contrary to any provision of this Act whose implementation is  
entrusted to a statutory author ity, then the Commission may make  a reference in respect of such issue to 
the statutory authority:  
Provided that the Commission, may, suo motu , make such a  reference to the statutory authority.  
(2) On receipt of a reference under sub -section ( 1), the statu tory authority  shall give its opinion, 
within sixty days of receipt of such reference,  to the Commission which shall consider the opinion of the 
statutory  authority, and thereafter give its f indings recording reasons there for on  the issues referred to in 
the said opinion.]  
4[22. Meetings of Commission .—(1) The Commission shall meet at such times and  such places, and 
shall observe such rules of  procedure in regard to the transaction of  business at its meetings as may be 
provided by regulations.  
(2) The Chairperson, if for any reason, is unable to attend a  meeting of the Commission, the senior -
most Member present at the  meeting, shall preside at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Commission  shall be decided by a 
majorit y of the Members present and voting, and  in the event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or 
in his absence,  the Member pr esiding, shall have a second or casting vote:  
Provided that the quorum for such meeting shall be three Members.]  
23. [Distribution of business of Commission amongst Benches .] Omitted by the Competition  
(Amendment ) Act, 2007  (39 of 2007) , s. 18 ( w.e.f.  12-10-2007) ]. 
24. [Procedure for deciding a case where Members of a Bench differ .] Omitted by s. 18, ibid.            
(w.e.f.  12-10-2007) ]. 
25. [Jurisdiction of Bench .] Omitted by s. 18, ibid. (w.e.f.  12-10-2007) ]. 
5[26. Procedure for inquiry under section 19 .—(1) On receipt of a reference from the Central 
Government or a State  Government or a statutory authority or on its  own knowledge or  information 
received under section 19, if the Commission is of the  opinion that there exists a prima facie  case, it shall 
direct the Director  General to cause an investigation to be made into the matter:  
  
                                                             
1. The proviso ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 15 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 15, ibid., for sub -section ( 2) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Ins. by s. 16, ibid., (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
4. Subs. s. 17, ibid., for section 22 (w.e.f.  12-10-2007).  
5. Subs. by s. 19, ibid., for section 26 (w.e.f.  20-5-2009).  18 
 Provided that if the subject mat ter of an  information received is, in the  opinion of the Commission, 
substantially the same as or has been covered  by any previous information received, then the new 
information may be  clubbed with the previous information.  
(2) Where on receipt of a refere nce from the Central Government or  a State Government or a 
statutory authority or information received under  section 19,  the Commission is of the opinion that there 
exists no prima facie  case, it  shall close the matter forthwith and pass such orders as it deems fit and  send 
a copy of its order to the Central Government or the State  Government or the statutory authority or the 
parties concerned, as the  case may be.  
(3) The Director General shall, on receipt of direction under sub -section ( 1), submit a report  on his 
findings within such period as may be specified by  the Commission.  
(4) The Commission may forward a copy of the report referred to in sub -section  (3) to the parties 
concerned:  
Provided that in case the investigation is caused to be made based on  reference received from the 
Central Government or the State Government  or the statutory authority, the Commission shall forward a 
copy of the  report referred to in sub -section ( 3) to the Central Government or the State  Government or the 
statutory authority, as the case may be.  
(5) If the report of the Director General referred to in sub -section ( 3) recommends that there is no 
contravention of the provisions of this Act, the  Commission shall invite objections or suggestions from 
the Central  Government or the S tate Government or the statutory authority or the  parties concerned, as the 
case may be, on such report of the Director  General.  
(6) If, after consideration of the objections or suggestions referred to in  sub-section ( 5), if any, the 
Commission agrees with  the recommendation  of the Director General, it shall close the matter forthwith 
and pass such  orders as it deems fit and communicate its order to the Central Government  or the State 
Government or the statutory authority or the parties concerned,  as the ca se may be.  
(7) If, after consideration of the objections or suggestions referred to in sub -section ( 5), if any, the 
Commission is of the opinion that further  investigation  is called for, it may direct further investigation in 
the matter by the Director Gen eral or cause further inquiry to be made in  the matter or itself proceed with 
further inquiry in the matter in accordance  with the provisions of this Act.  
(8) If the report of the Director General referred to in sub -section ( 3) recommends that there is 
contravention of any of the provisions of this Act,  and the Commission is of the opinion that further 
inquiry is called for, it shall  inquire into such contravention in accordance with the provisions of this Act.]  
27. Orders by Commission after inquiry into agreements or abuse of dominant  position .—
Where after inquiry the Commission finds that any agreement referred  to in section 3 or action of an 
enterprise in a dominant position, is in  contravention of section 3 or section 4, as the case may be, it may 
pass all or  any of the following orders, namely: — 
(a) direct any enterprise or association of enterprises or person or association  of persons, as the 
case may be, involved in such agreement, or abuse of  dominant position, to discontinue and not to         
re-enter such agreement or  discontinue such abuse of dominant position, as the case may be;  
(b) impose such penalty, as it may deem fit which shall be not more than  ten per  cent. of the 
average of the turnover for the last three  preceding financial years, upon  each of such person or 
enterprises which  are parties to such agreements or abuse:  
1[Provided that in case any agreement referred to in section 3 has been  entered into by a cartel, 
the Commission may impose upon each  producer, seller, distributor, trader o r service provider 
included in  that cartel, a penalty of up to three times of its profit for each year  of the continuance of 
such agreement or ten per  cent. of its turnover for  each year of the continuance of such agreement, 
whichever is higher.]  
2*   *   *   *  * 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s.  20, for the proviso (w.e.f.  20-5-2009).  
2. Cl. ( c) omitted by s. 20, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009)  19 
 (d) direct that the agreements shall stand modified to the extent and in  the manner as may be 
specified in the order by the Commission;  
(e) direct the enterprises concerned to abide by such other orders as the  Commission may pass 
and comply with the directions, including payment  of costs, if any;  
1*  *   *   *   * 
(g) pass such other 2[order or issue such  directions] as it may deem fit:  
3[Provided that while passing orders under this section, if the  Commission comes to a finding, 
that an enterpris e in contravention to section  3 or section 4 of the Act is a member of a group as 
defined in clause  (b) of the Explanation  to section 5 of the Act, and other members of such a  group  
are also responsible for, or have contributed to, such a  contravention, th en it may pass orders, under 
this section, against such  members of the group.]  
28. Division of enterprise enjoying dominant position .—(1) The 4[Commission] may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any  other law for the time being in force, by order in writing, 
direct division of an  enterprise enjoying dominant position to ensure that such enterprise does  not abuse 
its dominant position.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  powers, the order referred to 
in sub -section (1) may provide for all or any  of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the transfer or vesting of property, rights, liabilities or obligations;  
(b) the adjustment of contracts either by discharge or reduction of any  liability or obligation or 
otherwise;  
(c) the creation, allotment, surrender or cancellation of any shares, stocks  or securities;  
5*  *   *   *   * 
(e) the formation or winding up of an enterprise or the amendment of  the memorandum of 
association or articles of association or any  other instruments regulating the business of any 
enterprise;  
(f) the extent to which, and the circumstances in which, provisions of  the order affecting an 
enterprise may be altered by the enterprise  and the registration thereof;  
(g) any other matter which may be  necessary to give effect to the  division of the enterprise.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in  force or in any contract 
or in any memorandum or articles of association,  an officer of a company who ceases to hold office as 
such in consequence of  the division of an enterprise shall not be entitled to claim any compensation  for 
such cesser.  
29. Procedure for investigation of combination s.—(1) Where the Commission is of the 6[prima 
facie ] opinion that a  combination is  likely to cause, or has caused an appreciable adverse  effect on 
competition within the relevant market in India, it shall issue  a notice to show cause to the parties to 
combination calling upon  them to respond within thirty days of the receipt of the noti ce, as to  why 
investigation in respect of such combination should not be conducted.  
 7[(1A) After receipt of the response of the parties to the combination under  sub-section ( 1), the 
Commission may call for a report from the Director  General and such repor t shall be submitted by the 
Director General  within such time as the Commission may direct.]  
(2) The Commission, if it is prima facie  of the opinion that the combination has,  or is likely to have, 
an appreciable adverse effect on competition, it shall,  within seven working days from the date of receipt 
                                                             
1. Cl. ( f) omitted by Act 39 of 2007, s. 20 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for “order ” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. The Proviso inserted  by s.20, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 21, ibid., for “Central Government, on recommendation under clause ( f) of section 27 ” (w.e.f. 20-5-2009).  
5. Cl. ( d) omitted by s. 21 , ibid . (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009 ). 
6.  The words “prima facia ” shall stand inserted (date to be notified) by s. 22, ibid. 
7. Sub-section ( 1A) shall stand inserted (date to be notified) by s. 22, ibid.  
 
 20 
 of the response of  the parties to the combination, 1[or the receipt of the report from Director  General 
called under sub section ( 1A), whichever is later] , direct the parties  to the said combination to pub lish 
details of the combination within ten  working days of such direction, in such manner, as it thinks 
appropriate,  for bringing the combination to the knowledge or information of the  public and persons 
affected or likely to be affected by such  combinatio n. 
(3) The Commission may invite any person or member of the public, affected  or likely to be affected 
by the said combination, to file his written objections,  if any, before the Commission within fifteen 
working days from the date on  which the details of the combination were published under sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The Commission may, within fifteen working days from the expiry of the  period specified in           
sub-section ( 3), call for such additional or other  information as it may deem fit from the partie s to the said 
combination.  
(5) The additional or other information called for by the Commission  shall be furnished by the parties 
referred to in sub -section ( 4) within fifteen  days from the expiry of the period specified in sub -section ( 4). 
(6) After receipt of all information and within a period of forty -five working  days from the expiry of 
the period specified in sub -section ( 5), the  Commission shall proceed to deal with the case in accordance 
with the  provisions contained in section 31.  
 2[30. Inqui ry into disclosures under sub -section ( 2) of section 6 .—Where any person or enterprise has 
given a notice und er sub -section ( 2) of section 6, t he Commission shall inquire — 
(a) whether the disclosure made in the notice is correct;  
(b) whether the combination has, or is likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on  
competition.]  
31. Orders of Commission on certain combinations .—(1) Where the Commission is of the opinion 
that any combination does not, or  is not likely to, have an appreciable adver se effect on competition, it 
shall,  by order, approve that combination including the combination in respect of  which a notice has been 
given under sub -section ( 2) of section 6.  
(2) Where the Commission is of the opinion that the combination has, or is  likely to have, an 
appreciable adverse effect on competition, it shall  direct that the combination shall not take effect.  
(3) Where the Commission is of the opinion that the combination has, or is  likely to have, an 
appreciable adverse effect on competition but such  adverse effect can be eliminated by suitable 
modification to such  combination, it may propose appropriate modification to the combination, to  the 
parties to such combination.  
(4) The parties, who accept the modification proposed by the Commission  under sub -section ( 3), shall 
carry out such modification within the period  specified by the Commission.  
(5) If the parties to the combination, who have accepted the modification  under sub -section ( 4), fail to 
carry out the modification within the period  specified by the Commission, such combination shall be 
deemed to have an  appreciable adverse effect on competition and the Commission shall deal  with such 
combination in accordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(6) If the parties to the combination do not  accept the modification proposed by  the Commission 
under sub -section ( 3), such parties may, within thirty  working days of the modification proposed by the 
Commission, submit  amendment to the modification proposed by the Commission under that                     
sub-section.  
(7) If the Commission agrees with the amendment submitted by the parties  under sub -section ( 6), it 
shall, by order, approve the combination.  
                                                             
1. The words, brackets, figure and letter shall stand inserted (date to be notified) by Act 39 of 2007, s. 22.  
2. Section 30 shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by s. 23, ibid., to read as under:  
“30. Procedure in case of notice under sub -section ( 2) of section 6 .—Where any person or enterprise has given a 
notice under sub -section ( 2) of section 6, the Commission shall examine such notice and form its prima facie  opinion as 
provided in sub -section ( 1) of section 29 and proceed as per provisions contained in that section. ”. 
 21 
 (8) If the Commission does not accept the amendment submitted under sub  section ( 6), then, the 
parties shall be allowed a further period of thirty working  days within which such parties shall accept the 
modification proposed by  the Commission under sub -section ( 3). 
(9) If the parties fail to accept the modification proposed by the Commission  within thirty working 
days referred to in sub -section ( 6) or within a further  period of thirty working days referred to in               
sub-section ( 8), the combination  shall be deemed to have an appreciable adverse effect on competition  
and be dealt with in acc ordance with the provisions of this Act.  
(10) Where the Commission has directed under sub -section ( 2) that the  combination shall not take 
effect or the combination is deemed to have  an appreciable adverse effect on competition under                    
sub-section ( 9), then,  without prejudice to any penalty which may be imposed or any prosecution  which 
may be initiated under this Act, the Commission may order that — 
(a) the acquisition referred to in clause ( a) of section 5; or  
(b) the acquiring of control referred to in clause ( b) of section 5; or  
(c) the merger or amalgamation referred to in clause ( c) of section 5,  
shall not  be given effect to:  
Provided that the Commission may, if it considers appropriate, frame  a scheme to implement its order 
under this sub-section.  
(11) If the Commission does not, on the expiry of a period of 1[ninety working days from the date of 
publication referred to in sub -section ( 2) of section 29 ], pass an order or issue direction in accordance  
with the provisions of sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 7), the combination shall be 
deemed to have been approved by the Commission.  
Explanation .—For the purposes  of determining the period of 2[ninety working ] days specified in this 
sub-section, the period of thirty working  days specified in sub -section ( 6) and a further period of thirty 
working days  specified in sub - section ( 8) shall be excluded.  
(12) Where any extension of time is sought by the parties to the combination,  the period of ninety 
working days shall be reckone d after deducting the  extended time granted at the request of the parties.  
(13) Where the Commission has ordered a combination to be void, the  acquis ition or acquiring of 
control or merger or amalgamation referred to in  section 5, shall be dealt with by th e authorities under any 
other law for the  time being in force as if such acquisition or acquiring of control or merger or  
amalgamation had not taken place and the parties to the combination shall  be dealt with accordingly.  
(14) Nothing contained in this Ch apter shall affect any proceeding initiated or  which may be initiated 
under any other law for the time being in force.  
32. Acts taking place outside India but having an effect on competition in India .—The 
Commission shall, notwithstanding that, — 
(a) an agreement referred to in section 3 has been entered into outside India;  or 
(b) any party to such agreement is outside India; or  
(c) any enterprise abusing the dominant position is outside India; or  
(d) a combination has taken place outside India; or  
(e) any party to combination is outside India; or  
(f) any other matter or practice or action arising out of such agreement or  dominant position or 
combination is outside India,  
                                                             
1. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified)  by Act 39 of 2007, s. 24 , to read as “two hundred and 
ten days from the date of notice given to the Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 6 ”.  
2. The words in brackets shall stand substituted (date to be notified) by s. 24, ibid., to read as “two hundred and ten ”. 
 22 
 have power to inquire 1[in accordance with the provisions contained in  sections 19,  20, 26, 29 and 30 of 
the Act] into such agreement or abuse of  dominant position or combination if such agreement or dominant 
position or  combination has, or is likely to have, an appreciable adverse effect on  competition in the 
relevant market in India 1[and pass such orders as it may  deem fit in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act ]. 
2[33. Power to issue interim orders .—Where during an inquiry, the Commission is satisfied that an 
act in  contravention of sub -section ( 1) of section 3 or sub -section ( 1) of section 4 or  section 6 has been 
committed and continues to be committed or that such  act is about to be committed, the Commission may, 
by order, temporarily  restrain any party from carrying on such act until the conclusion of such inquiry  or 
until fur ther orders, without giving notice to such party, where it deems it  necessary.]  
34. [Power to award compensation. ] Omitted by the Competition  (Amendment ) Act, 2007                  
(39 of 2007 ) s. 27 (w.e.f. 12-10-2007).  
35. Appearance before Commission .—A 3[person or an enterprise] or the Director General may 
either appear in  person or authorise one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries  or cost 
accountants or legal practitioners or any of his or its officers to  present his or its case before the 
Commission.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “chartered accountant ” means a chartered accountant as defined in  clause ( b) of                        
sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Chartered Accountants Act,  1949 (38 of 1949) and who has 
obtained a certificate of practice  under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(b) “company secretary ” means a company secretary as defined in clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of  1980) and who has obtained a certificate of 
practice under sub -section ( 1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(c) “cost accountant ” means a cost accountant as defined in clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of 
section 2 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of  1959) and who has obtained a 
certificate of practice under sub - section  (1) of section 6 of that Act;  
(d) “legal practitioner ” means an advocate, vakil or an attorney of any High  Court, and includes a 
pleader in practice.  
4[36. Power of Commission to regulate its own pr ocedure .—(1) In the discharge of its functions, 
the Commission shall be guided  by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of 
this Act and of any rules made by the Central Government, the  Commission shall have the powers to 
regulate its own procedure.  
(2) The Commission shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions  under this Act, the same 
powers as are vested in a Civil Court under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a 
suit, in  respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and  examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examination of  witnesses or documents;  
(e) requisitioning, subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124  of the Indian Evidence Act, 
1872 (1 of 1872), any public record or  document or copy of such record or document from any office.  
(3) The Commission may call upon such experts, from the fields of  economics, commerce, 
accountancy, international trade or from any  other discipline as it deems necessary , to assist the 
Commission in the  conduct of any inquiry by it.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 25 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 26, ibid., for section 33 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 28, ibid., for “complainant or defendant ” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for section 36 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  23 
 (4) The C ommission may direct any person — 
(a) to produce before the Director General or the Secretary or an  officer authoris ed by it, such 
books  or other documents in the custody  or under the control of such person so directed as may be 
specified or  described in the direction, being documents relating to  any trade, the  examination of 
which may be required for the purposes of this Act;  
(b) to furnish to the Director General or the Secretary or any other  officer authoris ed by it, as 
respects the trade or such other information  as may be in his possession in  relation to the trade carried 
on by such  person  as may be required for the purposes of this Act.]  
37. [Review of orders of Commiss ion.] Omitted by  the Competition  (Amendment ) Act, 2007                 
(39 of 2007), s. 30 ( w.e.f. 12-10-2007).  
38. Rectification of orders .—(1) With a view to rectifying any mistake apparent from the record, the  
Commission may amend any order passed by it under the provisions of this  Act. 
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Commission may make — 
(a) an amendment under sub -section ( 1) of its own motion;  
(b) an amendment for rectifying any such mistake which has been brought  to its notice by any 
party to the order.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the Commission  shall not,  
while rectifying any mistake apparent from record, amend substantive part  of its order passed under 
the provisions of this Act.  
1[39. Execution of orders of Commission imposing monetary penalt y.—(1) If a person fails to pay 
any monetary penalty imposed on  him under this  Act, the Commission shall proceed to recover such 
penalty  in such  manner as may be specified by the regulations.  
(2) In a case where the Commission is of the opinion that it would be  expedient to recover the penalty 
imposed under this Act in accordance with  the provisions of the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), it 
may make a  reference to this effect to the concerned income -tax authority under that  Act for recovery of 
the penalty as tax due under the said Act.  
(3) Where a reference has bee n made by the Commission under sub -section  (2) for recovery of 
penalty, the person upon whom the penalty has been  imposed shall be deemed to be the assessee in 
default under the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) and the provisions contained in sections 221  to 227, 
228A, 229, 231 and 232 of the said Act and the Second Schedule  to that Act and any rules made there 
under shall, in so far as may be,  apply as if the said provisions were the provisions of this Act and referred  
to sums by way of penalty imposed un der this Act instead of to income - tax and sums imposed by way of 
penalty, fine  and interest under the  Income –tax Act, 1961 and to the Commission instead of the  Assessing 
Officer.  
Explanation  1.—Any reference to sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 6) of sectio n 220 of  the Income -tax 
Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), in the said provisions of that Act or the rules  made thereunder shall be construed 
as references to sections 43 to 45 of this Act.  
Explanation 2 .—The Tax Recovery Commissioner and the Tax Recovery Officer  referred to in the 
Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) shall be deemed to be the Tax  Recovery Commissioner and the Tax 
Recovery Officer for the purposes of recovery  of sums imposed by way of penalty under this Act and 
reference made by the  Commission under s ub-section ( 2) would amount to drawing of a certificate by the  
Tax Recovery Officer as far as demand relating to penalty under this Act.  
Explanation 3.—Any reference to appeal in Chapter XVIID and the Second Schedule to  the          
Income -tax Act, 1961 (4 3 of 1961), shall be construed as a reference to appeal  before the Competition 
Appellate Tribunal under section 53B of this Act.]  
40. [Appeal.]  Omitted by the Competition  (Amendment ) Act, 2007  (39 of 2007 ), s. 32                   
(w.e.f. 12-10-2007)  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 31, for section 39 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  24 
 CHAPTER V  
DUTIES OF DIRECTOR GENERAL  
41. Director General to investigate contravention s.—(1) The Director General shall, when so 
directed by the Commission,  assist the Commission in investigating into any contravention of the  
provisions of this Act or any rules or regulations made thereunder.  
(2) The Director General shall have all the powers as are conferred  upon the Commission under            
sub-section ( 2) of section 36.  
(3) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section ( 2), sections 240 and  240A of the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), so far as may be,  shall apply to an investigation made by the Director General or 
any other person investigating under his authority, as they apply to an  inspector appointed under that Act.  
1[Explanation .—For the pur poses of this section, — 
(a) the words “the Central Government ” under section 240 of the  Companies Act,1956                       
(1 of 1956) shall be construed as “the Commission ”; 
(b) the word “Magistrate ” under section 240A of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) shall be 
construed as “the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate,  Delhi ”.] 
CHAPTER VI  
PENALTIES  
2[42. Contravention of orders of Commission .—(1) The Commission may cause an inquiry to be 
made into compliance of its  orders or directions made in exercise of  its powers under the Act.  
(2) If any person, without reasonable clause, fails to comply with the  orders or directions of the 
Commission issued under sections 27, 28, 31,  32, 33, 42A and 43A of the Act, he shall be punishable 
with fine which  may extend to rupees one lakh for each day during which such  non-compliance occurs, 
subject to a maximum of rupees ten crore,  as the Commission may determine.  
(3) If any person does not comply with the orders or directions issued, or fails  to pay the fine imposed 
under sub-section ( 2), he shall, without  prejudice to any proceeding under section 39, be punishable with  
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years, or with fine  which may extend to rupees 
twenty -five crore, or with both, as the Chief  Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi may deem fit:  
Provided that the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi shall not take  cognizance of any offence under 
this section save on a complaint filed  by the Commission or any of its offi cers authoris ed by it.]  
3[42A. Compensation in case of contra vention of orders of Commission .—Without prejudice to 
the provisions of this Act, any person may  make an application to the Appellate Tribunal for an order for 
the recovery  of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to h ave been suffered, by 
such person as a result of the said enterprise violating  directions issued by the Commission or 
contravening, without any reasonable  ground, any decision or order of the Commission issued under 
sections  27, 28, 31, 32 and 33 or any condition or restriction subject to which any  approval, sanction, 
direction or exemption in relation to any matter has  been accorded, given, made or granted under this Act 
or delaying in carrying  out such orders or directions of the Commission.]  
4[43. Pena lty for failure to comply with directions of Commission and Director General .—If any 
person fails to comply, without reasonable cause, with a direction  given by — 
(a) the Commission under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 4) of section 36; or  
(b) the Director General w hile exercising powers referred to in sub -section  (2) of section 41,  
such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one lakh for  each day during which 
such failure continues subject to a maximum of rupees one  crore, as may be determin ed by the 
Commission.]  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 33 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 3 4, ibid., for section 42 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Ins. by s. 35, ibid. (w.e.f.  20-5-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 36, ibid., for section 43 (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  25 
 1[43A. Power to impose penalty for non -furnishing  of information on combinations .—If any 
person or enterprise who fails to give notice to the Commission under  sub-section  (2) of section 6, the 
Commission shall impose on such  person or enterprise a penalty which may extend to one per  cent.  of the  
total turnover or the assets, whichever is higher, of such a combination.]  
44. Penalty for making false statement or omission to furnish material information .—If any 
person, being a party to a combination, — 
(a) makes a statement which is false in any material particular, or knowing it  to be false; or  
(b) omits to state any material particular knowing it to be material,  
such person shall be liable to a penalty which shall not be less than  rupees fifty lakhs but which may 
extend to rupees one crore, as may be  determined by the Commission.  
45. Penalty for offences in relation to furnishing of information .—2[(1) Without prejudice to the 
provisions of section 44, if a person, who  furnishes or is required to furnish under this Act any particulars,  
documents or any information, — 
(a) makes any statement or furnishes any document which he knows  or has reason to believe to 
be false in any material particular; or  
(b) omits to state any material fact knowing it to be material; or  
(c) wilfully alters, suppresses or destroys any document which is  required to be furnished as 
aforesaid,  
such person shall be punishable with fine which may extend to rupees one crore  as may be determined by 
the Commission.]  
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub -section  (1), the Commission may  also pass such other 
order as it deems fit.  
46. Power to impose lesser penalty .—The Commission may, if it is satisfied that any producer, 
seller, distributor,  trader or service p rovider included in any cartel, which is alleged to have  violated 
section 3, has made a full and true disclosure in respect of the alleged  violations and such disclosure is 
vital, impose upon such producer, seller,  distributor, trader or service provider a  lesser penalty as it may 
deem fit, than  leviable under this Act or the rules or the regulations:  
3[Provided that lesser penalty shall not be imposed by the Commission in cases  where the report of 
investigation directed under section 26 has been  received b efore making of such disclosure.]  
Provided further that lesser penalty shall be imposed by the Commission  only in respect of a 
producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider  included in the cartel, who 4[has] made the full, 
true and vital disclo sures  under this section:  
5[Provided also that lesser penalty shall not be imposed by the Commission if the  person making the 
disclosure does not continue to cooperate with the Commission  till the completion of the proceedings 
before the Commission.]  
Provided also that the Commission may, if it is satisfied that such producer, seller,  distributor, trader 
or service provider included in the cartel had in the course of  proceedings, — 
(a) not complied with the condition on which the lesser penalty was impo sed by the Commission; 
or 
(b) had given false evidence; or  
(c) the disclosure made is not vital,  
                                                             
1. Section 43A shall stand inserted (date to be notified)  by Act 39 of 2007, s. 37 . 
2. Subs. by s. 38, ibid., for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
3. Sub. by s. 39, ibid., for the first proviso (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 39, ibid., for “first” (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  
5. The proviso i ns. by s. 39, ibid. (w.e.f. 20 -5-2009).  26 
 and thereupon such producer, seller, distributor, trader or service provider may be  tried for the offence 
with respect to which the lesser penalty was imposed and shall  also be liable to the imposition of penalty 
to which such person has been liable, had  lesser penalty not been imposed.  
47. Crediting sums realised by way of penalties to Consolidated Fund of India .—All sums 
realised by way of penalties under this  Act shall be credited to the  Consolidated Fund of India.  
48. Contravention by companies .—(1) Where a person committing contravention of any of the 
provisions of this  Act or of any rule, regulation, order made or direction issued thereunder  is a company, 
every person who, at the time the contravention was  committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to 
the company for the  conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall  be deemed to 
be guilty of the contravention and shall be liabl e to be proceeded against and punished accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such  person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the contravention was  committed without his knowledge or that he had 
exercised a ll due  diligence to prevent the commission of such contravention.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where a  contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, regulation,  order made or direction issued thereunder ha s been 
committed by a  company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with  the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to any neglect on the  part of, any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of the company,  such director, mana ger, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed  to be guilty 
of that contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, — 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other  association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
CHAPTER VII  
COMPETITION ADVOCACY  
49. Competition Advocacy .—1[(1) The Central Government may, in formulating a policy on 
competition  (including review of laws related to competition)  or on any other  matter, and a State 
Government may, in formulating a policy on  competition or on any other matter, as the case may be, 
make a  reference to the Commission for its opinion on possible effect o f such  policy on competition and 
on the receipt of such a reference, the  Commission shall, within sixty days of making such reference, give 
its opinion to the Central Government, or the State Government, as the case  may be, which may thereafter 
take furthe r action as it deems fit.]  
(2) The opinion given by the Commission under sub -section ( 1) shall not be  binding  upon the Central 
Government 2[or the State Government, as the  case may be ,] in formulating such policy.  
(3) The Commission shall take suitable mea sures 3*** for the  promotion of competition advocacy, 
creating awareness and imparting  training about competition issues.  
CHAPTER VIII  
FINANCE, ACCOUNTS AND AUDIT  
50. Grants by Central Government .—The Central Government may, after due appropriation made 
by Parliament  by law in this behalf, make to the Commission grants of such sums of money  as the 
Government may think fit for being utilised for the purposes of this Act.  
51. Constitution of Fund .—(1) There shall be constituted a fund to be called the “Competition 
Fund ” and there shall be credited thereto — 
(a) all Government grants received by the Commission;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 40, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Ins. by s. 40, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. The words “, as may be prescribed, ” omitted by s. 40, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  27 
 1*  *   *   *   * 
(c) the fees received  under this Act;  
(d) the interest accrued on the amounts refer red to in 2[clauses ( a) and ( c)]. 
(2) The Fund shall be applied for meeting — 
(a) the salaries and allowances payable to the Chairperson and  other Members and the 
administrative expenses including the salaries,  allowances and pension payable to the Director 
General, Additional,  Joint, Deputy or Ass istant Directors General, the Registrar and  officers and other 
employees of the Commission;  
(b) the other expenses of the Commission in connection with the discharge  of its functions and for 
the purposes of this Act.  
(3) The Fund shall be administered by a  committee of such Members  of the Commission as may be 
determined by the Chairperson.  
(4) The committee appointed under sub -section ( 3) shall spend monies  out of the Fund for carrying 
out the objects for which the Fund has been  constituted.  
52. Accounts an d audit.—(1) The Commission shall maintain proper accounts and other relevant  
records and prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as may  be prescribed by the Central 
Government in consultation with the  Comptroller and Auditor -General of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Commission shall be audited by the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India 
at such intervals as may be specified by  him and any expenditure incurred in connection with such audit 
shall be payable by the Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the orders of the  Commission, 
being matters appea lable to the 3[Appellate Tribunal or the Supreme  Court], shall not be subject to audit 
under this section.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any other person  appointed by him in 
connection with the audit of the accounts of the  Commission shall have the same rights, privileges and 
authority in  connection with such audit as the Comptro ller and Auditor -General of  India generally has, in 
connection with the audit of the Government  accounts and, in particular, shall have the right to demand 
the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and other  documents and papers and to inspect 
any of the offices of the Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the Commission as certified by the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India or 
any other person appointed by him in this behalf  together with the audit report thereon shall be forwarded 
annually to the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to  be laid before each 
House of Parliament.  
53. Furnishing of returns, etc., to Central Government .—(1) The Commission shall furnish to the 
Central Government at such time  and in such form and  manner as may be prescribed or as the Central 
Government  may direct, such returns and statements and such particulars  in regard to any proposed or 
existing measures for the promotion of  competition advocacy, creating awareness and imparting training 
about  competition issues, as the Central Government may, from time to time,  require.  
(2) The Commission shall prepare once in every year, in such form and at such  time as may be 
prescribed, an annual report giving a true and full account  of its activities durin g the previous year and 
copies of the report shall be  forwarded to the Central Government.  
(3) A copy of the report received under sub -section ( 2) shall be laid, as soon  as may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
  
                                                             
1. Cl. ( b) omitted by Act 39 of 2007, s. 41 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Subs. by s.  41, ibid., for “clauses ( a) to ( c)” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 42, ibid., for “Supreme Court ” (w.e.f.  12-10-2007).  28 
 1[CHAPTER VIIIA  
2[APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL ] 
3[ 4[53A.  Appellate Tribunal. —The National Company Law Appellate Tribunal constituted under 
section 410 of the Companies Act, 2013 ( 18 of 2013) shall, on and from the commencement of Part XIV 
of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of  2017) , be the Appellate Tribunal for the purposes of this Act 
and the said Appellate Tribunal shall —  
(a) hear and dispose of appeals against any direction issued or decision made or order passed by 
the Commission under sub -sections ( 2) and ( 6) of section 26, section 27, section 28, section 31, 
section 32, section 33, section 38, section 39, section 43, section 43A, section 44, section 45 or 
section 46 of this Act; and  
(b) adjudicate on claim for compensation that may arise from the findings o f the Commission or 
the orders of the Appellate Tribunal in an appeal against any finding of the Commission or under 
section 42A or under sub -section ( 2) of section 53Q of this Act, and pass orders for the recovery of 
compensation  under section 53N of this  Act.]  
553B. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Central Government or the State Government or a 
local authority  or enterprise or any person, aggrieved by any direction, decision or order  referred to in 
clause ( a) of section 53A may prefer an appeal to the Appellate  Tribunal.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of sixty  days from the date on 
which a copy of the direction or decision or order  made by the Commission is received by the Central 
Government or the State  Govern ment or a local authority or enterprise or any person referred to in that  
sub-section and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee  as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the  expiry of the sai d period of 
sixty days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient  cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may,  after giving the parties 
to the appeal, an opportunity of being h eard, pass  such orders thereon as it thinks fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting  aside the direction, decision or order appealed against.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to  the Commission and the 
parties to the appea l. 
(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall  be made by it to dispose of the appeal within six months 
from the date of  receipt of the appeal.  
653C. [Composition of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by the Finance Act, 2017 (7 of 2017), s. 171 
(w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
 653D. [Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .] 
Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
653E. [Selection Committee .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
653F. [Term of office of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 171, 
ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
653G. [Terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Members of Appellate                   
Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
653H. [Vacancies .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 43 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
       2. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 171 , for the heading  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
       3. 12-10-2007, vide S.O. No. 1747(E), dated 12 -10-2007.  
       4. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 171 , for section 53A  (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
       5. 20-5-2009, vide S.O. No 1242(E), dated 15 -5-2009.  
6. 20-12-2007, vide S.O. No. 2167(E), dated 20 -12-2007.  29 
 153-I. [Resignation of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. 
(w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153J. [Member of Appellate Tribunal to act as its Chairperson in certain cases .] Omitted by  s. 
171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153K. [Removal and suspension of Chairperson and Members of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted 
by s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153L. [Restriction on employment of Chairperson and other Members of Appellate  Tribunal in 
certain cases .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
153M. [Staff of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by  s. 171, ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
253N. Awarding compensation .—(1) Without prejudice to any other provisions contained in this 
Act, the  Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or any  enterprise or any person 
may make an application to the Appellate Tribunal  to adjudicate on  claim for compensation that may arise 
from the findings  of the Commission or the orders of the Appellate Tribunal in an appeal  against any 
findings of the Commission or under section 42A or under  sub-section  (2) of section 53Q of the Act, and 
to pass an o rder for the recovery  of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or damage shown to  
have been suffered, by the Central Government or a State Government or a  local authority or any 
enterprise or any person as a result of any contravention  of the provi sions of Chapter II, having been 
committed by enterprise.  
(2) Every application made under sub -section ( 1) shall be accompanied  by the findings of the 
Commission, if any, and also be accompanied with  such fees as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Appellate Tribunal may, after an inquiry made into the allegations  mentioned in the 
application made under sub -section ( 1), pass an order  directing the enterprise to make payment to the 
applicant, of the amount determined  by it as realisable from the enterprise as compensation for the loss  or 
damage caused to the applicant as a result of any contravention of the  provisions of Chapter II having 
been committed by such enterprise:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may obtain the recommendations of  the Commission bef ore 
passing an order of compensation.  
(4) Where any loss or damage referred to in sub -section ( 1) is caused to  numerous persons having the 
same interest, one or more of such persons  may, with the permission of the Appellate Tribunal, make an 
application  under that sub -section for and on behalf of, or for the benefit of, the  persons so interested, and 
thereupon, the provisions of rule 8 of Order 1 of  the First Schedule to the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 
(5 of 1908), shall  apply subject to the modification that every reference therein to a suit or  decree shall be 
construed as a reference to the application before the  Appellate Tribunal and the order of the Appellate 
Tribunal thereon.  
Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that — 
(a) an application may be made for compensation before the Appellate  Tribunal only after either 
the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on  appeal under clause ( a) of sub -section  (1) of section 
53A of the Act, has  determined in a proceeding before it that violati on of the provisions of the  Act 
has taken place, or if provisions of section 42A or sub -section  (2) of section  53Q of the Act are 
attracted;  
(b) enquiry to be conducted under sub -section  (3) shall be for the  purpose of determining the 
eligibility and quantum of compensation due  to a person applying for the same, and not for examining 
afresh the  findings of the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal on whether any  violation of the Act 
has taken place.  
253-O. Procedure  and powers of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be 
bound by the procedure laid down in  the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided 
by the  principles of natural justice and, subject to the other provisions of this Act  and of any rules made 
                                                             
1. 20 -12-2007, vide S.O. No. 2167(E), dated 20 -12-2007.  
2. 20 -5-2009, vide S.O. No. 1242(E), dated 15 -5-2009.  30 
 by the C entral Government, the Appellate Tribunal  shall have power to regulate its own procedure 
including the places at  which they shall have their sittings.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its  functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court  under the Code of  Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while 
trying a suit in respect of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining  him on oath;  
(b) requiri ng the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavit;  
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence  Act, 1872                          
(1 of 1872), requisitioning any public record or document or  copy of such record or document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismiss al of any representation for default or  any order passed by it 
ex parte ; 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(3) Every proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be  judicial proceedings 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the  purposes of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) and the  Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of  section 195  
and Chapter XXVI of the Code or Criminal Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974) . 
153P. Exec ution of orders of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Every order made by the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be enforced by it in the same manner as if it were a decree made by a court in a suit pending  therein, 
and it shall be lawful for the Appellate Tribunal to send, in  case of its inability  to execute such order, to 
the court within the loca l limits of whose jurisdiction, — 
(a) in the case of an order against a company, the registered office of the  company is situated; or  
(b) in the case of an order against any other person, place where the  person concerned voluntarily 
resides or carries on business or  personally works for gain, is situated.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Appellate  Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local  jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree  made by that court.  
153Q. Contravention of orders of Appellate Tribunal .—(1) Without prejudice to the provisions of 
this Act, if any person  contravenes, without any reasonable ground, any order of the Appellate  Tribunal, 
he shall be liable for a penalty of not exceeding rupees one crore  or imprisonment for a term up to three 
years or with both as the Chief  Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi may deem fit:  
Provi ded that the Chief Metropolitan Magistrate, Delhi shall not take cognizance  of any offence 
punishable under this sub -section, save on a complaint  made by an officer au thoris ed by the Appellate 
Tribu nal. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, any person may make  an application to the 
Appellate Tribunal for an order for the recovery  of compensation from any enterprise for any loss or 
damage shown to have  been suffered, by such person as a result of the said enterprise contravening,  
without any r easonable ground, any order of the Appellate Tribunal  or delaying in carrying out such 
orders of the Appellate Tribunal.  
253R. [Vacancy in Appellate Tribunal not to invalidate acts or proceedings .] Omitted by  s. 171, 
ibid. (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
                                                             
1. 20 -5-2009, vide S.O. No. 1242(E), dated 15 -5-2009.  
2. 20-12-2007, vide S.O. No. 2167(E), dated 20 -12-2007.  
 31 
 153-S. Right to legal representation .—(1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal 
may either appear  in person or authorise  one or more chartered accountants or company secretaries  or cost 
accountants or legal practitioners or any of its officers to pres ent his or its case before the Appellate 
Tribunal.  
(2) The Central Government or a State Government or a local authority or  any enterprise preferring 
an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal may authorise  one or more chartered accountants or company 
secretaries  or cost  accountants or legal practitioners or any of its officers to act as presenting  officers and 
every person so authorise d may present the case with re spect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.  
(3) The Commission may authorise  one or more char tered accountants or  company secretaries or cost 
accountants or legal practitioners or any of its  officers to act as presenting officers and every person so 
authorise d may  present the case with respect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal.  
Explanati on.—The expressions “chartered accountant ” or “company secretary ” or “cost accountant ” 
or “legal practitioner ” shall have the meanings respectively  assigned to them in the Explanation  to section 
35. 
153T. Appeal to Supreme Court .—The Central Government or any State Government or the 
Commission or  any statutory authority or any local authority or any enterprise or any  person aggrieved by 
any decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal may file  an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days 
from the date of  communication  of the decision or order of  the Appellate Tribunal to them:  
Provided that the Supreme court may, if it is satisfied that the applicant  was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal within the said  period, allow it to be filed afte r the expiry of the said period 
of sixty days.  
153U. Power to Punish for contempt .—The Appellate Tribunal shall have, and exercise, the same 
jurisdiction,  powers and authority in respect of contempt of itself as a High Court has  and may exercise 
and, for t his purpose, the provisions of the Contempt  of Courts Act, 1971 (70 of 1971) shall have effect 
subject to modifications  that,— 
(a) the reference therein to a High Court shall be construed as including  a reference to the 
Appellate Tribunal;  
(b) the references to the Advocate -General in section 15 of the said Act  shall be construed as a 
reference to such Law Officer as the  Central Government may, by notifi cation, specify in this behalf.]  
CHAPTER IX  
MISCELLANEOUS  
54. Power to exempt .—The Central Govern ment may, by notification, exempt from the application  
of this Act, or any provision thereof, and for such period as it may  specify in such notification — 
(a) any class of enterprises if such exemption is necessary in the interest  of security of the State o r 
public interest;  
(b) any practice or agreement arising out of and in accordance with  any obligation assumed by 
India under any treaty, agreement or  convention with any other country or countries;  
(c) any enterprise which performs a sovereign function on behalf of  the Central Government or a 
State Government:  
Provided that in case an enterprise is engaged in any activity including the activity  relatable to the 
sovereign functions of the Government, the Central Government  may grant exemption only in respect  
of activity relatable to the sovereign functions.  
55. Power of Central Government to issue directions .—(1) Without prejudice to the foregoing 
provisions of this Act, the Commission shall,  in exercise of its powers or the performance of its functions 
under  this Act, be bound by such directions on questions of policy, other than those  relating to technical 
and administrative matters, as the Central Government  may give in writing to it from time to time:  
                                                             
1. 20 -5-2009, vide S.O. No. 1242(E), dated 15 -5-2009.  
 32 
 Provided that the Commission shall, as far as practicab le, be given  an opportunity to express its views 
before any direction is given under  this sub -section.  
(2) The decision of the Central Government whether a question is one of policy  or not shall be final.  
56. Power of Central Government to supersede Commis sion.—(1) If at any time the Central 
Government is of the opinion — 
(a) that on account of circumstances beyond the control of the Commission,  it is unable to 
discharge the functions or perform the duties imposed  on it by or under the provisions of this Act; or  
(b) that the Commission has persistently made default in complying with  any direction given by 
the Central Government under this Act or in  the discharge of the functions or performance of the 
duties imposed on it  by or under the provisions of this Act and as a result of such default the  financial 
position of the Commission or the administration of the Commission  has suffered; or  
(c) that circumstances exist which render it necessary in the public  interest so to do,  
the Central Government may, by not ification and for reasons to be specified  therein, supersede the 
Commission for such period, not exceeding six months,  as may be specified in the notification:  
Provided that before issuing any such notification, the Central Government  shall give a reasonab le 
opportunity to the Commission to make representations  against the proposed supersession and shall 
consider representations, if any,  of the Commission.  
(2) Upon the publication of a notification under sub -section ( 1) superseding the Commission, — 
(a) the Chairperson and other Members shall , as from the date of  supersession, vacate their 
offices as such;  
(b) all the powers, functions and duties which may, by or under the  provisions of this Act, be 
exercised or discharged by or on behalf of the  Commission sh all, until the Commission is 
reconstituted under sub -section  (3), be exercised and discharged by the Central Government or  such 
authority as the Central Government may specify in this behalf;  
(c) all properties owned or controlled by the Commission shall, until the Commission is 
reconstituted under sub -section ( 3), vest in the  Central Government.  
(3) On or before the expiration of the period of supersession specified  in the notification issued under 
sub-section ( 1), the Central Government  shall reconstitute  the Commission by a fresh appointment of its 
Chairperson  and other Members and in such case any person who had vacated his  office under clause ( a) 
of sub -section ( 2) shall not be deemed to be disqualified  for re -appointment.  
(4) The Central Government sha ll cause a notification issued under sub -section  (1) and a full report of 
any action taken under this section and  the circumstances leading to such action to be laid before each 
House of  Parliament at the earliest.  
57. Restriction on disclosure of informat ion.—No information relating to any enterprise, being an 
information which has been  obtained by or on behalf of 1[the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal] for 
the purposes of this Act, shall, without the previous permission in writing of the  enterprise, be disclosed 
otherwise than in compliance with or for the purposes of  this Act or any other law for the time being in 
force.  
2[58. Chairperson, Members, Director General, Secretary, officers and other  employe es, etc., to 
be public servants .—The Chairperson  and other Members and the Director General, Additional,  Joint, 
Deputy or Assistant Directors General and Secretary and officers and  other employees of the Commission 
and the Chairperson, Members, officers and  other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shal l be deemed, 
while acting or purporting  to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to be public servants  
within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).]  
59. Protection of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the  Central Government or Commission or any officer of the Central Government  or the 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 44, for “the Commission ” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 45, ibid., for section 58 (w.e.f. (12 -10-2007).  33 
 Chairperson  or any Member or the Director General, Additional, Joint,  Deputy or A ssistant Directors 
General or 1[the Secretary or officers or other  employees of the Commission or the Chairperson, 
Members, officers and other  employees of the Appellate Tribunal] for anything which is in good faith 
done or  intended to be done under this Act or the rules or regulations ma de thereunder.  
60. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything  inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.  
61. Exclusion of jurisdiction of civil courts .—No civil c ourt shall have jurisdiction to entertain any 
suit or proceeding in respect  of any matter which the 2[Commission or the Appellate Tribunal] is 
empowered  by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court  or other 
authority in  respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of  any power conferred by or under 
this Act.  
62. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of,  the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
63. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules to carry  
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,  such rules may 
provide for all or any of  the following matters, namely: — 
3[(a) the term of the Selection Committee and the manner of selection of  panel of names under 
sub-section ( 2) of s ection 9;]  
(b) the form and manner in which and the authority before whom the  oath o f office and of secrecy 
shall be made and subscribed to under  sub-section ( 3) of section 10;  
4*  *   *   *   * 
(d) the salary and the other terms and conditions of service  including travelling expenses, house 
rent allowance and  conveyance facilities, sumptuary allowance and medical facilities  to be provided 
to the Chairperson and other Members under  sub-section ( 1) of section 14;  
5[(da) the number of Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors  General or such officers or 
other employees in the off ice of Director  General and the manner in which such Additional, Joint, 
Deputy  or Assistant Directors General or such officers or other employees  may be appointed under 
sub- section ( 1A) of section 16; ]  
(e) the salary, allowances and other terms and condi tions of service  of the Director General, 
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant  Directors General or 6[such officers or other employees] under  
sub-section ( 3) of section16;  
(f) the qualifications for appointment of the Director General, Additional,  Joint, Deputy or 
Assistant Directors General or 6[such  officers or other employees] under sub -section ( 4) of section 16;  
(g) the salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service  of the 7[Secretary] and 
officers and other employees payable,  and the number of such officers and employees under                  
sub-section ( 2) of section17;  
8*  *   *   *   * 
(k) the form in which the annual statement of accounts shall be prepared  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 52;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s . 46, for “Registrar or officers or other employees of the Commission ” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 47, ibid., for “Commission ” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
4 Cl. (c) omitted by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007)  
5. Ins. by s. 48 , ibid. (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
6. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for “such other advisers, consultants or officers ” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
7. Subs. by s. 48, ibid., for “Registrar ” (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
8. Cls. ( h), (i) and ( j) omitted by s. 48, ibid. (w.e.f. 12-10-2007).  34 
 (l) the time within which and the form and manner in which the  Commission may furnish returns, 
statements and such particulars  as the Central Government may require under sub -section ( 1) of 
section  53; 
(m) the form in which and the time within which the annual report shall be  prepa red under                    
sub-section ( 2) of section 53;  
1[(ma) the form in which an appeal may be filed before the Appellate Tribunal  under                        
sub-section ( 2) of section 53B and the fees payable in respect of  such appeal;  
2*   *  *  *   * 
(me) the fee which shall be accompanied with every application made under  sub-section ( 2) of 
section 53N;  
(mf) the other matters under clause ( i) of sub -section  (2) of section 53 -O in respect of which the 
Appellate Tribunal shall have powers under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while 
trying a suit;]  
3[(n) the manner in which the monies transferred to the Competition  Commission of India or the 
Appellate Tribunal shall be dealt with by  the Commission or the Appellate Tribunal, as the ca se may 
be, under  the fourth proviso to sub -section  (2) of section 66;]  
(o) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in  respect of which provision is to 
be, or may be, made by rules.  
(3) Every notification issued under sub -section  (3) of section 20 and section  54 and every rule made 
under this Act by the Central Government shall be  laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament,  while it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be  comprised in 
one session, or in two or more successive sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification  
in the notification or rule, or both Houses agr ee that the notification  should not be issued or rule should 
not be made, the notification or rule  shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no 
effect,  as the case may be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment  shall be  without 
prejudice to the validity of anything previously done  under that notification or rule, as the case may be.  
64. Power to make regulations .—(1) The Commission may, by notification, make regulations 
consistent with this  Act and the rules made thereunder to carry out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  provisions, such regulations 
may provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the cost of production to be determined under clause ( b) of the Explanation  to section 4;  
(b) the form of notice as may be specified and the fee which  may be determined under                     
sub-section  (2) of section 6;  
(c) the form in which details of the acquisition shall be fi led under sub -section  (5) of s ection 6;  
4[(d) the procedures to be followed for engaging the experts and professionals  under                        
sub-section  (3) of section 17;  
(e) the fee which may be determined under clause ( a) of sub -section  (1) of section 19;  
(f) the rules of procedure in regard to the transaction of business at  the meetings of the 
Commission under sub -section  (1) of section 22;  
(g) the manner in which penalty shall be recovered under  sub-section  (1) of section 39;  
(h) any other mat ter in respect of which provision is to be, or may be,  made by regulations.]  
                                                             
  1. Ins. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 48 (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
2. Clauses ( mb), (mc) and ( md) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s. 171 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
3. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 48, for clause ( n) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  
4. Subs . by s. 49 , ibid.,  for clauses ( d) and ( e) (w.e.f. 12 -10-2007).  35 
 (3) Every regulation made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after  it is made, before each 
House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total  period of thirty d ays which may be comprised in 
one session or in two or  more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session  immediately 
following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses agree in making any modification 
in the regulation , or both  Houses agree that the regulation should not be made, the regulation  shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no  effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or  annulment shall be without prejudice to  the validity of anything previously  done 
under that regulation.  
65. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the  Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette,  make suc h provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as  may appear to it to be necessary for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided that  no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of a period  of two years 
from the commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
66. Repeal and saving .—1[(1) The Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969               
(54 of  1969) is hereby  repealed and the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade  Practices Commission 
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the  said Act (hereafter referred to as the repe aled Act) 
shall stand dissolved . 
2*   *   *   *   * 
(1A) The repeal of the Monopolies a nd Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969 (54  of 19 69) shall, 
however, not affect, — 
(a) the previous operation of the Act so repealed or anything duly done or  suffered thereunder; or  
(b) any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired, accrued or incurred  under the Act so 
repealed; or  
(c) any penalty, confiscation or punishment incurred in respect of any  contravention under the 
Act so repealed; or  
(d) any proceeding or remedy in respect of any such right, privilege,  obligation, liability, penalty, 
confiscation or punishment as aforesaid,  and any such proceeding or remedy may be instituted, 
continued or  enforced, and any such penalty, confiscation or punishment may be  imposed or made as 
if that Act had not been repealed.]  
(2) On the dissolution of th e Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Commission, the person 
appointed as the Chairman of the Monopolies and  Restrictive Trade Practices Commission and every 
other person appointed as  Member and Director General of Investigation and Registration, Ad ditional,  
Joint, Deputy, or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration  and any officer and other 
employee of that Commission and holding office as  such immediately before such dissolution shall vacate 
their respective offices  and such Ch airman and other Members shall be entitled to claim compensation  not 
exceeding three months ’ pay and allowances for the premature termination  of term of their offic e or of 
any contract of service:  
Provided that the Director General of Investigation and Reg istration,  Additional, Joint, Deputy or 
Assistant Directors General of Investigation and  Registration or any officer or other employee who has 
been, immediately  before the dissolution of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Commission 
appointed on deputation basis to the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, shall, on 
such dissolution, stand reverted to his parent cadre, Ministry or Department, as the case may be:  
3[Provided further that the Director General of Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint,  
Deputy or Assistant Directors General of Investigation and Registration or any officer or other  employee 
                                                             
1. Subs. by  Act 39 of 2007, s. 50, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
2. The p roviso and the Explanation  omitted by Act 39 of 2009, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1 4-10-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 50 , for the second proviso (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  36 
 who has been, immediately before the dissolution of the Monopolies and  Restrictive Trade Practices 
Commission  employed  on regular basis by the Monopolies and  Restrictive Trade Practices Commission, 
shall become, on and from such dissolution, the  officer and employee, respectively, of the Competition 
Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, in such manner as may be s pecified by the Central 
Government , with the same rights and  privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like matters as would 
have been admissible to him  if the rights in relation to such Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices 
Commission had not  been  transferred to, and vested in, the Competition Commission of India or the 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, and shall continue to do so unless  and until his employment in the  
Competition Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal,  as the case may  be, is duly terminated or 
until his remuneration,  terms and conditions of employment are duly  altered by the  Competition 
Commission of India or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may  be:] 
Provided also that notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes  Act, 1947                      
(14 of 1947), or in any other law for the time being in force, the transfer of  the services of any Director 
General of Investigation and Registration, Additional,  Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors Genera l of 
Investigation and Registration or  any officer or other employee, employed in the Monopolies and 
Restrictive Trade  Practices Commission, to 1[the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate  
Tribunal , as the case may be, ] shall not entitle such Dir ector General of Investigation  and Registration, 
Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant Directors General of  Investigation and Registration or any officer 
or other employee any compensation  under this Act or any other law for the time being in force and no  
such claim shall  be entertained by any court, tribunal or other authority:  
Provided also that where  the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices Commission has established 
a provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund for the benefit of the Di rector  General of 
Investigation and Registration, Additional, Joint, Deputy or Assistant  Directors General of Investigation 
and Registration or the officers and other employees  employed in the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
Practices Commission,  the moni es relatable to the officers and other employees whose services have  been 
transferred by or under this Act to 2[the Competition Commission of India  or the Appellate Tribunal, as 
the case may be, shall, out of the monies standing] , on the dissolution of the  Monopolies and Restrictive 
Trade Practices Commission  to the credit of such provident fund, superannuation, welfare or other fund, 
stand  transferred to, and vest in, 3[the Competition Commission of India or the Appellate  Tribunal , as the 
case may be, and such monies which stand so transferred  shall be dealt with by the said Commission or 
the Tribunal, as the case may be, in  such manner as may be prescribed ]. 
4[(3) All cases pertaining to monopolistic trade practices or restrictive trade  practices pending 
(including such cases, in which any unfair trade  practice has also been alleged), before the Monopolies 
and Restrictive Trade  Practices Commission shall,  5[on the commencement of the Competition  
Amendment Act,  2009 (39 of 2009)] stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and shall be  adjudicated 
by the Appellate Tribunal in accordance with the provisions of the  repealed Act as if that Act had not 
been repealed.]  
6[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that  all cases referred to in this              
sub-section, sub -section  (4) and sub -section  (5) shall be deemed to include all applications made for the 
losses or  damages under section 12 B of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Act,1969             
(54 of 1969)  as it stood before its repeal.]  
(4) Subject to the provisions of sub -section  (3), all cases pertaining to unfair trade  practices other than 
those referred to in clause ( x) of sub -section  (1) of section  36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade 
Practices Act, 1969 (54 of 1969)  and pending before  the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices 
Commission 7[immediately before the commencement of the Competition (Amendment) Act, 2 009          
(39 of 2009) , shall, on such commencement ], stand tr ansferred to the National Commission constituted 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 39 of 2007, s. 50, for “the Central Government ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
2. Subs. by s. 50 , ibid., for “the Central Government shall, out of the monies standing ” (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
3. Subs. by s. 50, ibid.,  for certain words (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
4. Subs. by s. 50, ibid., for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
5. Subs. by Act 39 of 2009, s. 2, for “after the expiry of two years referred to in the proviso to sub -section ( 1)”                        
(w.e.f. 14-10-2009).  
6. Ins. by s.  2, ibid. (w.e.f. 14 -10-2009).  
7. Subs. by s. 2 , ibid., for “on or before the expiry of two years referred to in the proviso to sub -section ( 1)”                    
(w.e.f. 14 -10-2009).  37 
 under the Consumer Protection Act , 1986 (68 of 1986) and the National Commission shall dispose of 
such cases as if they were cases filed under that Act:  
Provided that the National Commission may, if it consi ders appropriate, transfer  any case transferred 
to it under this sub -section, to the concerned State  Commission established under section 9 of the 
Consumer Protection Act,  1986 (68 of 1986) and that State Commission shall dispose of such case as if  it 
was filed under that Act:  
1[Provided further that all the cases relating to the unfair trade practices  pending, before the National 
Commission under this sub -section, on or before  the date on which the C ompetition (Amendment) Bill, 
2009 receives the assent  of the President, shall, on and from that date, stand transferred to the Appellate  
Tribunal and be adjudicated by the Appellate Tribunal in accordance with  the provisions of the repealed 
Act as if that Act had not been repealed. ] 
2[(5) All cases pertaining to  unfair trade practices referred to in clause ( x) of sub-section ( 1) of section 
36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Act, 1969  (54 of 1969)  and pending before the 
Monopolies and Restrictive Trade  Practices Commission shall, 3[on the commen cement of the 
Competition  (Amendment) Act, 2009 (39 of 2009)],  stand transferred to the Appellate Tribunal and the  
Appellate Tribunal shall dispose of such cases as if they were cases filed  under that Act.]  
(6) All investigations or proceedings, other than  those relating to unfair trade  practices, pending 
before the Director General of Investigation and Registration  on or before the commencement of this Act 
shall, on such commencement,  stand transferred to the Competition Commission of India, and the  
Compet ition Commission of India may conduct or order for conduct of such  investigation or proceedings 
in the manner as it deems fit.  
(7) All investigations or proceedings, relating to unfair trade practices, other than those  referred to in 
clause ( x) of sub -section ( 1) of section 36A of the Monopolies  and Restrictive Trade Practices Act, 1969  
(54 of 1969) and pending before  the Director General of Investigation and Registration on or before the 
commencement  of this Act shall, on such commencement, stand transferr ed to the  National Commission 
constituted under the Consumer Protection Act, 1986  (68 of 1986) and the National Commission may 
conduct or order for conduct  of such investigation or proceedings in the manner as it deems fit : 
4[Provided that all investigations or proceedings, relating to unfair trade  practices pending before the 
National Commission, on or before the date  on which the Competition (Amendment) Bill, 2009 receives 
the assent of  the President shall, on and from that date, stand transfe rred to the Appellate  Tribunal and the 
Appellate Tribunal may conduct or order for conduct of such  investigation or proceedings  in the manner 
as it deems fit.]  
(8) All investigations or proceedings relating to unfair trade practices referred to  in clause ( x) of            
sub-section ( 1) of section 36A of the Monopolies and Restrictive  Trade Practices Act, 1969  (54 of 1969), 
and pending before the Director  General of Investigation and Registration on or before the 
commencement of  this Act shall, on such com mencement, stand transferred to the Competition  
Commission of India and the Competition Commission of India may conduct  or order for conduct of such 
investigation in the manner as it deems fit.  
(9) Save as otherwise provided under sub -sections ( 3) to ( 8), all cases or  proceedings pending before 
the Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices  Commission shall abate.  
(10) The mention of the particular matters referred to in sub -sections ( 3) to ( 8) shall not be held to 
prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of  the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with 
regard to the effect of  repeal.   
                                                             
1. The proviso inserted by Act 39 of 2007, s.  2 (date to be notified).  
      2. Subs. by s. 50,  ibid., for sub -section ( 5) (w.e.f. 1 -9-2009).  
3. Subs. by Act 39 of 2009, s. 2, for certain words (date to be notified).  
4. The proviso i ns. by  s. 2, ibid., (w.e.f. 14 -10-2009).  
--------------------------The Control of National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002--------------------------
1 
 THE CONTROL OF NATIONAL  HIGHWAYS (LAND AND TRAFFIC)  
ACT, 2002  
__________________  
 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________________  
 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
HIGHWAY S ADMINISTRATION  AND TRIBUNALS, ETC  
3. Establishment of Highway Administrations.  
4. Powers and functions of Highway Administration.  
5. Establishment of Tribunals.  
6. [Omitted .] 
7. [Omitted .] 
8. [Omitted .] 
9. [Omitted .] 
10. [Omitted .] 
11. [Omitted .] 
12. [Omitted .] 
13. [Omitted .] 
14. Jurisdiction , powers and authority of Tribunal.  
15. Bar of jurisdiction.  
16. Procedure and powers of Tribunal.  
17. Conditions as to making of interim order.  
18. Execution of orders of Tribunal.  
19. Limitation.  
20. Appointment of officers to act on behalf of Highway Administration.  
21. Delegation of powers.  
22. Power to tr ansfer jurisdiction.  
 
CHAPTER III  
PREVENTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPATION OF HIGHWAY LAND AND THEIR REMOVAL  
23. Highway land to be deemed as property of Central Government.  
24. Prevention of occupation of highway land.  
25. Grant of lease or licence of highway land for t emporary use.  
26. Removal of unauthorised occupation.  
27. Recovery of cost of removal of unauthorised occupation and fine imposed.   2 
 CHAPTER IV  
CONTR OL OF ACCESS TO THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS  
SECTIONS  
28. Right of access.  
29. Procedure for permission to access to Highway.  
30. Regulation or diversion of access, etc.  
 
CHAPTER V  
REGULATION OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF TRAFFIC ON NATIONAL HIGHWAYS  
31. Highway Administration to regulate traffic when Highway deemed unsafe.  
32. Prohibition of use of heavy vehicles on certain Highways.  
33. Temporary clos ure of traffic on Highway.  
34. Permanent closure of Highway.  
35. Power to restrict the use of vehicles.  
36. Prevention and repair of damage to Highway.  
37. Prohibition to leave vehicles or animals in dangerous position.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION ON HIGHWAY LA ND FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES, DRAINS, ETC.  
38. Construction on highway land.  
 
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCE AND PENALTY  
39. Offence and penalty.  
 
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
40. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner.  
41. Finality of orders.  
42. Duty of village officials.  
43. Conduct of inquiry.  
44. Officers of Highways Administration to be public servant.  
45. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
46. Offences by companies.  
47. Procedure for service of notices,  etc. 
48. Act to have overriding effect.  
49. Power to remove difficulties.  
50. Power to make rules.  
  3 
 THE CONTROL OF NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (LAND AND TRAFFIC) ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 13 OF 2003  
[14th January , 2003.]  
An Act to provide for control of land within the National Highways, right of way and traffic 
moving on the National Highways and also for removal of u nauthorised occupation thereon.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Control of National  
Highway s (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint; and different dates may be appointed for different pro visions of this Act.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ”, in relation to a Tribunal, means the date on which such Tribunal is 
established under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) “building ” means any work of construction done in any manner by use of any material and 
includes a farm building for agricultural purposes, plinth, doorstep, wall, drain, advertisement board 
and other t hings fixed with such building;  
(c) “construct ”, with its gramma tical variations, in relation to a building, means to construct, 
reconstruct, erect, re -erect, extend or  alter structurally a building;  
(d) “cost of land ” means the market value of the land as determined by the competent authority of 
the State Government o r the Government of the Union territory appointed for such det ermination, as 
the case may be;  
(e) “Highway ” means a National Highway declared as such under section 2 of the National 
Highways Act, 1956 (48 of 1956) and includes any Expressway or Express Hig hway vested in the 
Central Government, whether surfaced or  unsurfaced, and also includes — 
(i) all lands appurtenant to the Highway, whether demarcated or not, acquired for the purpose 
of the Highway or transferred for such purpose by the State Govern ment to the Central 
Government;  
(ii) all bridges, culverts, tunnels, causeways, carriageways and other structures constructed  on 
or across such Highway; and  
(iii) all trees, railings, fences, posts, paths, signs, signals, kilometre stone and other Highway 
acces sories and materials on such Highways;  
(f) “Highway Administration ” means the Highway Administration established under section 3;  
(g) “highway land ” means the land of which the Central Government is, or is deemed to be, the 
owner under sub -section ( 1) of section 23;  
(h) “land” includes benefits arising out of land and things attached to the earth or permanently 
fastened to anything attached to the earth ; 
(i) “means of access ” means any permanent means of access, whether private or public, for 
vehicles of a ny kind ; 
                                                             
1. 27th January, 2005, vide notification No. S.O. 96(E) dated  27th January, 2005, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II  
sec. 3(ii). 
 4 
 (j) “premises ” means any land or building or p art of a building and includes — 
(i) the garden, grounds and outhouses, if any, appertaining to such buil ding or part of a 
building; and  
(ii) any fittings affixed to such building or part of a building for the mor e beneficial 
enjoyment thereof;  
(k) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
1[(l) “Tribunal ” means the Airport Appellate  Tribunal referred to in  sub-section ( 1) of  
section 5. ]  
(m) “unauthorised occupation ” means any occupation of the highway land, without permission 
under this Act fo r such purpose, by a person who — 
 (i) is trespasser on the Highway; or  
(ii) for the time being is paying or is liable to pay to other person rent or any portion of the 
rent of the premises on a Highway; or  
(iii) lives in or otherwise uses any premises on a Highway; or  
(iv) is a rent -free tenant of any premises on a Highway; or   
(v) is a licensee of any premises on a Highway for its possession; or  
(vi) is liable to pay damages to the owner of any premises on a Highway for the use or 
possession of such premises;  
(n) “vehicle ” means a barrow, sledge, plough, drag and any wheeled  or tracked conveyance of 
any description capable of being used on a Highway.  
CHAPTER II  
2[HIGHWAYS  ADMINISTRATION AND TRIBUNALS, ETC .]; 
3. Establishm ent of Highway Administrations .—(1) The Central Government shall, by notific ation 
in the Official Gazette, — 
(a) establish, for the purposes of this Act, a body or authority consisting of one or more officers 
of the Central Government or the State Government to be known as Highway Administration to 
exercise powers and discharge functions conf erred on it under t his Act; and  
(b) define the limits of the Highway within which, or the length of Highway on which, a Highway 
Administration shall have jurisdiction:  
Provided that the Central Government may, in the notification issued under this sub -section or by 
any gene ral or special order, impose any condition or limitation subject to which a Highway 
Administration shall exercise powers and discharge functions conferred on it under this Act.  
(2) The Central Government may establish one or more Highway Administrations for a State or 
Union territory or for a  Highway under sub -section ( 1). 
(3) Subject to the provisions of this Act, the Highway Administration shall exercise powers and 
discharge functions conferred on it under this Act in such manner as may be prescribed.  
4. Powers and funct ions of Highway Administration .—A Highway Administration shall exercise 
powers and discharge functions throughout its jurisdiction specified under this Act subject to such 
conditions or limitations as may be imposed by the notification  issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 3 
and by any general or special order made in this behalf by the Central Government.  
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017  s. 167 for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  
2. Subs. by s. 167, ibid.,  for the heading (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  5 
 5. Establishment of Tribunals .—1[(1) The Airport Appellate Tribunal established under section 28 -I 
of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994  (55 of 1994)  shall, on and from the commencement of Part 
XIV of Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , be the Tribunal for the purposes of this Act and 
the said Tribunal shall exercise the jurisdiction, powers and authority confer red on it by or under this 
Act.]  
(2) The Central Government 2[shall specify, by notif ication in the Official Gazette] , the limits of the 
Highway within which, or the length of Highway on which, the Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction for 
entertaining and deciding the appeals filed before it.  
3*    *    *   * 
14. Jurisdiction, po wers and authority of Tribunal .—A Tribunal shall exercise, on and from the 
appointed day, the jurisdiction, powers and authority to entertain appeals from the orders passed or 
actio ns (except issuance or serving of notices) taken unde r sections 26, 27, 28, 36, 37 and 38 by the 
Highway Administration or an officer authorised on its behalf, as the case may be.  
15. Bar of jurisdiction .—On and from the appointed day, no court (except the  Supreme Court and a 
High Court exercising jurisdiction under articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution) or other authority, 
except the Tribunal sha ll have, or be entitled to exer cise, any jurisdiction, powers or authority in relation 
to the matters specifi ed in section 14.  
16. Pr ocedure and powers of Tribunal .—(1) The Tribunal shall not be bound by the procedure laid 
down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principles of natural 
justice and, subject to the other prov isions of this Act and of any rules, the Tribunal shall have powers to 
regulate its own procedure including the places at wh ich it shall have its sittings.  
(2) The appeal filed before the Tribunal under section 14 shall be dealt with by it as expeditiously  as 
possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal finally within four months from the 
date of the rece ipt of the appeal.  
(3) The Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the same 
powers as are  vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a 
suit, in respect of the followin g matters, namely :— 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses or d ocuments;  
(e) reviewing its decisions;  
(f) dismissing an appeal or application for d efault or deciding it ex parte ; 
(g) setting asid e any order of dismissal of any appeal or application for default or any o rder 
passed by it ex parte ; and  
(h) any other matt er which may be prescribed.  
(4) Any proceeding before the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of  sections 193 and 228, and for the purposes of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860) and the Tribunal shall be deemed to be a civil court for all the purposes of section 195 and 
Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) . 
17. Conditions  as to making of interim order .—Notwithstanding anything contained in any other 
provision of this Act or in any other law for the time being in force, no interim order (whether by way of 
injunction or stay or in any other manner) shall be made on, or in any proceeding relating to, a n 
application or appeal unless — 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 167 for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  
2. Subs. by s.167 , ibid., for “shall also specify, in the notification referred to in sub -section ( 1)” (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017) . 
3. Ss. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12 and 13  omitted by s. 167, ibid. (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017)  6 
 (a) copies of such application or appeal and of all documents in support of the plea for such 
interim order are furnished to the party against whom such application is made or appeal is           
preferred; and  
(b) opportunity is given to such p arty to be h eard in the matter:  
Provided that the Tribunal may dispense with the requirements of clauses ( a) and ( b) and make an 
interim order as an exceptional measure if it is satisfied, for reasons to be recorded in writing, that it is 
necessary so to do for preven ting any loss bein g caused to the applicant or the appellant, as the case may 
be; which cannot be adequately compensated in money; but any such interim order shall, if it is not 
sooner vacated, cease to have effect on the expiry of a period of fourteen day s from the date o n which it is  
made unless the said requirements have been complied with before the expiry of that period and the 
Tribunal has continued the operation of the interim order.  
18. E xecution of orders of Tribunal .—(1) An order passed by the Tribunal under this Act shall be 
executable by the Tribunal as a decree of a civil court, and for this purpose, the Tribunal shall have all  the 
powers of the civil court.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Tribunal may transmit any order made 
by it to the civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if it were a 
decree made by that court.  
19. Limitation .—Every appeal to the Tribunal under this Act shall be preferred within a period of 
sixty days from the date on which the order appealed against has been made:  
Provided that an appeal may be admitted after the expiry of the said period of sixty days, if the 
appellant satisfies the Tribunal that he had sufficient cause for not preferring the a ppeal within the 
specified period.  
20. Appointment of officers to act on be half of Highway Administration .—(1) The Highway 
Administration may, if it thinks fit after the approval of the Central Government, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint s uch— 
(a) gazetted officer of the Central Government; or  
 (b) gazetted offi cer of the State Government; or  
(c) officer of the National Highways Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the 
National Highways Authority of India Act, 1988 (68 of 1988)  or any other authority constituted under 
any other enactment, equivalent to a gazetted officer of the Central Government or the State 
Government,  
to exercise such powers and discharge such functions of the Highway Administration as may be  specified 
in the  notification.  
(2) The Highway Administration may specify in the notification under sub -section ( 1), the limits of 
the Highway within which or the length of the Highway on which an officer appointed under that  
sub-section shall exercise the powers and discharge the fun ctions.  
21. Delegation of powers .—The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it (except the powers conferred by section 50) under this Act shall, 
subject to such condit ions, if  any, as may be specifi ed in the notification, be exercisable by a State 
Government or any other authority or an officer of the State Government as may be specified in the 
notification.  
22. Power to transfer jurisdiction .—The Central Government may, at any  time, by notification in 
the Official Gazette, transfer the jurisdiction of a Highway Administration defined under clause ( b) of 
sub-section ( 1) of sect ion 3 to other Highway Administ ration , and on the transfer the Highway 
Administration shall cease to ha ve and such other Highway Administration shall, subject to the 
conditions, if any, specified in the notification, have all the powers and authority exer cisable by the 
Highway Administ ration  before such transfer of jurisdiction.  
  7 
 CHAPTER III  
PREVENTION OF UNAUTHORISED OCCUPATION OF HIGHWAY LAND AND THEIR REMOVAL  
23. Highway land to be deemed as property of Central Government .—(1) All lands forming parts  
of a Highway which vest in the Central Government or which do not already vest in the Central 
Government but have been acquired for the purpose of Highway shal l, for the purposes of this Act, and 
other Central Acts, be deemed to be the property of the Centr al Government as owner thereof.  
(2) The Highway Administration shall cause to be maintained a record in the prescribed manner in 
which the particulars of the lands, relating to the Highway, of which the Central Government is the owner 
shall be entered and the entries of the particulars of such lands in any record maintained for such purpose 
before the commen cement of this Act shall be deemed to be the entry of the particulars of such lands 
made in the first said record and accordingly the Central Governme nt shall be deemed to be the own er of 
the lands regarding which the entries have been made in such records  maintained before the 
commencement of this Act.  
(3) Any person claiming against the ownership of the Central Government referred to in  
sub-section  (2) shall make written complaint to the Highway Administration and prove his claim before it 
and the Highwa y Administration, after considering the evidence produced by such person, may correct 
such records or reject the claim.  
24. Prevention  of occupation of highway land .—(1) No person shall occupy any highway land or 
discharge any material through drain on such land without obtaining prior permission, for such purpose in 
writing, of the Highway Administration or any officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf.  
 (2) The Highway Administration or the officer authorised under sub -section ( 1) may, on an 
application made by a person in this behalf and having regard to the safety and convenience of traffic, 
grant permission to such person — 
 (i) to place a movable struc ture on the Highway in front of any building owned by him or to 
make a movable structure on support of such bu ilding and over the Highway, or  
(ii) to put up a temporary lawning or tent or other similar construction or a temporary stall or  
scaffolding on th e Highway, or  
(iii) to deposit or cause to be depos ited, building materials, goods  for sale or ot her articles on any 
Highway, or  
(iv) to make a temporary excavation for carrying out any repairs or impro vements to adjoining 
buildings,  
and such permission sh all be granted subject to the conditions and on payment of the rent and other 
charges by issuing permit in  the form as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no such permission shall be valid beyond a period of one month at a time from the date 
on which the perm ission has been granted unless it is renewed by the Highway Administration or such 
officer on an application made by such person for the renewal of the p ermission.  
(3) The permission granted under sub -section ( 2) shall specify therein — 
(i) the time up to w hich the permission is granted;  
(ii) the purpose of such permission;  
(iii) the portion of the Highway in respect of which the permission has been granted,  
and shall be accompanied with a plan or ske tch of such portion of Highway.  
(4) The person, to whom t he permit has been issued under sub -section ( 2), shall produce the permit 
for inspection whenever called upon to do so by any officer of the Highway Administration and shall, on 
the expiry of the pe rmission granted under such perm it, restore the portion of  the Highway specified in 
the permit in such condition as it was immediately before the issuing of such permit and deliver the 
possession of such portion to the Highway Administration.  8 
 (5) The Highway Administration or the officer issuing the permit under sub-section ( 2) shall maintain 
a complete record of all such permits issued, and shall also ensure in every case at the expiration of the 
period up to w hich the permission under a perm it is granted under that sub -section that the possession of 
the portion of the Highway in respect of which such permission was granted has been delivered to the 
Highway Administration.  
25. Grant of lease or licence of highway land for temporary use .—The Highway Administration 
or the officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf may, having regard to the safety and 
convenience of traffic and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed and on payment of prescribed 
rent or other charges, g rant lease or licence of highway land  to a person for temporary use:  
Provided that no such lease shall be valid for more than five years at a time from the date on which 
such lease has been granted unless renewed by the Highway Administration or such offic er. 
26. Remo val of unauthorised occupation .—(1) Where the Highway Administration or the officer 
authorised by such Administration in this behalf is of the opinion that it is necessary in the interest of 
traffic safety or conv enience to cancel any permit is sued under sub -section ( 2) of section 24, it may, after 
recording the reasons in writing for doing so, cancel such permit and, thereupon, the person to whom the 
permission was granted shall, within the period specified by an order made by the Highway 
Adm inistration or such officer restore the portion of the Highway specified in the permit in such condition 
as it was immediately before the issuing of such permit and deliver the possession of such portion to the 
Highway Admi nistration and in case such pers on fails to deliver such possession within such period, he 
shall be deemed to be in unauthorised occupation of highway land for the purposes of this section and 
section 27.  
 (2) When, as a result of the periodical inspection of highway land or otherwise, the Highway 
Administration or the officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf is satisfied that any 
unauthorised  occupation has taken place on highway land, the Highway Administration  or the officer so 
authorised shall serve a notice in a prescrib ed form on the person causing or responsible for such 
unauthorised occupation requiring him to remove such unauthorised occupation and to restore such 
highway land in its original condition as before the unauthorised occupation within the period specified in 
the notice.  
(3) The notice under sub -section ( 2) shall specify therein the highway land in respect of which such 
notice is issued, the period within which the unauthorised occupation on such land is required to be 
removed, the place and time of hearing any represent ation, if any, which the person to whom the notice is 
addressed may make within the time specified in the notice and that failure to comply with such notice 
shall render the person specified in the notice liable to penalty, and summary evictio n from the highway 
land in respect of which such notice is iss ued, under sub -section ( 6). 
(4) The service of the notice under sub -section ( 2) shall be made by delivering a copy thereof to the 
person to whom such notice is addressed or to his agent or other  person on his behalf or by registered post 
addressed to the person to whom such notice is addressed and an acknowledgment purporting to be signed 
by such person or his agent or other person on his behalf or an endorsement by a postal employee that 
such pe rson or his agent or such other person on his behalf has refused to take delivery may be deemed to 
be prima facie  proof of service.  
(5) Where the service of the notice is not made in the manner provided under sub -section ( 4), the 
contents of the notice sha ll be advertised in a local newspaper for the knowledge of the person to whom 
the notice is add ressed and such advertisement sh all be deemed to be the service  of such notice on such 
person.  
(6) Where the service of notice under sub -section ( 2) has been made under sub -section ( 4) or  
sub-section ( 5) and the unauthorised occupation on the highway land in respect of which such notice is 
served has not been removed within the time specified in the notice for such purpose and no reasonable 
cause has been show n before the Highway Administration or the officer authorised by such 
Administration in this behalf for not so removing unauthorised occupation, the Highway Administration 
or such officer , as the case may be, shall cause such unauthorised occupation to be removed at the 
expenses of the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, and impose penalty on 9 
 the person to whom the notice is add ressed which shall be five hundr ed rupees per square metre of the 
land so unauthorisedly occupied and w here the penalty so imposed is less than the cost of such land, the 
penalty may be extended equal to such cost.  
(7) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Highway Administration or the officer 
authorised by such Administration in this beh alf shall have power without issuing any notice under this 
section to remove the unauthorised occupation on the highway land, if such unauthorised occupation is in 
the nature of — 
(a) exposing any goods or article — 
(i) in open air; or 
(ii) through temporary stall, kiosk, booth or any other shop of temporary nature , 
(b) construction or erection, whe ther temporary or permanent , or 
(c) trespass or other unauthorised occupation which can be removed easily without use of any 
machine or other de vice, 
and in removing such occupation, the Highway Administration or such officer may take assistance of the 
police, if necessary, to remove such occupation by use of the reasonable fo rce necessary for such 
removal.  
(8) Notwithstanding anything contained i n this section, if the Highway Administration or the officer 
authorised by such Administration in this behalf is of the opinion that any unauthorised occupation on the 
highway land is  of such a nature that the immed iate removal of which i s necessary in the  interest of — 
(a) the safet y of traffic on the Highway; or  
(b) the safety of any structu re forming part of the Highway,  
and no notice can be served on the person responsible for such unauthorised occupation under this section 
without undue delay owing to his absence or for any other reason, the Highway Administration or the 
officer authorise d by such Administration may mak e such construction including alteration of any 
construction as may be feasible at the prescribed cost necessary for the safety referred  to in clause ( a) or 
clause ( b) or have such unauthorised occupation removed in the manne r specified in sub -section ( 7). 
(9) The Highway Administration or an officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf shall, 
for the purposes of this section o r section 27, have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the 
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while trying a suit, in respect of  the following matters, 
namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining  him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discove ry and production of documents;  
(c) issuing commissions for th e examination of witnesses; and  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed,  
and any proceeding before such Administration or officer shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of sections 193 and 228, and for the purpose of section 196, of the Indian Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) and the Administration or the office r shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of 
section 195 and Chapter XXVI of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974).  
27. Recovery of cost of removal of unauthoris ed occupation and fine imposed .—(1) Where a 
Highway Administration or th e officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf has removed any 
unauthorised occupation or mad e any construction including alt eration of construction in respect of any 
unauthorised occupation or repaired any damage under sub -section ( 2) of secti on 36, the expenditure 
incurred in such removal or repair together with fifteen per cent. of additional  charges or any fine 
imposed und er this Act shall be recoverable in the manner herein after provided in this section.  
(2) The Highway Administration or th e officer authorised in this behalf by such Administration shall 
serve a copy of the bill in the prescribed form indicating therein the expenditure, additional charges or 10 
 fine recoverable  under sub -section ( 1) on the pe rson from whom such expenditure, addi tional charges or 
fine is recoverable and the provisions of section 26 relating to the service of notice shall apply for the 
service of copy of the bill under this sub -section as if for the word “notice ” the word “bill” has be en 
substituted in that section.  
(3) A copy of the bill referred to in sub -section ( 2) shall be accompanied with a certificate issued by 
the Highway Administration or the officer authorised by such Administration in this behalf and the 
amount indicated in the bill shall be the co nclusiv e proof that such amount is the expenditure actually 
incurred for all or any of the purposes referred to in sub -sectio n (1) as indicated in the bill.  
(4) Where a Highway Administration or the officer authorised in this behalf by such Administration 
has removed any unauthorised occupation or made any construction including alteration of construction 
in respect of any unauthorised occupation or repaire d any damage under sub -section ( 2) of section 36, the 
material, if any, recovered as a result of such removal, construction, alteration or repair shall be retained 
in possession of the Highway Administration or such officer till the payment of the bill in respect thereof 
served under sub -section ( 2) and on payment of such bill such material shall be return ed to the person 
entitled for the material, but in case of the failure of such payment within the time specified for t he 
payment in the bill, the mate rial may be sold by auction by the Highway Administration or such officer 
and after deduction of the amoun t payable under the bill from the proceeds of the auction, the balance, if 
any, shall be returned t o the person entitled therefor.  
(5) In case where the proceeds of the auction under sub -section ( 4) is less than the amount 
recoverable under the bill referr ed to in that sub -section, the difference between such proceeds and the 
amount so recoverable or w here no such auction has been ma de, the amount recoverable under the bill 
shall, in case of failure of the payment within the time specified in the bill, be r ecoverable as the arrears of 
land revenue.  
CHAPTER IV  
CONTROL OF ACCESS TO THE  NATIONAL  HIGHWAYS  
28. Right of access .—(1) No person shall have right of access to a Highway either through any 
vehicle or on foot by a group of five or more persons except permitted by the Highway Administration 
either generally or specifically in the manner specified in section 29.  
(2) The acce ss to a Highway under sub -section ( 1) shall be subject to the guidelines and instructions 
issued by the Centra l Government from time to time.  
(3) The Highway Administration may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare a Highway or 
any portion ther eof to be limited for access in the manner as specified in such notification and may also 
impose any restriction or control on such access t o, from or across such Highway as specified in that 
notification.  
29. Procedure for p ermission to access to Highway .—(1) The general permission under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 28 shall be given by issuing notification in the Official Gazette for such purpose 
and specific permission under that sub -section shall be give n in the manner specified hereinafter under 
this section.  
(2) Any person desirous of obtaining specific permission referred to in sub -section ( 1) may make an 
application in the prescribed form to the Highway Administration specifying therein the means of access 
to which such permission relates and shall also be accompanied with such fees as may be prescribed and 
the Highway Administration shall, a fter considering the application either give the permission with or 
without the terms and conditions as may be prescribed or reject the application as it may deem fit.  
(3) In case, where the permission has been given in respect of the application made unde r  
sub-section ( 2), the person to whom such permission has been given shall obtain the licence from the 
Highway Administration in the pr escribed form enumerating therei n the terms and conditions, if any, 
subject to which such permission has been given, and  such permission shall be renewed after such period 
and in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  11 
 (4) If any person contravenes the provisions of sub -section ( 1) of section 28 or violates any terms and 
conditions subject to which permission has been given under  sub-section ( 2) including non -renewal of 
licence obtaine d under sub -section ( 3), his acc ess to Highway under the permission under sub -section ( 1) 
or sub -section ( 3), as the case may be, shall be deemed to be unauthorised access and the Highway 
Administrat ion or the officer authorised by such Administration s hall have the power to remove su ch 
access and where necessary, the Highway Administration or such officer may use the necessary force 
with the assistance of the police to remove such access.  
30. Regulat ion or diversion of access, etc .—(1) Notwithstanding any permission given under  
sub-section ( 1) or sub -section ( 2) of section 29, the Highway Administration shall have the power in the 
interest of the safety and convenience of the traffic to re fuse, regulate or divert any proposed or existing 
access to the Highway.  
(2) Where an existing access is diverted, the alternative access given in lieu thereof shall not be 
unreasonably distant from the existing access.  
CHAPTER V  
REGULATION OF DIFFERENT TY PES OF TRAFFIC ON NATIONAL HIGHWAYS  
31. Highway Administration to regulate traf fic when Highway deemed                             
unsafe .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the Highway Administration shall have the 
power to regulate and control the plying of vehicles on the Highway for  the proper management thereof.  
(2) If at any time the Highway Administration is satisfied on the information received by it or 
otherwise that any Highway within its jurisdiction or any part thereof is or ha s become congested or 
unsafe for vehicular or pe destrian traffic by reason of da mage or otherwise, it may, either close the 
Highway or such part thereof to all traffic or to any class of traffic, or regulate the number and speed of 
vehicles to be used on t he Highway or such part thereof, as the case ma y be, in the manner as it may de em 
fit. 
32. Prohibition of use of heav y vehicles on certain Highways .—Where the Highway 
Administration is satisfied that the surface of a Highway or any part thereof, or any bridge, culvert or 
causeway built on or across the Highway is not designed to carry vehi cles of which the laden weight 
exceeds a prescribed limit, it may, subject to such rules as may be made in this behalf, prohibit or restrict 
the plying of such vehicles  on or over such Highway or part thereof or such bridge,  culvert or causeway, 
as the cas e may be.  
33. Temporary  closure of traffic on Highway .—Where, in exercise of the powers under section 31 
or section 32, the Highway Administration considers it proper f or the purposes of that section to 
temporarily close a Highway or part thereof or to restrict or regulate traffic on such Highway or part 
thereof, it may do so in the manner as it may deem fit.  
34. Permanent closure of Highway .—(1) Where, in exercise of the powers under section 31, the 
Highway Administration deems it necessary in the interest of the safety of the Highway to close a 
Highway or part thereof, it may, by notification in the Officia l Gazette, give notice of its intention to the 
public to do so  specifying therein the time within which the objections and suggestions received shall be 
considered under sub -section ( 3) and in addition to such notice, it shall also notify the contents of such 
notice in at least two newspapers, one of which shall be i n the local language of the area through which 
such Highway passes and another shall be the newspaper  being circulated in such area.  
(2) The notice under sub -section ( 1) shall indicate the alternative route proposed to be provided in 
lieu of the Highway or  part thereof intended to be closed specifying therein as to whether such alternative 
route shall be an already existing Highway o r shall be newly constructed and shall also invite objections 
and suggestions from the persons affected on such proposal withi n the time and to be addressed to the 
offic er as specified in such notice.  
(3) The Highway Administration shall, after considering the objections and suggestions, if any, 
received within the time specified in such notice, take decision on the proposal for closure under the 
notice and shall act in accordance with such decision.  12 
 35. Power t o restrict the use of vehicles .—If the Highway Administration is satisfied that it is 
necessary in the interest of public safety or convenience, or because of the nature of  any road or bridge so 
to do, it may, by  notification in the Official Ga zette, prohibit or restrict, subject to such exceptions or 
conditions as may be specified in the notification, the use of any Highway or part thereof by a class or 
classes of traffic e ither generally or on specified occasion or time as specified in the n otification and when 
such prohibition or restriction is imposed, the Highway Administration shall cause such traffic signs to be 
placed or erected at suitable places for the convenience of the traffic as may be prescribed:  
Provided that where any prohibition or restriction under this section is to be remained for a period of 
one month or less, such prohibition or restriction may be imposed without issuing notifi cation in the 
Official Gaze tte: 
Provided further that the prohibition or restriction imposed under the first proviso shall be published 
widely for the knowledge of the users by other possible means.  
36. Prevention a nd repair of damage to Highway .—(1) No person who is in charge of, o r in 
possession of, any vehicle or animal shall, wilfully or negligently, cause, or allow such vehicle or animal 
to ca use, any damage to any Highway.  
(2) Where, in contravention of sub -section ( 1), any damage has been caused to any Highway, the 
Highway Administration shall have such damage repaired at its own expenses and such expenses together 
with fifteen per cent. thereof as additional charges shal l, without prejudice to any other action which may 
be taken against the person who has so contravened sub -section ( 1), be recovered from him in accordance 
with the provisions contained in section 27 as if such expenses and a dditional charges were the expen ses 
and additional charges recoverable under that section.  
37. Prohibition to leave vehicles or animals i n dangerous positi on.—(1) No person in charge of, or 
in possession of, any vehicle or animal shall allow such vehicle or animal to stand or proceed on a 
Highway unless the same is under such safet y control as may be prescribed.  
(2) Where, in contravention of sub -section ( 1), any obstruction on the Highway is caused, the vehicle 
or animal causing such obstruction shall be caused to be towed away by the Highway Administration to 
remove such obstruct ion on the Highway and the vehic le or animal so towed away sh all be taken into 
possession by the Highway Administration and shall be handed over to the owner thereof in the manner, 
by payment to the Highway Administration, the expenses incurred in such removal, as may be prescribed.  
(3) In case where the expenses in respect of the vehicle or animal taken into possession under  
sub-section ( 2) have not been paid in the manner prescribed under that sub -section, the Highway 
Administration shall sell such vehicle or animal by auction and th e proceeds of the auction shall be the 
property of  the Central Government.  
(4) Any person who has unauthorised occupation on a highway land shall be summarily evicted by 
the Highway Administration in the manner specified in section 26 for removal of unauth orised occupation 
and shall be liable to fine impo sed by the Highway Admi nistration which shall not be less than five 
hundred rupees per square metre of the unauthorisedly occupied land by him but which may be extended 
to the cost of such land.  
CHAPTER VI  
REGULATION OF CONSTRUCTION ON HIGHWAY LAND FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES, DRAINS, ETC.  
38. Construction on highway land .—(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for 
the time being in force, no person other than a Highway Administration or a person authorised by such 
Administration in this behalf sh all construct, install, sh ift, repair, alter or carry any poles, pillars, 
advertisement towers, transformers, cable wire, pipe, drain, sewer, canal, railway line, tramway, 
telephone boxes, repeater station , street, path or passage of any kind on highway la nd or across, under or 
over any Highway except with the prior permission in writing of the Highway A dministration for such 
purpose.  
(2) Any person who intends to obtain the permission under sub -section ( 1) shall make an application 
in the prescribed form to the Highway Administration containing therein the purpose and period of 13 
 occupancy of Highway, location and part of the Highway t o be occupied, method of execution of work, 
period of construction and meth od of restorati on of such part of the Highway.  
(3) The Highway Administration shall consider the application made under sub -section ( 1) and if it is 
satisfied that there is no alternative other than the Highway in respect of which the permission is sought 
under the appl ication where the land can be fo und to locate the public utility, it may give permission in 
writin g as sought in the application:  
Provided that while giving such permission, the Highway Administration may impose such 
conditions  as it may deem fit to protect — 
(i) the Highway from damage; and  
(ii) the traffic on the Highway from obstruction,  
and may also impose such fees and other charges as may be prescribed on the person to whom such 
permission is given in respect of any land forming part of the Highway, occupied or applied to the 
proposed work or construction under permission and also impose on such person the expenditure, if any, 
incurred by the Highway Administration for repairing any damage caused to the Highway by laying or 
shifting of any structure, article or equipment under the permission.  
(4) If any person, in contravention of sub -section ( 1), makes any construction or carries out any other 
work, the Highway Administration may, at its own expenses, cause such construct ion or other work to be 
removed from the Highway and restore the Highwa y in the condition as it was immediately before giving 
permission for such construction or other work under sub -section ( 3) and such expenses together with 
fifteen per cent. thereof as additional charges and fine imposed b y the Highway Administration tak ing 
into account the nature of the damages caused by such construction or other work, which shall not be less 
than five hundred rupees per square metre of land used for such construction or other work, but shall not 
exceed the cost of such land, shall be recovered from such person in accordance with the provisions 
contained in section 27 as if such expenses, additional charges and fine were the expenses, additional 
charges and fine recover able under that section.  
CHAPTER VII  
OFFENCE AND PENALTY  
39. Offence and penalty .—(1) If any person, who has been evicted from any unauthorised 
occupation on a highway land under this Act, again occupies any highway land without permission for 
such occupation under this Act, he shall be punishable with impriso nment for a term which may ex tend to 
one year, or with fine which shall not be less than one thousand rupees per square metre of so occupied 
highway land but which shall not exceed two times the cost of su ch highway land, or with both.  
(2) Any court, convicting a person under sub -section ( 1), may make an order for evicting that person 
from such occupied highway land summarily and he shall be liable to such eviction without prejudice to 
any other action  that may be taken against him.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of  Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the 
offence punishable under sub -section ( 1) shall be cognizable.  
CHAPTER VIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
40. Right of appellant to take as sistance of legal practitioner .—A person preferring an appeal to 
the Tribunal under this Act may either appear in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his 
choice to present his case before the Tribunal . 
41. Finality of orders .—Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Act, every order made or any 
action taken by the High way Administration or the officer authorised in this behalf by such 
Administration or every order passed or decision made on appeal under this Act by the Tribunal shall be 
final and shall not be called in question in any original suit, application or execu tion proceeding and no 
injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken i n 
pursuance of any power conferred by or under this Act to the Highway Administration or Tribunal.  14 
 42. Duty of village officials .—Wherever any village headman, village accountant, village watchman 
or other village official, by whatever name called, becomes aware of any offence involving unauthorised 
occupation, damage or destruction of the highway lan d, he shall forthwith inform the nearest police 
station or the nearest Highway Administration or any officer authorised in this behalf by such 
Administration, the commission of such offence and shall also be duty bound to assist the Highway 
Administratio n and its officers in pr osecuting the offender of the offence.  
43. Conduct of inquiry .—The Highway Administration or the officer authorised in this behalf by 
such Administration shall, if he desires to make any inquiry for the purposes of this Act, make a summary 
inquiry in such manner as may be prescribed.  
1[44. Officers of Highways Administration to be public servant .—The officer or officers 
constituting the Highways Administration and any other officer authorised by such Administration under 
this Act, shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this 
Act, to be public servants within the meaning of secti on 21 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) .] 
45. Protection  of action taken in good faith .—No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or 2[any other officer of the Central Government ] or the officer or 
officers constituting the Highway Administration or any other officer authorised by such Administration 
under this Act or any other person, for anything which is in good faith done or intended to  be done under 
this Act or the rules  made thereunder.  
46. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence punishable under this Act has been committed 
by a company, every person who, at the time th e offence was committed, was in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for t he conduct of the business of th e company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to pre vent the commission of su ch offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where any offence punishable under this 
Act has been committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the 
consent or connivance of, or is attributable to , any negle ct on the part of any director, manager, secretary 
or other officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to 
be guilty of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished acc ordingly.  
 Explanation .—For the purposes of this se ction, — 
(a) “company ” means any  body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and  
(b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.  
47. Procedu re for service of  notices, etc .—Save as otherwise provided in this Act, every notice or 
bill issued or prepared under this Act may be served or presented in such manner as may be prescribed.  
48. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument 
having effect by virtue of any law other than this Act.  
49. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving eff ect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions, 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary or expedie nt for removing 
the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made under this section after the expiry of three years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 7 of 201 7, s. 167  for section 44 (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  
2. Subs by, s.167, ibid for certain words (w.e.f.  26-5-2017).  15 
 (2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
50. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, after previous publication, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carryin g out the purposes of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing powe r, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner of exercising powers and discharge functions unde r sub -section ( 3) of section 3;  
1*    *    *   * 
 (f) the additional matters in respect of which the Tribunal may exercise the powers of a civil 
court under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 3) of section 16;  
(g) the manner for maintaining the records of the Highway Administration in which the lands are 
shown and the manner of proving claim for correction of such records und er sub -section ( 2) of 
section 23;  
(h) the conditions subject to which, the rent and other charges on payment of which and the form 
in which permit may be issued for grant of permission under  sub-section ( 2) of section 24;  
(i) the conditions, payment of ren t and other charges for grant of lease or licence of  highway land 
under section 25;  
(j) the form of notice under sub -section ( 2) of section 26;  
(k) the feasible cost for making construction including alteration of any construction under   
sub-section ( 8) of section 26;  
(l) the additional matter in respect of which the Highway Administration or an officer authorised 
by such Administration in this behalf may exercise the powers of a civil court under clause ( d) of  
sub-section ( 9) of section 26;  
(m) the form of the bill under  sub-section ( 2) of section 27;  
(n) the form of application, the fees to be accompanied therewith and the terms and conditions for 
permission under  sub-section ( 2) of section 29;  
(o) the form of licence, the period and the manner of renewal of such licence under   
sub-section ( 3) of section 29;  
(p) the limit of laden weight and the provisions subject to which the plying of vehicles may be 
prohibited or restricted under section 32;  
(q) the traffic signs to be plac ed or erected under sec tion 35;  
(r) the safety and control for allowing any vehicle or animal to stand or proceed on a Highway 
under sub -section ( 1) of sect ion 37;  
(s) the manner of handing over the vehicle or animal to the owner and payment of expenses 
incurred in the removal o f such vehicle or animal under  sub-section ( 2) of section 37;  
(t) the form of application under  sub-section ( 2) of section 38;  
(u) the fees and other charges to be imposed under  sub-section ( 3) of section 38;  
(v) the manner of su mmary inquiry under section  43; 
(w) the manner of service or presentation of notic e or bill under section 47; and  
(x) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
(3) Every rule made or every notification issued by the Central Government under this Act shall be 
laid, as soon as may be after it is made or issued, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, 
                                                             
1. Cls. (b), (c), (d) and ( e) omitted by Act 7 of 2017, s.167 (w.e.f . 26-5-2017).  16 
 for a total period of thirty days which may be com prised in one session or in two or more successive  
sessions, and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive 
sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or notification or bo th 
Houses agree that the rule or notification should not be made or issued, the rule or notification shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment shal l be w ithout prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule or notification.  
--------------------------The Electricity Act, 2003--------------------------
1 
 THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
–––––––  
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1.   Short title, extent and commencement.  
2.   Definitions.  
 
PART II  
NATIONAL  ELECTRICITY  POLICY  AND PLAN 
3.   National Electricity Policy and Plan.  
 4.   National p olicy on stand alone systems for rural areas and non -conventional energy systems.  
5.   National policy on electrification and local distribution in rural areas.  
6.   Joint responsibility of State Government and Central Government in rural el ectrification.  
 
PART III  
GENERATION  OF ELECTRICITY  
7.   Generating company and requirement for setting up of generating station.  
8.   Hydro -electric generation.  
9.   Captive generation.  
10. Duties of generating companies.  
11. Directions to generating companies.  
 
PART IV  
LICENSING  
12. Authorised persons to transmit, supply, etc., electricity.  
13. Power to exempt.  
14. Grant of licence.  
15. Procedure for grant of licence.  
16. Condition s of licence.  
17. Licensee not to do certain things.  
18. Amendment of licence.  2 
 SECTIONS  
19. Revocation of licence.  
20. Sale of utilities of licensees.  
21. Vesting of utility in purchaser.  
22. Provisions where no purchase takes place.  
23. Directions to licensees.  
24. Suspension of distribution licence and sale of utility.  
 
PART V  
TRANSMISSION  OF ELECTRICITY  
Inter-State transmission  
25. Inter -State, regional and inter -regional transmission.  
26. National Load Despatch Centre.  
27. Constitution of Regional Load Despatch Centre.  
28. Functions of Regional Load Despatch Centre.  
29. Compliance of directions.  
Intra-State transmission  
30. Transmission within a State.  
31. Constitution of State Load Despatch Cent ers. 
32. Functions of State Load Despatch Cent ers. 
33. Compliance of directions.  
Other provisions relating to transmission  
34. Grid Standards.  
35. Intervening transmission facilities.  
36. Charges for intervening transmission facilities.  
37. Directions by Appropriate Government.  
38. Central Transmission Utility and functions.  
39. State Transmission Utility and functions.  
40. Duties of transmission licensees.  
41. Other business of transmission licensee.  
PART VI  
DISTRIBUTION OF  ELECTRICITY  
Provisions with respect to distribution licensee s 
42. Duties of distribution licensee and open access.  
43. Duty to supply on request.  
44. Exceptions from duty to supply electricity.  
45. Power to recover charges.  
  3 
 SECTIONS  
46. Power to recover expenditure.  
47. Power to require security.  
48. Additional terms of supply.  
49. Agreement s with respect to supply or purchase of electricity.  
50. The Electricity supply code. 
51. Other businesses of distribution licensees.  
Provisions with respect to electricity trader s 
52. Provisions wit h respect to electricity trader . 
Provisions with respect to supply generally  
53. Provision  relating to safety and electricity supply.  
54. Control of transmission and use of electricity.  
55. Use, etc., of meters.  
56. Disconnection of supply in default of payment.  
Consumer protection: Standards of performance  
57. Standards of performance of licensee.  
58. Different standards of performance by licensee.  
59. Information with respect to levels of performance.  
60. Market domination.  
 
PART  VII 
TARIFF  
61. Tariff regulations.  
62. Determination of tariff.  
63. Determination of tariff by bidding process.  
64. Procedure for tariff order.  
65. Provision of subsidy by State Government.  
66. Development of market.  
PART VIII  
WORKS  
Works of licensees  
67. Provision  as to opening up of streets, railways, etc.  
Provisions relating to overhead lines  
68. Overhead lines.  
69. Notice to telegraph authority.   4 
 PART IX  
CENTRAL  ELECTRICITY  AUTHORITY  
Constitution and functions of Authority  
SECTIONS  
70. Constitution, etc., of Central Electricity Authority.  
71. Members not to have certain interest.  
72. Officers and staff of Authority.  
73. Functions and duties of Authority.  
Certain powers and directions  
74. Power to require statistics and returns.  
75. Directions by Central Government to Authority.  
PART X  
REGULATORY  COMMISSIONS  
Constitution, powers and functions of Central Commission  
76. Constitution of Central Commission.  
77. Qualifications for appointment of Members of Central Commission.  
78. Constitution of Selection Committee to recommend Members . 
79. Functions of Central Commission.  
80. Central Advisory Committee.  
81. Objects of Central Advisory Committee.  
Constitution, powers and functions of State Commissions  
82. Constitution of State Commission . 
83. Joint Commission.  
84. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of State Commission.  
85. Constitution of Selection Committee to select Members of State Commission.  
86. Functions of State Commission.  
87. State Advisory Committee.  
88. Objects of State Advisory Committee.  
Appropriate Commission –Other provisions  
89. Term of office and conditions of service of Members.  
90. Removal of Member.  
Proceedings and powers of Appropriate Commission  
91. Secretary, officers and other employees of Appropriate Commission.  
92. Proceedings of Appropriate Commission . 
93. Vacancies, etc. , not to invalidate proceedings . 
94. Powers of Appropriate Commission.  
95. Proceedings before Commission.  
96. Powers of entry and seizure.   5 
 SECTIONS  
97. Delegation . 
Grants, Fund and Accounts, Audit and Report  
98. Grants and loans by Central  Government.  
99. Establishment of Fund by Central Government.  
100. Accounts and audit of Central Commission.  
101. Annual r eport of Central Commission.  
102. Grants and Loans by State Government . 
103. Establishment of Fund by State Government . 
104. Accounts and audit of State Commission . 
105. Annual r eport of State Commission.  
106. Budget of Appropriate Commission . 
107. Directions by Central Government . 
108. Directions by State Government . 
109. Directions to Joint Commission.  
 
PART XI  
APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  FOR ELECT RICITY  
110. Establishment of Appellate Tribunal.  
111. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.  
112. Composition of Appellate Tribunal.  
113. Qualification s for appoin tment of Chairperson and Member  of Appellate Tribunal.  
114. Term of o ffice.  
115. Terms and conditions of service.  
116. Vacancies.  
117. Resignation and r emoval.  
117A. Qualification s, terms and conditions of service of Chairperson and Member.  
118. Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances.  
119. Officers and other employees of Appellate  Tribunal.  
120. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal.  
121. Power of Appellate Tribunal.  
122. Distribution of business amongst Benches and transfer of cases from one Bench to another 
Bench.  
123. Decision to be by majority.  
124. Right of appellant to t ake assistance of legal practitioner and of Appropriate Commission to 
appoint presenting officers.  
125. Appeal to Supreme Court.  6 
 PART XII  
INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
SECTIONS  
126. Assessment.  
127. Appeal to Appellate Authority.  
128. Investigation of certain matters . 
129. Orders for securing compliance.  
130. Procedure for issuing directions by Appropriate Commission.  
 
PART XIII  
REORGANISATION  OF BOARD  
131. Vesting of property of Board in State Government.  
132. Use of proceeds of sale or transfer of Boa rd, etc.  
133. Provisions relating to officers and employees.  
134. Payment of compensation or damages on transfer.  
 
PART XIV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
135. Theft of Electricity.  
136. Theft of electric lines and materials.  
137. Punishment for receiving stolen property.  
138. Interference with meters or works of licensee.  
139. Negligently breaking or damaging works.  
140. Penalty for intentionally injuring works.  
141. Extinguishing public lamps.  
142. Punishment for non -compliance of directions by Appropriate Commi ssion.  
143. Power to adjudicate.  
144. Factors to be taken into account by adjudicating officer.  
145. Civil court  not to have jurisdiction.  
146. Punishment for non -compliance of orders or directions.  
147. Penalties not to affect other liabilities.  
148. Penalty where works belong to Government.  
149. Offences by companies.  
150. Abetment.  
  7 
 SECTIONS  
151. Cognizance of offences.  
151A. Power of police to investigate.  
151B.  Certain offences to be cognizable and non -bailable.  
152. Compounding of offences.  
 
PART  XV 
SPECIA L COURTS  
153. Constitution of Special Courts.  
154. Procedure and power of Special Court.  
155. Special Court to have powers of Court of Session.  
156. Appeal and revision.  
157. Review.  
 
PART XVI  
DISPUTE RESOLUTION  
Arbitration  
158. Arbitration.  
 
PART XVII  
OTHER PROVISIONS  
Protective c lauses  
159. Protection of railways, highways, airports and canals, docks, wharfs and piers.  
160. Protection of telegraphic, telephonic and electric signalling lines.  
161. Notice of accidents and in quiries. 
162. Appointment of Chief Electrical Inspector and Electrical Inspector.  
163. Power for licensee to enter premises and to remove fittings or other apparatus of licensee.  
164. Exercise of powers of Telegraph Authority in certain cases.  
165. Amendment of sections  40 and 41 of Act 1 of 1894.  
 
PART XVIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
166. Coordination Forum . 
167. Exemption of electric lines or electrical plants from attachment in certain cases.  
168. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
169. Members, officers, etc. , of Appellate Tribunal, Appropriate Commission to be public servants.  8 
 SECTIONS  
170. Recovery of penalty payable under this Act.  
171. Services of notices, orders or documents.  
172. Transitional provisions.  
173. Inconsistency in laws.  
174. Act to have overriding effect.  
175. Provisions of this Act to be in addition to and not in derogation of other laws.  
176. Power of Central Government to make rules.  
177. Powers of Authority to make regulations.  
178. Powers of Central Commission to make regulations.  
179. Rules and regulations to be laid before Parliament.  
180. Powers of State Governments to make rules.  
181. Powers of State Commissions to make regulations.  
182. Rules and regulations to be laid before State Legislature.  
183. Power to remove difficulties.  
184. Provisions of Act not  to apply in certain cases.  
185. Repeal and saving.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
  9 
 THE ELECTRICITY ACT, 2003  
 ACT NO. 36 OF 2003   
[26th May , 2003 .] 
An Act to consolidate the laws relating to generation, transmission, distribution, trading and use 
of electricity and generally for taking measures conducive to development of electricity 
industry, promoting competition therein, protecting interest of consumers and supply of 
electricity to all areas, rationalis ation of electricity tariff, ensuri ng transparent policies 
regarding subsidies, promotion of efficient and environmentally benign policies, constitution 
of Central Electricity Authority, Regulatory Commissions and establishment of Appellate 
Tribunal and for matters connected therewith or in cidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fourth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: – 
PART I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title, extent and commencement .–(1) This Act may be called the  Electricity Act, 2003.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India except the State of Jammu and Kashmir.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by  notification, appoint:  
Provided that different dates may be appointed for different provisions of  this Act and any reference 
in any such provision to the commencement of this  Act shall be construed as a reference to the coming 
into force of that provision.  
2. Definitions .–In this Act, unless t he context otherwise requires, – 
(1)“Appellate Tribunal ” means the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity established  under section 110;  
(2) “appointed date ” means such date as the Central Government may, by  notification, appoint;  
(3) “area of supply ” means the area within which a distribution licensee  is authorised by his licence 
to supply electri city; 
(4) “Appropriate Commission ” means the Central Regulatory  Commis sion referred to in                
sub-section (1) of section 76 or the State  Regulatory Commission referred to in section 82 or the Joint  
Commission referred to in  section 83, as the ca se may be ; 
(5) “Appropriate Government ” means, – 
(a) the Central Government, – 
(i) in respect of a generating company wholly or partly owned  by it;  
(ii) in relation to any inter -State generation, transmission,  trading or supply of electricity and 
with respect to any  mines, oil -fields, railways, national highways, airports,  telegraphs,  
broadcasting stations and any works of defence,  dockyard, nuclear power installations;  
(iii) in respect of  the National Load Despatch Centre and Regional  Load Despatch Centre;  
(iv) in relation to any works or electric installation belonging to  it or under its control ; 
(b) in any other case, the State Government  having jurisdiction under  this Act;  
                                                             
1. 10th June, 2003 ( Ss. 1 to 120 and ss. 122 to 185), vide notification No. S.O. 669( E), dated 10 th June, 2003, see Gazette of 
India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii). 10 
 (6) “Authority ” mean s the Central Electricity Authority referred to in  sub-section  (1) of section 70;  
(7) “Board ” means  a State Electricity Board, constituted before the  commencement of this              
Act, under sub -section ( 1) of section 5 of the  Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948  (54 of 1948) ; 
 (8) “Captive generating plant ” means a power plant set up by any person  to generate electricity 
primarily for his own use and includes a power  plant set up by any co -operative society or association 
of persons for  generating electricity primarily for use of members of such co -operative  society or 
association;  
(9) “Central Commission ” means the Central Electricity Regulatory  Commission referred to in      
sub-section ( 1) of section 76;  
(10) “Central Transmission Utility ” means any Government company  which the Central 
Government may notify under sub -section ( 1) of section 38;  
(11) “Chairperson ” means the Chairperson of the Authority or Appropriate  Commission or the 
Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be;  
(12) “Cogeneration ” means a process which simultaneously produces two  or more for ms of useful 
energy (including electricity);  
(13) “company ” means a company formed and registered under the  Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 
1956) and includes any body corporate under a  Central, State or Provincial Act;  
(14) “conservation ” means any reduction in consumption of electricity as a  result of increase in the 
efficiency in supply and use of electricity;  
(15) “consumer ” means any person who is supplied with electricity for his  own use by a licensee or 
the Government or by any other  person  engaged in the business of supplying electricity to the public 
under  this Act or any other law for the time being in force and includes any  person whose premises are 
for the time being connected for the  purpose of receiving electricity with the works of a licensee, the  
Government or such other person, as the case may be;  
(16) “dedicated transmission lines ” means any electric supply -line for point  to point transmission 
which are required for the purpose of connecting  electric lines or electric pla nts of a captive generating 
plant referred to  in section 9 or generating station referred to in section 10 to any  transmission lines or 
sub-stations  or generating stations, or the load  centre, as the case may be;  
 (17) “distribution licensee ” means a lice nsee authorised to operate and  maintain a distribution 
system for supplying electricity to the  consumers in his area of supply;  
(18) “distributing main ” means the portion of any main with which a  service line is, or is intended 
to be, immediately connected;  
(19) “distribution system ” means the system of wires and associated  facilities between the delivery 
points on the transmission lines or the  generating station connection and the point of connection to the  
installation of the consumers;  
(20) “electric line ” means any line which is used for carrying electricity for  any purpose and 
includes – 
(a) any support for any such line, that is to say, any structure, tower, pole or  other thing in, on, 
by or from which any such line is, or may be,  supported, carried or suspended; and  
(b) any apparatus connected to any such line for the purpose of carrying  electricity;  
(21) “Electrical Inspector ” means a person appointed as such by the Appropriate  Government under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 162 and also includes Chief  Electrical Inspector;   11 
 (22) “electrical plant ” means any plant, equipment, apparatus or appliance or any  part thereof used 
for, or connected with, the generation, transmission,  distribution or supply of e lectricity but does not 
include – 
(a) an electric line; or  
(b) a meter used for ascertaining the quantity of electricity supplied to any  premises; or  
(c) an electrical equipment, apparatus or appliance under the control of a  consumer;  
(23) “electricity ” means electrical energy – 
(a) generated, transmitted, supplied or traded for any purpose; or  
(b) used for any purpose except the transmission of a message;  
(24) “Electricity Supply Code ” means the Electricity Supply Code specified under  section 50;  
(25) “electricity system ” means a system under the control of a generating  company or licensee, as 
the c ase may be, having one or more – 
(a) generating stations; or  
(b) transmission lines; or  
(c) electric lines and sub -stations,  
and when used in the context of a State or the Union, the entire electricity system  within the territories 
thereof;  
(26) “electricity trader ” means a person who has been granted a licence to  undertake trading in 
electricity under section 12;  
(27) “franchisee ” means a person  authorised by a distribution licensee to  distribute electricity on its 
behalf in a particular area within his area of  supply;  
(28) “generating company ” means any company or body corporate or  association or body of 
individuals, whether incorporated or not, or artificial  juridical person, which owns or  operates or 
maintains a generating station;  
(29) “generate ” means to produce electricity from a generating station for the  purpose of giving 
supply to any premises or enabling a supply to be so given;  
(30) “generating station ” or “station ” means any station for generating  electricity, including any 
building and plant with step -up transformer, switch -gear,  switch yard, cables or other appurtenant 
equipment, if any, used for that  purpose and the site thereof; a site intended to b e used for a generating 
station,  and any building used for housing the operating staff of a generating station, and  where 
electricity is generated by water -power, includes penstocks, head and tail  works, main and regulating 
reservoirs, dams and other hydra ulic works, but  does not in any case include any sub -station;  
(31) “Government company ” shall have the meaning assigned to it in section 617  of the Companies 
Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) ; 
(32) “grid” means the high voltage backbone system of inter -connected  transmission lines,            
sub-station  and generating plants;  
(33) “Grid Code ” means the Grid Code specified by the Central Commission  under clause ( h) of   
sub-section ( 1) of section 79;  
(34) “Grid Standards ” means the Grid Standards specified under clause ( d) of section 73 by the 
Authority;  12 
 (35) “high voltage line ” means an electric line or cable of a nominal voltage as  may be specified by 
the Authority from time to time;  
(36) “inter-State  transmission system ” includes – 
(i) any system for the conveyance of electricity by means of main  transmission line from the 
territory of one State to another State;  
(ii) the conveyance of electricity across the territory of an intervening  State as well as 
conveyance within the State which is incidental to  such inter -State transmission of electricity;  
(iii) the transmission of electricity within the territory of a State on a  system built, owned, 
operated, maintained or controlled by a  Central Transmission Utility;  
(37) “intra-State transmission system ” means any system for transmission of  electricity other than 
an inter-State transmission system ; 
(38) “licence ” means a licence granted under section 14;  
(39) “licensee ” means a person who has been granted a licence under  section 14;  
(40) “line” means any wire, cable, tube, pipe, insulator, conductor or other  similar thing (including 
its casing or coating) which is designed or adapted for  use in carrying electricity and includes any l ine 
which surrounds or supports , or is surrounded or supported by or is installed in close proximity to, or 
is supported, carried or suspended in association with, any such line;  
(41) “local authority ” means any Nagar Panchayat, Municipal Council,  municipal corporation, 
Panchayat constituted at  the village, intermediate and  district levels, body of port commissioners or 
other authority legally entitled to,  or entrusted by the Union or  any State Government with, the control 
or management of any area or local fund;  
 (42) “main ” means any electric supply -line through which electricity is, or is  intended to be, 
supplied ; 
(43) “Member ” means the Member of the Appropriate Commission or Authority  or Joint 
Commission, or the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be, and includes  the Chairperson of such 
Commission or Authority or Appellate Tribunal;  
(44) “National Electricity Plan ” means the National Electricity Plan notified under  sub-section ( 4) 
of section 3;  
(45) “National Load Despatch Centre ” means the Centre established under sub -section  (1) of  
section 26;  
(46) “notification ” means notification published in the Official Gazette and the  expression “notify ” 
shall be construed accordingly;  
(47) “open access ” means the non -discriminatory provision for the use of  transmission lines or 
distribution system or associated facilities with such lines  or system by any licensee or consumer or a 
person engaged in generation in  accordance with the regulations specified by the Appropriate 
Commission;  
(48) “overhead line ” means an electric line which is placed above the ground and  in the open air 
but does not include live rails of a traction system;  
(49) “person ” shall include any company or body corporate or association or  body of individuals, 
whether incorporated or not, or artificial juridical person;  
 13 
 (50) “power system ” means all aspects of generation, transmission, distribution  and supply of 
electricity and includes one or  more of the following, namely: – 
(a) generating stations;  
(b) transmission or main transmission lines;  
(c) sub -stations;  
(d) tie-lines;  
(e) load despatch activities;  
(f) mains or distribution mains;  
(g) electric supply -lines;  
(h) overhead lines;  
(i) service lines;  
(j) works;  
(51) “premises ” includes any land, building or structure;  
(52) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made by the Appropriate  Government under this Act;  
(53) “public lamp ” means an electric lamp used for the lighting of any street;  
(54) “real time operation ” means action to be taken at a given time at which  information about the 
electricity system is made available to  the concerned Load  Despatch Centre;  
(55) “Regional Power Committee ” means a committee established by resolution  by the Central 
Government for a specified region for facilitating the integrated  operation of the power systems in that 
region;  
(56) “Regional Load Despatch Centre ” means the Centre established under sub -section  (1) of  
section 27;  
(57) “regulations ” means regulations made under this Act;  
(58) “repealed laws ” means the Indian Electricity Act, 1910  (9 of 1910) , the Electricity  (Supply) 
Act, 1948 (54 of 1948) and the Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998  (14 of 1998) repealed 
by section 185;  
(59) “rules ” means rules made under this Act;  
(60) “Schedule ” means the Schedule to this Act;  
(61) “service -line” means any electric supply -line through which electricity is, or  is intended to be, 
supplied – 
(a) to a single consumer either from a distributing main or  immediately  from the Distribution 
Licensee ’s premises; or  
(b) from a distributing main to a group of consumers on the same  premises or on contiguous 
premises supplied from the same point  of the distributing main;  
(62) “specified ” means specified by regulations made by the Appropriate  Commission or the 
Authority, as the case may be, under this Act;  
(63) “stand alone system ” means the electricity system set -up to generate power  and distribute 
electricity in a specified area without connection to the grid;  
(64) “State Commission ” means the State Electricity Regulatory Commission  constituted under  
sub-section  (1) of section 82 and includes a Joint Commission  constituted under sub -section ( 1) of  
section 83;  14 
 (65) “State Grid Code ” means the State Grid Code specified under clause ( h) of sub-section ( 1) of 
section 86;  
(66) “State Load Despatch Centre ” means the centre established under sub -section  (1) of section 
31; 
(67) “State Transmission Utility ” means the Board or the Government company  specified as such 
by the State Government under sub -section ( 1) of section 39;  
(68) “street ” includes any way, road, lane, square, court, alley, passage or open  space, whether a 
thoroughfare or not, over which the public have a right of way  and also the roadway and footway over 
any public bridge or causeway;  
(69) “sub-station ” means a station fo r transforming or converting electricity for  the transmission or 
distribution thereof and includes transformers , converters,  switch -gears, capacitors, synchronous 
condensers, structures, cable and other  appurtenant equipment and any buildings used for that  purpose 
and the site  thereof;  
(70) “supply ”, in relation to electricity, means the sale of electricity to a licensee or  consumer;  
(71) “trading ” means purchase of electricity for resale thereof and the expression  “trade ” shall be 
construed accordingly;  
(72) “transmission lines" means all high pressure cables and overhead lines (not  being an essential 
part of the distribution system of a licensee) transmitting  electricity from a generating station to 
another generating station or a sub -station,  together with any step -up and step -down transformers, 
switch -gear and  other works necessary to and used for the control of such cables or overhead  lines, 
and such buildings or part thereof as may be required to accommodate  such transformers, switch -gear 
and other w orks;  
(73) “transmission licensee ” means a licensee authorised to establish or operate  transmission lines;  
(74) “transmit ” means conveyance of electricity by means of transmission lines  and the expression 
“transmission ” shall be construed accordingly;  
(75) “utility ” means the electric lines or electrical plant, and includes all lands,  buildings, works 
and materials attached thereto belonging to any person acting  as a generating company or licensee 
under the provisions of this Act;  
(76) “wheeling ” means the operation whereby the distribution system and  associated facilities of a 
transmission licensee or distribution licensee, as the case  may be, are used by another person for the 
conveyance of electricity on payment  of charges to be determined unde r section 62;  
(77) “works ” includes electric line, and any building, plant, machinery,  apparatus and any other 
thing of whatever description required to transmit,  distribute or supply electricity to the public and to 
carry into effect the objects of  a lice nce or sanction granted under this Act or any other law for the 
time being in  force.  
PART II  
NATIONAL  ELECTRICITY  POLICY  AND PLAN 
3. National Electricity Policy and Plan .–(1) The Central Government  shall, from time to time, 
prepare the National Electricity  Policy and tariff policy,  in consultation with the State Governments and 
the Authority for development  of the power system based on optimal utilisation of resources such as coal,  
natural gas, nuclear substances or materials, hydro and renewable sources of  energy.  
(2) The Central Government shall publish National Electricity Policy and tariff  policy from time to 
time.  15 
 (3) The Central Government may, from time to time, in consultation with the  State Governments and 
the Authority, review or revise  the National Electricity  Policy and tariff policy  referred to in                      
sub-section ( 1). 
(4) The Authority shall prepare a National Electricity Plan in accordance with  the National Electricity 
Policy and notify such plan once in  five years:  
Provided that the Authority while preparing the National Electricity Plan  shall publish the draft 
National Electricity Plan and invite suggestions and  objections thereon from licensees, generating 
companies and the public within  such time as m ay be prescribed:  
Provided fu rther that the Authority shall – 
(a) notify the plan after obtaining the approval of the Central  Government;  
(b) revise the plan incorporating therein the directions, if any, given by  the Central Government 
while granting approval under clause ( a). 
(5) The Authority may review or revise the National Electricity Plan in  accordance with the National 
Electricity Policy.  
4. National p olicy on stand alone systems for rural areas and non -conventional  energy systems. – 
The Central Government shall, after consultation with the State  Governments, prepare and notify a 
national policy, permitting stand alone  systems (including those based on renewable sources of energy 
and other non -conventional  sources of energy) for rural areas.  
5. Na tional policy on electrification and local distribution in rural  areas .–The Central 
Government shall also formulate a national policy, in  consultation with the State Governments and the 
State Commissions, for rural  electrification and for bulk purchase of power and management of local  
distribution in rural areas through Panchayat Institutions, users ’ associations, co -operative  societies,    
non-Governmental organisations or franchisees.  
1[6. Joint responsibility of State Government and Central Government  in rural electrification. –
The concerned State Government and the Central Government shall  jointly endeavour to provide access 
to electricity to all areas including villages  and hamlets through rural electricity infrastructure and 
electrification of  househ olds.]  
PART III  
GENERATION  OF ELECTRICITY  
7. Generating company and requirement for setting up of generating  station .–Any generating 
company may establish, operate and maintain a  generating station without obtaining a licence under this 
Act if it complies with the technical standards relating to connectivity with the grid referred to in       
clause ( b) of section 73.  
8. Hydro -electric generation .–(1) Notwithstanding anything  contained in section 7, any gene rating 
company intending to set up a hydro -generating station shall prepare and submit to the Authority for its 
concurrence,  a scheme estimated to involve a capital expenditure exceeding such sum, as  may be fixed by 
the Central Government, from time to time, by notification.  
(2) The Authority shall, bef ore concurring in any scheme submitted to it  under sub -section ( 1) have 
particular regard to,  whether or not in its opinion, – 
(a) the proposed river -works will prejudice the prospects for the best  ultimate development of the 
river or its tributaries for po wer generation, consistent with the requirements of drinking water,  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s. 2, for section 6 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  16 
 irrigation, navigation, flood -control, or other public purposes, and  for this purpose the Authority shall 
satisfy itself, after consultation  with the State Government, the Central Governme nt, or such other  
agencies as it may deem appropriate, that an adequate study has  been made of the optimum location 
of dams and other river -works;  
(b) the proposed scheme meets the norms regarding dam design and  safety.  
(3) Where a multi -purpose scheme for  the development of any river in any  region is in operation, the 
State Government and the generating company shall  co-ordinate their activities with the activities of the 
person s responsible for such  scheme in so far as they are inter -related.  
9. Captive g eneration. –(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, a person may construct,  
maintain or operate a captive generating plant and dedicated transmission lines:  
Provided that the supply of electricity from the captive generating plant  through the grid shall be 
regulated in the same manner as the generating station  of a generating company:  
1[Provided further that no licence shall be required under this Act for  supply of electricity generated 
from a captive generating plant to any licen see in  accorda nce with the provisions of this Act and the rules 
and regulations made  thereunder and to any consumer subject to the regulations made under                
sub-section  (2) of section 42 .] 
(2) Every person, who has constructed a captive generating plant and  maintains and operates such 
plant, shall have the right to open access for the  purposes of carrying electricity from his captive  
generating plant to the  destination of his use:  
Provided that such open access shall be subject to availability of  adequate tr ansmission facility and 
such availability of transmission facility shall  be determined by the Central Transmission Utility or the 
State Transmission  Utility, as the case may be:  
Provided further that any dispute regarding the availability of  transmission f acility shall be 
adjudicated upon by the Appropriate Commission.  
10. Duties of generating companies .–(1) Subject to the provisions of  this Act, the duties of a 
generating company shall be to establish, operate and  maintain generating stations, tie -lines, sub-stations 
and dedicated transmission  lines connected therewith in accordance with the provisions of this Act or the  
rules or regulations made thereunder.  
(2) A generating company may supply electricity to any licensee in  accordance with this Act and the  
rules and regulations made thereunder and  may, subject to the regulations made under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 42, supply  electricity to any consumer.  
(3) Every generating company shall – 
(a) submit technical details regarding its generating stations to the Appropriate Commission and 
the Authority;   
(b) co-ordinate with the Central Transmission Utility or the State  Transmission Utility, as the case 
may be, for transmission of the  electricity generated by it.  
11. Directions to generating companies .–(1) The Appropriate  Government may specify that a 
generating company shall, in extraordinary  circumstances operate and maintain any generating station in 
accordance with  the directions of that Government.  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2007, s. 3 (w.e.f.  15-6-2007).  
 17 
 Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, the expr ession “extraordinary  circumstances ” means 
circumstances arising out of threat to security of the  State, public order or a natural calamity or such other 
circumstances arising in  the public interest.  
(2) The Appropriate Commission may offset the adverse financial impact of  the directions referred to 
in sub -section ( 1) on any generating company in such  manner as it considers appropriate.  
PART IV  
LICENSING  
12. Authorised persons to trans mit, supply, etc., electricity. –No person shall – 
(a) transmit electricity; or  
(b) distribute electricity; or  
(c) undertake trading in electricity,   
unless he is authorised to do so by a licence issued under section 14, or is  exempt under section 13.  
13. Power to exempt. –The Appropriate Commiss ion may, on the recommendations of the  
Appropriate Government, in accordance with the national policy formulated  under section 5 and in the 
public interest, direct, by notification that subject to  such conditions and restrictions, if any, and for such 
period or periods, as may  be specified in the notification, the provisions of section 12 shall not apply to 
any local authority, Panchayat Institution, users ’ association, co -operative societies,  non-governmental 
organisations, or franchisees.  
14. Grant of lic ence. –The Appropriate Commission may, on an application made to it under  section 
15, grant a licence to any person – 
(a) to transmit electricity as a transmission licensee; or  
(b) to distribute electricity as a distribution licensee; or  
(c) to undertake trading in electricity as an electricity trader,  
in any area as may be specified in the licence:  
Provided that any person engaged in the business of transmission or  supply of electricity under the 
provisions of the repealed laws or any Act  specified in the  Schedule on or before the appointed date shall 
be deemed to be  a licensee under this Act for such period as may be stipulated in the licence,  clearance or 
approval granted to him under the repealed laws or such Act  specified in the Schedule, and the provi sions 
of the repealed laws or such Act  specified in the Schedule in respect of such licence shall apply for a 
period of  one year from the date of commencement of this Act or such earlier period as  may be specified, 
at the request of the licensee, by the Ap propriate Commission  and thereafter the provisions of this Act 
shall apply to such business:  
Provided further that the Central Transmission Utility or the State  Transmission Utility shall be 
deemed to be a transmission licensee under this  Act: 
Provided als o that in case an Appropriate Government transmits  electricity or distributes electricity or 
undertakes trading in electricity, whether  before or after the commencement of this Act, such Government 
shall be deemed  to be a licensee under this Act, but shall  not be required to obtain a licence under  this 
Act: 
Provided also that the Damodar Valley Corporation, established under  sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of 
the Damodar Valley Corporation Act, 1948  (14 of 1948) , shall be  deemed to be a licensee under this Act  
but shall not be required to obtain a  licence under this Act and the provisions of the Damodar Valley 18 
 Corporation  Act, 1948 , or in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act,  shall 
continue to apply to that Corporati on: 
Provided also that the Government company or the company referred  to in sub -section ( 2) of section 
131 of this Act and the company or companies  created in pursuance of the Acts specified in the Schedule, 
shall be deemed to  be a licensee under this Act:  
Provided also that the Appropriate Commission may grant a licence to  two or more persons for 
distribution of electricity through their own distribution  system within the same area, subject to the 
conditions that the applicant for grant  of licence within t he same area shall, without prejudice to the other 
conditions or  requirements under this Act, comply with the additional requirements 1[relating  to the 
capital adequacy, credit worthiness, or code of conduct] as may be  prescribed by the Central Government, 
and no such applicant, who complies  with all the requirements for grant of licence, shall be refused grant 
of licence on  the ground that there already exists a licensee in the same area for the same  purpose:  
Provided also that in a case where a distribution licensee proposes to  undertake distribution of 
electricity for a specified area within his area of  supply through another person, that person shall not be 
required to obtain  any separate licence from the concerned State Commission and such  distribution 
licensee shall be responsible for distribution of electricity in his area  of supply:  
Provided also that where a person intends to generate and distribute  electricity in a rural area to be 
notified by the State Government, such person  shall not require any licence for such generation and 
distribution of electricity,  but he shall comply with the measures which may be specified by the Authority  
under section 53:  
Provided also that a distribution licensee shall not require a licence to  undertake tra ding in electricity.  
15. Procedure for grant of licence .–(1) Every application under  section 14 shall be made in such 
form and in such manner as may be specified  by the Appropriate Commission and shall be accompanied 
by such fee as may  be prescribed.  
(2) Any person who has made an application for grant of a licence shall, within  seven days after 
making such application, publish a notice of his application  with such particulars and in such manner as 
may be specified and a licence  shall not be granted – 
(i) until the objections, if any, received by the Appropriate  Commission in response to publication 
of the application have  been considered by it:  
Provided that no objection shall be so considered unless it is received  before the expiration of 
thirty days from  the date of the publication of the  notice as aforesaid;  
(ii) until, in the case of an application for a licence for an area  including the whole or any part of 
any cantonment, aerodrome,  fortress, arsenal, dockyard or camp or of any building or place in  the 
occupation of the Government for defence purposes, the  Appropriate Commission has ascertained 
that there is no objection  to the grant of the licence on the part of the Central Government.  
(3) A person intending to act as a transmission licensee shall, im mediately  on making the application, 
forward a copy of such application to the Central  Transmission Utility or the State Transmission Utility, 
as the case may be.  
(4) The Central Transmission Utility or the State Transmission Utility, as  the case may be, shall, 
within thirty days after the receipt of the copy of the  application referred to in sub -section ( 3), send its 
recommendations, if any, to  the Appropriate Commission:  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 57 of 2003, s. 2, for “(including the capital adequacy , creditworthiness, or c ode of conduct) ” (w.e.f. 27 -1-2004).  
 19 
 Provided that such recommendations shall not be binding on the  Commission.  
(5) Befor e granting a licence under section 14, the Appropriate Commission  shall – 
(a) publish a notice in two such daily newspapers, as that Commission  may consider necessary, 
stating the name and address of the  person to whom it proposes to issue the licence;  
(b) consider all suggestions or objections and the recommendations, if  any, of the Central 
Transmission Utility or  the State Transmission  Utility, as the case may be.  
(6) Where a person makes an application under sub -section ( 1) of section 14  to act as a licen see, 
the Appropriate Commission shall, as far as practicable,  within ninety days afte r receipt of such 
application, – 
(a) issue a licence subject to the provisions of this Act and the rules  and regulations made 
thereunder; or  
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing if such  application does not 
conform to the provisions of this Act or the  rules and regulations made thereunder or the 
provisions of any  other law for the time being in force:  
Provided that no application shall be rejected  unless the applicant has  been given an opportunity of 
being heard.  
(7) The Appropriate Commission shall, immediately after issue of a licence,  forward a copy of the 
licence to the Appropriate Government, Authority, local  authority, and to such other perso n as the 
Appropriate Commission considers  necessary.  
 (8) A licence shall continue to be i n force for a period of twenty -five years  unless such licence is 
revoked.  
16. Condition s of licence .–The Appropriate Commission may specify any general or specific  
conditions which shall apply either to a licensee or class of licensees and such  conditions shall be deemed 
to be conditions of such licence:  
Provided that the Appropriate Commission shall, within one year from  the appointed date, specify 
any general or sp ecific conditions of licence  applicable to the licensees referred to in the first, second, 
third, fourth and  fifth provisos to section 14 after the expiry of one year from the  commencement of this 
Act. 
17. Licensee not to do certain things .–(1) No licensee  shall, without  prior approval of the 
Appropriate Commission, – 
(a) undertake any transaction to acquire by purchase or takeover or  otherwise, the utility of any 
other licensee; or   
(b) merge his utility with the utility of any other licensee:  
Provided that  nothing contained in this sub -section shall apply if the  utility of the licensee is situate in 
a State other than the State in which the  utility referred to in clause ( a) or clause ( b) is situate.  
(2) Every licensee shall, before obtaining the approval un der sub -section  (1), give not less than one 
month ’s notice to every other licensee who transmits  or distributes, electricity in the area of such licensee 
who applies for such  approval.  
(3) No licensee shall at any time assign his licence or transfer his utility, or  any part thereof, by sale, 
lease, exchange or otherwise without the prior  approval of the Appropriate Commission.  
(4) Any agreement, relating to any transaction specified in sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 3), unless 
made with the prior approva l of the Appropriate  Commission, shall be void.  20 
 18. Amendment of licence .–(1) Where in its opinion the public interest so permits, the Appropriate  
Commission, may, on the application of the licensee or otherwise, make such  alterations and amendments 
in the  terms and conditions of his licence as it thinks  fit: 
Provided that no such alterations or amendments shall be made except  with the consent of the 
licensee unless such consent has, in the opinion of the  Appropriate Commission, been unreasonably 
withheld.  
(2) Before any alterations or amendments in the licence are made under this  section, the following 
provisi ons shall have effect, namely: – 
(a) where the licensee has made an application under sub -section ( 1) proposing any alteration or 
modifications in his licence, the  licensee shall publish a notice of such application with such  
particulars and in such manner as may be specified;  
(b) in the case of an application proposing alterations or modifications  in the area of supply 
comprising the whole or any part o f any  cantonment, aerodrome, fortress, arsenal, dockyard or camp 
or any  building or place in the occupation of the Government for defence  purposes, the Appropriate 
Commission shall not make any  alterations or modifications except with the consent of the Ce ntral 
Government;  
(c) where any alterations or modifications in a licence are proposed to  be made otherwise than on 
the application of the licensee, the  Appropriate Commission shall publish the proposed alterations or  
modifications with such particulars an d in such manner as may be  specified;  
(d) the Appropriate Commission shall not make any alterations or  modification s unless all 
suggestions or objections received within  thirty days from the date of the first publication of the 
notice have  been considered.  
19. Revocation of licence .–(1) If the Appropriate Commission,  after making an enquiry, is satisfied 
that public interest so requires, it may  revoke a licence in any o f the following cases, namely: – 
(a) where the licensee, in the opinion of the Appropriate  Commission,  makes wilful and 
prolonged default in doing anything required of  him by or under this Act or the rules or regulations 
made  thereunder;  
(b) where the licensee breaks any of the terms or conditions of his  licence the breach of which is 
expressly  declared by such licence to  render it liable to revocation;  
(c) where the licensee fails, within the period fixed in this behalf by his  licence, or any longer 
period which the Appropriate Commission  may have granted therefor – 
(i) to show, to the satisfaction of the Appropriate Commission,  that he is in a position fully 
and efficiently to discharge the  duties and obligations imposed on him by his licence; or  
(ii) to make the deposit or furnish the security, or pay the fees or  other charges required  by his 
licence;  
(d) where in the opinion of the Appropriate Commission the financial  position of the licensee is 
such that he is unable fully and efficiently  to discharge the duties and obligations imposed on him by 
his licence.  
(2) Where in its opinion t he public interest so requires, the Appropriate  Commission may, on 
application, or with the consent of the licensee, revoke his  licence as to the whole or any part of his area 
of distribution or transmission or  trading upon such terms and conditions as it thinks fit.  
(3) No licence shall be revoked under sub -section ( 1) unless the Appropriate  Commission has given 
to the licensee not less than three months ’ notice, in  writing, stating the grounds on which it is proposed 21 
 to revoke the licence, and  has considered any cause shown by the licensee within the period of that notice,  
against the proposed revocation.  
(4) The Appropriate Commission may, instead of revoking a licence under  sub-section ( 1), permit it 
to remain in force subject to such further term s and  conditions as it thinks fit to impose, and any further 
terms and conditions so  imposed shall be binding upon and be observed by the licensee and shall be of  
like force and effect as if they were contained in the licence.  
(5) Where the Commission revo kes a licence under this section, it shall serve  a notice of revocation 
upon the licensee and fix a date on which the revocation  shall take effect.  
(6) Where the Appropriate Commission has given notice for revocation of  licence under                
sub-section ( 5), without prejudice to any penalty which may be  imposed or prosecution proceeding which 
may be initiated under this Act, the  licensee may, after prior approval of that Commission, sell his utility 
to any  person who is found eligible by that Commission for grant of licence.  
20. Sale of utilities of licensees .–(1) Where the Appropriate  Commission revokes under section 19 
the licence of any licensee, the following  provisions shall apply, namely: – 
(a) the Appropriate Commission shall invite applications for acquiring  the utility of the licensee 
whose licence has been revoked and  determine which of such applications should be accepted,  
primarily on the basis of the highest and best price offered for the  utility;  
(b) the Appropriate Commission may, by notice in writing, require the  licensee to sell his utility 
and thereupon the licensee shall sell his  utility to the person (hereafter in this section referred to as the  
“purchaser ”) whose application has been accepted by that  Commission;  
(c) all the rights, duties, obligations and liabilities of the licensee, on  and from the date of 
revocation of licence or on and from the  date, if earlier, on which the utility of the licensee is sold to a  
purchaser, shall absolutely cease except for any liabiliti es which  have accrued prior to that date;  
(d) the Appropriate Commission may make such interim arrangements  in regard to the operation 
of the utility as may be considered  appropriate including the appointment of Administrators;  
(e) The Administrator appointed under clause ( d) shall exercise such  powers and discharge such  
functions as the Appropriate  Commission may direct.  
(2) Where a utility is sold under sub -section ( 1), the purchaser shall pay to the  licensee the purchase 
price of the utility in suc h manner as may be agreed upon.  
(3) Where the Appropriate Commission issues any notice under sub -section  (1) requiring the licensee 
to sell the utility, it may, by such notice, require the  licensee to deliver the utility, and thereupon the 
licensee shall deliver on a date  specified in the notice, the utility to the designated purchaser on payment 
of the  purchase price thereof.  
(4) Where the licensee has delivered the utility referred to in sub -section  (3) to the purchaser but its 
sale has not been complete d by the date fixed in the  notice issued under that sub -section, the Appropriate 
Commission may, if it  deems fit, permit the intending purchaser to operate and maintain the utility  system 
pending the completion of the sale.  
21. Vesting of utility i n purchaser. –Where a utility is sold under section 20 or section 24, then, upon  
completion of the sale or on the date on which the utility is delivered to the  intending purchaser, as the 
case may be, whichever is earlier – 
(a) the utility shall vest in the purchaser or the intending purchaser, as  the case may be, free from 
any debt, mortgage or similar obligation  of the licensee or attaching to the utility:  
Provided that any such debt, mortgage or similar obligation shall attach to  the purchase money in 
substitution for the utility; and  22 
 (b) the rights, powers, authorities, duties and obligations of the licensee  under his licence shall 
stand transferred to the purchaser and such  purchaser shall be deemed to be the licensee.  
22. Provisions where no purchase takes place .–(1) If the utility  is not sold in the manner provided 
under section 20 or section 24, the  Appropriate Commission may, to protect the interest of consumers or 
in the  public interest, issue such directions or formulate such scheme as it may deem  necessary for 
operation of the utility.  
(2) Where no directions are issued or scheme is formulated by the  Appropriate Commission under 
sub-section (1), the licensee referred to in section  20 or section 24 may dispose of the utility in such 
manner as it ma y deem fit:  
Provided that, if the licensee does not dispose of the utility, within a  period of six months from the 
date of revocation, under section 20 or section 24,  the Appropriate Commission may cause the works of 
the licensee in, under,  over, along, or  across any street or public land to be removed and every such  street 
or public land to be reinstated, and recover the cost of such removal and  reinstatement from the licensee.  
23. Directions to licensees .–If the Appropriate Commission is of the opinion that it is necessary or  
expedient so to do for maintaining the efficient supply, securing the equitable  distribution of electricity 
and promoting competition, it may, by order, provide  for regulating supply, distribution, consumption or 
use thereof.  
24. Suspension of distribution licence and sale of utility .–(1) If at  any time the Appropriate 
Commission is of the opinion that a distribution  licensee – 
(a) has persistently failed to maintain uninterrupted supply of  electricity conforming to standards 
regarding quality of  electricity to the consumers; or  
(b) is unable to discharge the functions or perform the duties  imposed on it by or under the 
provisions of this Act; or  
(c) has persistently defaulted in complying with any direction  given by the Appropriate 
Commission under this Act; or  
(d) has broken the terms and conditions of licence,   
and circumstances exist which render it necessary for it in public interest so to  do, the Appropriate 
Commission may, for reasons to be recorded in writing,  suspend, for a period not exceeding one year, 
the licence of the distribution  licensee and appoint an Administrator to discharge the functions of the  
distribution licensee in accordance with the terms and conditions of the licence:  
Provided that before suspending a licence under this section, the  Appropriate Commission shall 
give a reasonable opportunity to the distribution  licensee to make representations against the proposed 
suspension of licen ce and shall consider the representations, if any, of the distribution licensee.  
(2) Upon suspension of licenc e under sub -section ( 1), the utilities of the  distribution licensee shall 
vest in the Administrator for a period not exceeding  one year or up to the date on which such utility is 
sold in accordance  with the  provisions contained in section 20, whichever is later.  
(3) The Appropriate Commission shall, within one year of appointment of  the Administrator 
under sub -section ( 1), either revoke the licence in accordance  with the provisions contained in      
section 19 or revoke suspension of the licence  and restore the utility to the distribution licensee whose 
licence had been  suspended, as the case may be.  
(4) In a case where the Appropriate Commission revokes the licence under  sub-section ( 3), the 
utility of the distribution licensee shall be sold within a  period of one year from the date of revocation 
of the licence in accordance with  the provisions of section 20 and the price after deducting the 
administrative and  other expenses on sale of utiliti es be remitted to the distribution licensee.  23 
   PART V  
TRANSMISSION OF ELECTRICITY  
Inter -State transmission  
25. Inter -State, regional and inter -regional transmission .–For the purposes of this Part, the Central 
Government may, make region -wise demarcation of  the country, and, from time to time, make such  
modifications therein as it may consider necessary for the efficient, economical  and integrated 
transmission and supply of electricity, and in particular to  facilitate voluntary inter -connections and        
co-ordinat ion of facilities for the inter -State, regional and inter -regional generation and transmission of 
electricity.  
26. National Load Despatch Centre .–(1) The Central Government  may establish a Centre at the 
national level, to be known as the National Load  Despatch Centre for optimum scheduling and despatch 
of electricity among the  Regional Load Despatch Centres.  
(2) The constitution and functions of the National Load Despatch Centre shall  be such as may be 
prescribed by the Central Government:  
Provided that the National Load Despatch Centre shall not engage in  the business of trading in 
electricity.  
(3) The National Load Despatch Centre shall be operated by a Government  company or any authority 
or corporation established or constituted by or  under any Central Act, as may be notified by the Central 
Government.  
27. Constitution of Regional Load Despatch Centre .–(1) The Central Government shall establish a 
Centre for each region to be  known as the Regional Load Despatch Centre having terri torial jurisdiction 
as determined by the Central Government in accordance with section 25 for the  purposes of exercising the 
powers and discharging the functions under this Part.  
(2) The Regional Load Despatch Centre shall be operated by a Government  compa ny or any authority 
or corporation established or constituted by or  under any Central Act, as may be notified by the Central 
Government:  
Provided that until a Government company or authority or corporation  referred to in this sub -section 
is notified by the  Central Government, the  Central Transmission Utility shall operate the Regional Load 
Despatch Centre:  
Provided further that no Regional Load Despatch Centre shall engage in  the business of generation of 
electricity or trading in electricity.  
28. Functions  of Regional Load Despatch Centre .–(1) The Regional  Load Despatch Centre shall be 
the apex body to ensure integrated operation of  the power system in the concerned region.  
(2) The Regional Load Despatch Centre shall comply with such principles,  guidelines and 
methodologies in respect of wheeling and optimum  scheduling and despatch of electricity as the Central 
Commission may specify in  the Grid Code.  
(3) The Regional Load  Despatch Centre shall – 
(a) be responsible for optimum scheduling and despatch of electricity  within the region, in 
accordance with the contracts entered into  with the licensees or the generating companies operating in 
the region;  
(b) monitor grid operations;  
(c) keep accounts of quantity of electricity transmitted through the  regional grid;  
(d) exercise supervision and control over the inter -State transmission  system; and  24 
 (e) be responsible for carrying out real time operations for grid  control and despatch of electricity 
within the region through  secure and economic operation of the re gional grid in accordance  with the 
Grid Standards and the Grid Code.  
(4) The Regional Load Despatch Centre may levy and collect such fee and  charges from the 
generating companies or licensees engaged in inter -State  transmission of electricity as may be spe cified 
by the Central Commission.  
29. Compliance of directions .–(1) The Regional Load Despatch  Centre may give such directions and 
exercise such supervision and control as  may be required for ensuring stability of grid operations and for 
achieving the  maxi mum economy and efficiency in the operation of the power system in the  region under 
its control.  
(2) Every licensee, generating company, generating station, sub -station and  any other person 
connected with the operation of the power system shall comply  with the directions issued by the Regional 
Load Despatch Centres under sub -section  (1). 
(3) All directions issued by the Regional Load Despatch Centres to any  transmission licensee of State 
transmission lines or any other licensee of the  State or generating company (othe r than those connected to 
inter-State  transmission system) or sub -station in the State shall be issued through the State  Load 
Despatch Centre and the State Load Despatch Centres shall ensure that  such directions are duly complied 
with by the licensee or generating company or  sub-station.  
(4) The Regional Power Committee in the region may, from time to time,  agree on matters 
concerning the stability and smooth operation of the integrated  grid and economy and efficiency in the 
operation of the po wer system in that  region.  
(5) If any dispute arises with reference to the quality of electricity or safe,  secure and integrated 
operation of the regional grid or in relation to any  direction given under sub -section ( 1), it shall be 
referred to the Central  Commission for decision : 
Provided that pending the decision of the Central Commission, the  directions of the Regional Load 
Despatch Centre shall be complied with by the  State Load Despatch Centre or the licensee or the 
generating company, as the  case may be. 
(6) If any licensee, generating company or any other person fails to comply  with the directions issued 
under sub -section ( 2) or sub -section ( 3), he shall be  liable to a penalty not exceeding rupees fifteen lacs.  
Intra -State transmission  
30. Transmission within a State. –The State Commission shall facilitate and promote transmission, 
wheeling  and inter -connection arrangements within its territorial jurisdiction for the  transmission and 
supply of electricity by economical and efficient utilisati on of  the electricity.  
31. Constitution of State Load Despatch Centres .–(1) The State  Government shall establish a 
Centre to be known as the State Load Despatch  Centre for the purposes of exercising the powers and 
discharging the functions  under this Part.  
(2) The State Load Despatch Centre shall be operated by a Government  company or any authority or 
corporation established or constituted by or  under any State Act, as may be notified by the State 
Government:  
Provided that until a Government company or any authority or  corporation is notified by the State 
Government, the State Transmission  Utility shall operate the State Load Despatch Centre:  
Provided further that no State Load Despatch Centre shall engage in the  business of trading in 
electricity.  25 
 32. Funct ions of State Load Despatch Centres .–(1) The State  Load Despatch Centre shall be the 
apex body to ensure integrated operation of  the power system in a State.  
(2) The State Load Desp atch Centre shall – 
(a) be responsible for optimum scheduling and despatch of electricity  within a State, in 
accordance with the contracts entered into with  the licensees or the generating companies operating in 
that State;  
(b) monitor grid operations;  
(c) keep accounts of the quantity of electricity transmitted through  the State  grid;  
(d) exercise supervision and control over the intra -State transmission  system; and  
(e) be responsible for carrying out real time operations for grid control  and despatch of electricity 
within the State through secure and  economic operation of the St ate grid in accordance with the Grid  
Standards and the State Grid Code.  
(3) The State Load Despatch Centre may levy and collect such fee and charges  from the generating 
companies and licensees engaged in intra -State  transmission of electricity as may be sp ecified by the 
State Commission.  
33. C ompliance of directions. –(1) The State Load Despatch Centre  in a State may give such 
directions and exercise such supervision and control as  may be required for ensuring the integrated grid 
operations and for achieving  the maximum economy and efficiency in the operation of power system in 
that State.  
(2) Every licensee, generating company, generating station, sub -station and  any other person 
connected with the operation of the power system shall comply  with the directio ns issued by the State 
Load Depatch Centre under sub -section  (1). 
(3) The State Load Despatch Centre shall comply with the directions of the  Regional Load Despatch 
Centre.  
(4) If any dispute arises with reference to the quality of electricity or safe,  secure and integrated 
operation of the State grid or in relation to any direction  given under sub -section ( 1), it shall be referred to 
the State Commission for  decision:  
Provided that pending the decision of the State Commission, the  directions of the Stat e Load 
Despatch Centre shall be complied with by the  licensee or generating company.  
(5) If any licensee, generating company or any other person fails to comply  with the directions issued 
under sub -section  (1), he shall be liable to a penalty  not exceeding  rupees five lacs.  
Other provisions relating to transmission  
34. Grid Standards .–Every transmission licensee shall comply with such technical  standards, of 
operation and maintenance of transmission lines, in accordance  with the Grid Standards, as may be 
specified by the Authority.  
35. Intervening transmission facilities .–The Appropriate Commission may, on an application by 
any licensee, by  order require any other licensee owning or operating intervening transmission  facilities to 
provide the use of such f acilities to the extent of surplus capacity  available with such licensee:  
Provided that any dispute, regarding the extent of surplus capacity  available with the licensee, shall be 
adjudicated upon by the Appropriate  Commission.  26 
 36. Charges for intervening transmission facilities .–(1) Every  licensee shall, on an order made 
under section 35, provide his intervening  transmission facilities at rates, charges and terms and conditions 
as may be  mutually agreed upon : 
Provided that the Appropriate Commission may specify rates, charges  and terms and conditions if 
these cannot be mutually agreed upon by the  licensees.  
(2) The rates, charges and terms and conditions referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be fair and 
reasonable, and may be allocated in proportion to the  use of  such facilities.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of section s 35 and 36, the expression  “intervening transmission 
facilities ” means the electric lines owned or operated  by a licensee where such electric lines can be 
utilised for transmitting  electricity for and on behalf of another licensee at his request and on payment  of a 
tariff or charge.  
37. Directions by Appropriate Government .–The Appropriate Government may issue directions to 
the Regional Load  Despatch Centres or State Load Despatch Ce ntres, as the case may be, to take  such 
measures as may be necessary for maintaining smooth and stable  transmission and supply of electricity to 
any region or State.  
38. Central Transmission Utility and functions .–(1) The Central  Government may notify any 
Government company as the Central Transmission  Utility:  
Provided that the Central Transmission Utility shall not engage in the  business of generation of 
electricity or trading in electricity:  
Provided further that the Central Government may transfer, and v est any  property, interest in 
property, rights and liabilities connected with, and  personnel involved in transmission of electricity of 
such Central Transmission  Utility, to a company or companies to be incorporated under the Companies 
Act, 1956 (1 of 1956 ) to function as a transmission licensee, through a transfer scheme to be  effected in 
the manner specified under Part XIII and such company or companies  shall be deemed to be transmission 
licensees under this Act.  
(2) The functions of the Central  Transmiss ion Utility shall be – 
(a) to undertake transmission of electricity through inter -State  transmission system;  
(b) to discharge all functions of planning and co -ordination relating  to inter -State transmission 
system with – 
(i) State Transmission Utilities;  
(ii) Central Government;  
(iii) State Governments;  
(iv) generating companies;  
(v) Regional Power Committees;  
(vi) Authority;  
(vii) licensees;  
(viii) any other person notified by the Central Government in this  behalf;  
(c) to ensure development of an efficient, co-ordinated and  economical system of inter -State 
transmission lines for smooth  flow of electricity from generating stations to the load centres;  
(d) to provide non -discriminatory open access to its transmission  system for use by – 
(i) any licensee or generating company on payment of the  transmission charges; or  27 
 (ii) any consumer as and when such open access is provided by  the State Commission under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 42, on  payment of the transmission charges and a surcharge  thereon, as 
may be specified by the Central Commission:  
Provided that such surcharge shall be utilised for the purpose of meeting  the requirement of 
current level cross -subsidy:  
Provided further that such surcharge and cross subsidies shall be  progressively reduced 1*** in 
the manner as may be specified by the Central  Commission:  
2*  *   *   *   * 
Provided also that the manner of payment and utilisation of the  surcharge shall be specified by the 
Central Commission:  
Provided also that such surcharge shall not be leviable in c ase open  access is provided to a person 
who has established a captive generating plant  for carrying the electricity to the destination of his own 
use. 
39. State Transmission Utility and functions .–(1) The State Government may notify the Board or a 
Government company as  the State Transmission Utility:  
Provided that the State Transmission Utility shall not engage in the  business of trading in electricity:  
Provided further that the State Government may transfer, and vest any  property, interest in prope rty, 
rights and liabilities connected with, and  personnel involved in transmission of electricity, of such State 
Transmission  Utility, to a company or companies to be incorporated under the Companies Act,  1956         
(1 of 1956) to function as transmissio n licensee through a transfer scheme to be effected  in the manner 
specified under Part XIII and such company or companies shall be  deemed to be transmission licensees 
under this Act.  
(2) The functions of the State  Transmission Utility shall be – 
(a) to undertake transmission of electricity through intra -State  transmission system;  
(b) to discharge all functions of planning and co -ordination relating to  intra-State transmission 
system with – 
(i) Central Transmission Utility;  
(ii) State Governments;  
(iii) generating companies;  
(iv) Regional Power Committees;  
(v) Authority;  
(vi) licensees;  
(vii) any other person notified by the State Government in  this behalf;  
(c) to ensure development of an efficient, co -ordinated and  economical system of intra -State 
transmission lines for smooth flow  of electricity from a generating station to the load cent ers; 
(d) to provide non -discriminatory open access to its transmission  system for use by– 
(i) any licensee or generating company on payment of the  transmission charges ; or 
                                                             
1. The words “and eliminated ” omitted by Act 26 of 2007, s. 4 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
2. The t hird proviso omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  28 
 (ii) any consumer as and when such open access is provided by the  State Commission under   
sub-section ( 2) of section 42, on  payment of the transmission charges and a surcharge thereon,  as 
may be specified by the State Commission:  
Provided that  such surcharge shall be utilised for the purpose of  meeting the requirement of 
current level cross -subsidy:  
Provided further that such surcharge and cross subsidies shall be  progressively reduced 1*** 
in the manner as may be specified by the State  Commission:  
2*   *   *   *  * 
Provided also that the manner of payment and utilisation of the  surcharge shall be specified by the 
State Commission:  
Provided also that such surcharge shall not be leviable in case open  access is provided to a person 
who has established a captive generating plant  for carrying the electricity to the destination of his own 
use. 
40. Duties of transmission licensees .–It shall be the duty of a transmission licensee – 
(a) to build, maintain and operate an efficient, co -ordinated and  economical inter -State 
transmission system or intra -State  transmission system, as the case may be;  
(b) to comply with the directions of the Regional Load Despatch  Centre and the State Load 
Despatch Centre as the case may be;  
(c) to provide non -discriminato ry open access to its transmission  system for use by – 
(i) any licensee or generating company on payment of the  transmission charges; or  
(ii) any consumer as and when such open access is provided by  the State Commission under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 42, on payment of the transmission charges and a surcharge thereon, as  
may be specified by the State Commission:  
Provided that such surcharge shall be utilised for the purpose of  meeting the requirement of current 
level cross -subsidy:  
Provided further that suc h surcharge and cross subsidies shall be  progressively reduced 3*** in the 
manner as may be specified by the  Appropriate Commission:  
  
                                                             
1. The words “and eliminated ” omitted by Act 26 of 2007, s. 5 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
2. The third proviso omitted by s. 5, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
3. The words “and eliminated ” omitted  by s. 6,  ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
 
 
 
 
 29 
 1*   *   *   *   * 
Provided also that the manner of payment and utilisation of the  surcharge shall be specified by the 
Appropriate Commission:  
 Provided also that such surcharge shall not be leviable in case open  access is provided to a person 
who has established a captive generating plant  for carrying the electricity to the destination of his own 
use. 
41. Other business of transmission licensee .–A transmission licensee may, with prior intimation to 
the Appropriate  Commission , engage in any business for optimum utilisation of its assets:  
Provided that a proportion of the revenues derived from such business  shall, as may be  specified by 
the Appropriate Commission, be utilised for  reducing its charges for transmission and wheeling:  
Provided further that the transmission licensee shall maintain separate  accounts for each such 
business undertaking to ensure that transmission  business neither subsidises in any way such business 
undertaking nor  encumbers its transmission assets in any way to support such business:  
Provided also that no transmission licensee shall enter into any contract  or otherwise engage in the 
business of trading in electricity . 
PART VI  
DISTRIBUTION OF  ELECTRICITY  
Provisions with respect to distribution licensee s 
42. Duties of distribution licensee and open access .–(1) It shall be the duty of a distribution licensee 
to develop and maintain an efficient,  co-ordinated and economical distribution system in his area of 
supply and to  supply electricity in accordance with the provisions contained in this Act.  
(2) The State Commission shall introduce open access in such phases and  subject to such conditions, 
(including the cross subsidies, and other operational  constraints) as may be specified within one year of 
the appointed date by it and  in specifying the extent of open access in successive phases and in 
determining  the charges for wheeling, it shall have due regard to all relevant factors including  such cross 
subsidies, and other operational constraints:  
Provided that 2[such open access shall be allowed on payment of a  surcharge] in addition to the 
charges for wheeling as may be determined by the  State Commiss ion: 
Provided further that such surcharge shall be utilised to meet the  requirements of current level of 
cross subsidy within the area of supply of the  distribution licensee : 
Provided also that such surcharge and cross subsidies shall be  progressively reduced 3*** in the 
manner as may be specified by the State  Commission:  
Provided also that such surcharge shall not be leviable in case open access  is provided to a person 
who has established a captive generating plant for  carrying the electr icity to the destination of his own 
use: 
                                                             
1. The Third proviso omitted by Act 26 of 2007, s. 6 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
2. Subs. by s.7, ibid., for “such open access may be allowed before the cross subsidies are eliminated on payment of a surcharge ” 
(w.e.f. 15 -6-2007) . 
3. The words “and eliminated ” omitted by s . 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007 ). 
 30 
 1[Provided also that the State Commission shall, not later than five years  from the date of 
commencement of the Electricity (Amendment) Act, 2003  (57 of 2003) , by regulations, provide such 
open access to all consum ers who require a supply of  electricity where the maximum power to be made 
available at any time exceeds  one megawatt.]  
 (3) Where any person, whose premises are situated within the area of supply  of a distribution 
licensee, (not being a local authority engaged in the business of  distribution of electricity before the 
appointed date) requires a supply of  electricity from a generating company or any licensee other than such  
distribution licensee, such person may, by notice, require the distribution  license e for wheeling such 
electricity in accordance with regulations made by the  State Commission and the duties of the distribution 
licensee with respect to such  supply shall be of a common carrier providing  non-discriminatory open 
access . 
(4) Where the State Commission permits a consumer or class of consumers to  receive supply of 
electricity from a person other than the distribution licensee of  his area of supply, such consumer shall be 
liable to pay an additional surcharge  on the charges of wheeling, as may b e specified by the State 
Commission, to meet  the fixed cost of such distribution licensee arising out of his obligation to supply.  
(5) Every distribution licensee shall, within six months from the appointed date  or date of grant of 
licence, whichever is earlier, establish a forum for redressal of  grievances of the consumers in accordance 
with the guidelines as may be  specified by the State Commission.  
(6) Any consumer, who is aggrieved by non -redressal of his grievances under  sub-section ( 5), may 
make a r epresentation for the redressal of his grievance to  an authority to be known as Ombudsman to be 
appointed or designated by the  State Commission.  
(7) The Ombudsman shall settle the grievance of the consumer within such  time and in such manner 
as may be spec ified by the State Commission.  
(8) The provisions of sub -sections ( 5), (6) and ( 7) shall be without prejudice to  right which the 
consumer may have apart from the rights conferred upon him by  those sub -sections.  
43. Duty to supply on request .–(1) 2[Save as otherwise provided in  this Act, every distribution] 
licensee, shall, on an application by the owner or  occupier of any premises, give supply of electricity to 
such premises, within one  month after receipt of the application requiring such supply:  
Provided that where such supply requires extension of distribution mains,  or commissioning of new 
sub-stations, the distribution licensee shall supply the  electricity to such premises immediately after such 
extension or commissioning  or within such period as may be  specified by the Appropriate Commission:  
Provided further that in case of a village or hamlet or area wherein no  provision for supply of 
electricity exists, the Appropriate Commission may  extend the said period as it may consider necessary 
for electrifica tion of such  village or hamlet or area.  
3[Explanation .–For the purposes of this sub -section, “application ” means  the application complete in 
all respects in the appropriate form, as required by  the distribution licensee, along with documents 
showing payment of necessary  charges and other compliances.]  
  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 2003, s. 3 (w.e.f. 27 -1-2004 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s . 8, for “Every distribution ” (w.e.f. 15 -6- 2007) . 
3. Ins. by  s. 8, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-6-2007).  
 
 
 31 
 (2) It shall be the duty of every distribution licensee to provide, if required,  electric plant or electric 
line for giving electric supply to the premises specified in  sub-section ( 1): 
Provided that n o person shall be entitled to demand, or to continue to  receive, from a licensee a 
supply of electricity for any premises having a separate  supply unless he has agreed with the licensee to 
pay to him such price as  determined by the Appropriate Commission.  
(3) If a distribution licensee fails to supply the electricity within the period  specified in                  
sub-section ( 1), he shall be liable to a penalty which may extend to  one thousand rupees for each day of 
default.  
44. Exceptions from duty to supply electricity .–Nothing contained in section 43 shall be taken as 
requiring a distribution  licensee to give supply of electricity to any premises if he is prevented from so  
doing by cyclone, floods, storms or other occurrences beyond his control.  
45. P ower to recover charges .–(1) Subject to the provisions of this  section, the prices to be charged 
by a distribution licensee for the supply of  electricity by him in pursuance of section 43 shall be in 
accordance with such  tariffs fixed from time to time and  conditions of his licence.  
(2) The charges for electricity supplied by a  distribution licensee shall be – 
(a) fixed in accordance with the methods and the principles as may  be specified by  the concerned 
State Commission ; 
(b) published in such manner so as to give adequate publicity for such  charges and prices.  
(3) The charges for electricity supplied by a distribution licensee may include –  
(a) a fixed charge in addition to the charge for the actual electricity supplied;  
(b) a rent or other charges in respect of any electric meter or electrical  plant provided by the 
distribution licensee.  
(4) Subject to the provisions of section 62, in fixing charges under this section  a distribution licensee 
shall not show undue preference to any person or class of  persons or discrimination against any person or 
class of persons.  
(5) The charges fixed by the distribution licensee shall be in accordance with  the provisions of this 
Act and the regulations made in this behalf by the  concerned State Commission.  
46. Power to  recover expenditure .–The State Commission may, by regulations, authorise a 
distribution  licensee to charge from a person requiring a supply of electricity in pursuance of  section 43 
any expenses reasonably incurred in providing any electric line or  electr ical plant used for the purpose of 
giving that supply.  
47. Power to require security .–(1) Subject to the provisions of this  section, a distribution licensee 
may require any person, who requires a supply of  electricity in pursuance of section 43, to give hi m 
reasonable security, as may be  determined by regulations, for the payment to him of all monies which 
may become due to him – 
(a) in respect of the electricity supplied to such persons; or  
(b) where any electric line or electrical plant or electric meter is to be  provided for supplying 
electricity to such person, in respect of the  provision of such line or plant or meter,  
and if that person fails to give such security, the distribution licensee may,  if he thinks fit, refuse to give 
the supply of electricit y or to provide the  line or plant or meter for the period during which the failure 
continues.  
(2) Where any person has not given such security as is mentioned in sub -section  (1) or the security 
given by any person has become invalid or  insufficient, the distribution licensee may, by notice, require 
that person, within  thirty days after the service of the notice, to give him reasonable security for the  32 
 payment of all monies which may become due to him in respect of the supply of  electricity or provision 
of such line or plant or meter.  
(3) If the person referred to in sub -section ( 2) fails to give such security, the  distribution licensee may, 
if he thinks fit, discontinue the supply of electricity  for the period during which the failure continues.  
(4) The di stribution licensee shall pay interest equivalent to the bank rate or  more, as may be 
specified by the concerned State Commission, on the security  referred to in sub -section ( 1) and refund 
such security on the request of the  person who gave such security.  
(5) A distribution licensee shall not be entitled to require security in  pursuance of clause ( a) of      
sub-section ( 1) if the person requiring the supply is  prepared to take the supply through a pre -payment 
meter.  
48. Additional terms of supply .–A distribution licensee may require any person who requires a 
supply of  electricity in pursuance of section 43 to accept – 
(a) any restrictions which may be imposed for the purpose of enabling  the distribution licensee to 
comply with the regulations made  under section 53;  
(b) any terms restricting any liability of the distribution licensee for  economic loss resulting from 
negligence of the person to whom the  electricity is supplied.  
49. Agreement s with respect to supply or purchase of electricity .–Where th e Appropriate 
Commission has allowed open access to certain  consumers under section 42, such consumers, 
notwithstanding the provisions  contained in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) of section 62, may enter into an  
agreement with any person for supply or purchase of electricity on such terms  and conditions (including 
tariff) as may be agreed upon by them.  
1[50. The Electricity supply code.–The State Commission shall specify an electricity supply code to 
provide  for recovery of electricity charges, intervals for billing of electricity charges,  disconnection of 
supply of electricity for non -payment thereof, restoration of  supply of electricity,  measures for preventing 
tampering, distress or damage to  electrical plant  or electrical line or meter, entry  of distribution licensee 
or any  person acting on his behalf for disconnectin g supply and removing the meter,  entry for replacing, 
altering or maintaining electric lines or electrical plants or  meter and such other matters.]  
51. Other businesses of distrib ution licensees .–A distribution licensee may, with prior intimation to 
the Appropriate  Commission, engage in any other business for optimum utilisation of its assets:   
Provided that a proportion of the revenues derived from such business  shall, as may be s pecified by 
the concerned State Commission, be utilised for  reducing its charges for wheeling : 
Provided further that the distribution licensee shall maintain separate  accounts for each such business 
undertaking to ensure that distribution  business neither subsidises in any way such business undertaking 
nor encumbers its distribution assets in a ny way to support such business:  
Provided also that nothing contained in this section shall apply to a local  authority engaged, before 
the commencement of this Act, i n the business of  distribution of electricity.  
Provisions with respect to electricity traders  
52. Provisions with respect to electricity trader .–(1) Without  prejudice to the provisions contained 
in clause ( c) of section 12, the Appropriate  Commission may, specify the technical requirement, capital 
adequacy  requirement and credit  worthiness for being an electricity trader.  
(2) Every electricity trader shall discharge such duties, in relation to supply  and trading in electricity, 
as may be specified by the Ap propriate Commission.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s . 9, for section 50 ( w.e.f. 15 -6-2007) . 33 
 Provisions with respect to supply generally  
53. Provision  relating to safety and electricity supply .–The Authority may , in consultation with the 
State Government, specify  suitable measures for – 
(a) protecting the public (including the  persons engaged in the  generation, transmission or 
distribution or trading) from dangers  arising from the generation, transmission or distribution or 
trading  of electricity, or use of electricity supplied or installation,  maintenance or use of any electric 
line or electrical plant;  
(b) eliminating or reducing the risks of personal injury to any person,  or damage to property of 
any person or interference with use of  such property ; 
(c) prohibiting the supply or transmission of electricity except by  means of a system which 
conforms to the specification as may be  specified;  
(d) giving notice in the specified form to the Appropriate  Commission and the Electrical 
Inspector, of accidents and failures  of supplies or transmissions of electricity;  
(e) keeping by a generating company or licensee the maps, plans  and sections relating to supply 
or transmission of electricity;  
(f) inspection of maps, plans and sections by any person authorised by  it or by Electrical Inspector 
or by any person on payment of  specifie d fee;  
(g) specifying action to be taken in relation to any electric line or  electrical plant, or any electrical 
appliance under the control of a  consumer for the purpose of eliminating or reducing the risk of  
personal injury or damage to property or inter ference with its use.  
54. Control of transmission and use of electricity .–(1) Save as  otherwise exempted under this Act, 
no person other than the Central  Transmission Utility or a State Transmission Utility, or a licensee shall 
transmit  or use electricity at a rate exceeding two hundred and fifty watts and one  hundred volts – 
(a) in any street, or  
(b) in any place, – 
(i) in which one hundred or more persons are ordinarily likely  to be assembled; or  
(ii) which is a factory within the meaning of the Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 194 8) or a mine 
within the meaning of the Mines Act, 1952  (35 of 1952) ; or 
(iii) to which the State Government, by general or special order,  declares the provisions of 
this sub -section to apply,  
without giving, before the commencement of t ransmission or use of  electricity, not less than seven days ’ 
notice in writing of his intention to the  Electrical Inspector  and to the District Magistrate  or the 
Commissioner of  Police, as the case may be, containing particulars of the electrical installation  and plant, 
if any, the nature and the purpose of supply and complying with  such of the provisions of Part XVII of 
this Act, as may be applicable:  
Provided that nothing in this section shall apply to electricity used for  the public carriage of 
passengers, animals or goods, on, or for the lighting or  ventilation of the rolling stock of any railway or 
tramway subject to the  provisions of the Railways Act, 1989  (24 of 1989) . 
(2) Where any difference or dispute arises as to whether a place is or is not one in which one hundred 
or more persons are ordinarily likely to be  assembled, the matter shall be referred to the State 
Government, and the  decision of the State Government thereon shall be final.  
(3) The provisions of this section shall be binding o n the Government.  
55. Use, etc., of meters .–(1) No licensee shall supply electricity, after  the expiry of two years from 
the appointed date, except through installation of a  correct meter in accordance with the regulations to be 
made in this behalf by the  Authority:  34 
 Provided that the licensee may require the consumer to give him security  for the price of a meter and 
enter into an agreement for the hire thereof, unless  the consumer elects to purchase a meter:  
Provided further that the State Commission may, b y notification, extend  the said period of two years 
for a class or classes of persons or for such area as  may be specified in that notification.  
(2) For proper accounting and audit in the generation, transmission and  distribution or trading of 
electricity,  the Authority may direct the installation of  meters by a generating company or licensee at such 
stages of generation,  transmission or distribution or trading of electricity and at such locations of  
generation, transmission or distribution or trading , as it may deem necessary.  
(3) If a person makes default in complying with the provisions contained in  this section or the 
regulations made under sub -section ( 1), the Appropriate  Commission may make such order as it thinks fit 
for requiring the default to be  made good by the generating company or licensee or by any officers of a  
company or other association or any other person who is responsible for its  default.  
56. Disconnection of supply in default of payment .–(1) Where any  person neglects to pay any 
charge for electricity or any sum other than a charge  for electricity due from him to a licensee or the 
generating company in respect of  supply, transmission or distribution or wheeling of electricity to him, 
the licensee or the generating company may, after givi ng not less than fifteen clear  days’ notice in 
writing, to such person and without prejudice to his rights to  recover such charge or other sum by suit, cut 
off the supply of electricity and for  that purpose cut or disconnect any electric supply line or oth er works 
being the  property of such licensee or the generating company through which electricity  may have been 
supplied, transmitted, distributed or wheeled and may  discontinue the supply until such charge or other 
sum, together with any  expenses incurred by him in cutting off and reconnecting the supply, are paid,  but 
no longer:  
Provided that the supply of electricity shall not be cut off if such person  deposits, under protest, – 
(a) an amount equal to the sum claimed from him, or  
(b) the electricity charges due from him for each month calculated on  the basis of average charge 
for electricity paid by him during the  preceding six months,  
whichever is less, pending disposal of any dispute between him and the  licensee.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contain ed in any other law for the time being  in force, no sum due from 
any consumer, under this section shall be recoverable  after the period of two years from the date when 
such sum became first due  unless such sum has been shown continuously as recoverable as arrear of  
charges for electricity supplied and the licensee shall not cut off the supply of  the electricity.  
Consumer protection: Standards of performance  
57. Standards of performance of licensee .–(1) The Appropriate Commission may, after consultation 
with the licensees and  persons likely to be affected, specify standards of performance of a licensee or a  
class of licensees.  
(2) If a licensee fails to meet the standards specified under sub -section ( 1), without prejudice to any 
penalty which may be imposed o r prosecution be  initiated, he shall be liable to pay such compensation to 
the person affected as  may be determined by the Appropriate Commission:  
Provided that before determination of compensation, the concerned  licensee shall be given a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard.  
(3) The compensation determined under sub -section ( 2) shall be paid by the  concerned licensee 
within ninety days of such determination.  
58. Different standards of performance by licensee .–The Appropriate Commission may specify 
different standards under sub -section  (1) of section 57 for a class or classes of licensee s. 35 
 59. Information with respect to levels of performance .–(1) Every  licensee shall, within the period 
specified by the Appropriate Commission,  furnish to the Commission the  following information, 
namely: – 
(a) the level of performance achieved under sub -section ( 1) of section 57;  
(b) the number of cases in which compensation was made under sub -section  (2) of section 57 and 
the aggregate amount of the  compensation.  
(2) The Appropriate Commission shall at least once in every year arrange for  the publication, in such 
form and manner as it considers appropriate, of such of  the information furnished to it under                
sub-section ( 1). 
60. Market dom ination .–The Appropriate Commission may issue such directions as it considers  
appropriate to a licensee or a generating company if such licensee or generating  company enters into any 
agreement or abuses its dominant position or enters  into a combination which is likely to cause or causes 
an adverse effect on  competition in electricity industry.  
PART VII 
TARIFF  
61. Tariff regulations. –The Appropriate Commission shall, subject to the provisions of this Act,  
specify the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff, and in doing so,  shall be g uided by the 
following, namely: – 
(a) the principles and methodologies specified by the Central  Commission for determination of 
the tariff applicable to  generating companies and transmission licensees;  
(b) the generation, transmission, distribution and supply of electricity  are conducted on 
commercial principles;  
(c) the factors which would encourage competition, efficiency,  economical use of the resources, 
good performance and optimum  investments;  
(d) safe guarding of consumers' interest and at the same time, recovery  of the cost of electricity in 
a reasonable manner;  
(e) the principles rewarding efficiency in performance;  
(f) multi year tariff principles;  
1[(g) that the tariff progressively reflects the cost of supply of electricity  and also  reduces      
cross -subsidies in the manner specified by the  Appropriate Commission;]  
(h) the promotion of co -generation and generation of electricity from  renewable sources of 
energy;  
(i) the National Electricity Policy and tariff policy:  
Provided that the terms and conditions for determination of tariff under  the Electricity (Supply) Act, 
1948  (54 of 1948) , the Electricity Regulatory Commission Act,  1998 (14 of 1998) and the enactments 
specified in the Schedule as  they stood immediately  before the appointed date, shall continue to apply for 
a period of one year or  until the terms and conditions for tariff are specified under this section,  whichever 
is earlier.  
62. Determination of tariff .–(1) The Appropriate Commission  shall determine the tariff in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act for – 
(a) supply of electricity by a generating company to a distribution  licensee:  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s . 10, for clause ( g) (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007 ). 36 
 Provided that the Appropriate Commission may, in case of shortage of  supply of electricit y, fix 
the minimum and maximum ceiling of tariff for sale or  purchase of electricity in pursuance of an 
agreement, entered into between a  generating company and a licensee or between licensees, for a 
period not  exceeding one year to ensure reasonable price s of electricity;  
(b) transmission of electricity ; 
(c) wheeling of electricity;  
(d) retail sale of electricity:  
Provided that in case of distribution of electricity in the same area by two  or more distribution 
licensees, the Appropriate Commission may, for  promoting  competition among distribution licensees, fix 
only maximum ceiling of tariff for  retail sale of electricity.  
(2) The Appropriate Commission may require a licensee or a generating  company to furnish separate 
details, as may be specified in respec t of generation, transmission and distribution for determination of 
tariff.  
(3) The Appropriate Commission shall not, while determining the tariff under  this Act, show undue 
preference to any consumer of electricity but may  differentiate according to the c onsumer's load factor, 
power factor, voltage, total  consumption of electricity during any specified period or the time at which the  
supply is required or the geographical position of any area, the nature of supply  and the purpose for which 
the supply is re quired.  
(4) No tariff or part of any tariff may ordinarily be amended, more frequently  than once in any 
financial year, except in respect of any changes expressly  permitted under the terms of any fuel surcharge 
formula as may be specified.  
(5) The Commission may require a licensee or a generating company to  comply with such procedure  
as may be specified for calculating the expected  revenues from the tariff and charges which he or it is 
permitted to recover.  
(6) If any licensee or a generating compa ny recovers a price or charge  exceeding the tariff determined 
under this section, the excess amount shall be  recoverable by the person who has paid such price or 
charge along with interest  equivalent to the bank rate without prejudice to any other liabilit y incurred by  
the licensee.  
63. Determination of tariff by bidding process .–Notwithstanding anything contained in section 62, 
the Appropriate  Commission shall adopt the tariff if such tariff has been determined through  transparent 
process of bidding in accordance with the guidelines issued by the  Central Government.  
64. Procedure for tariff order .–(1) An application for determination  of tariff under section 62 shall 
be made by a generating company or licensee in  such manner and accompanied by such fee, a s may be 
determined by  regulations.  
(2) Every applicant shall publish the application, in such abridged form and  manner, as may be 
specified by the Appropriate Commission.  
(3) The Appropriate Commission shall, within one hundred and twenty days  from receipt of an 
application under sub -section ( 1) and after considering all  suggestions and objec tions received from the 
public, – 
(a) issue a tariff order accepting the application with such  modifications or such conditions as 
may be specified in that order;  
(b) reject the application for reasons to be recorded in writing if such  application is not in 
accordance with the provisions of this Act and  the rules and regulations made thereunder or the 
provisions of  any other law for the time being in force:  37 
 Provide d that an applicant shall be given a reasonable opportunity of  being heard before rejecting his 
application.  
(4) The Appropriate Commission shall, within seven days of making the  order, send a copy of the 
order to the Appropriate Government, the Authority,  and the concerned licensees and to the person 
concerned.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in P art X, the tariff for any inter -State supply, transmission or 
wheeling of electricity, as the case may be,  involving the territories of two States may, upo n application 
made to it by the  parties intending to undertake such supply, transmission or wheeling, be  determined 
under this section by the State Commission having jurisdiction in  respect of the licensee who intends to 
distribute electricity and make pay ment  therefor.  
(6) A tariff order shall, unless amended or revoked, continue to be in force  for such period as may be 
specified in the tariff order.  
65. Provision of subsidy by State Government. –If the State Government requires the grant of any 
subsidy to any consumer or class of consumers in the tariff determined by the State Commission  under 
section 62, the State Government shall, notwithstanding any direction  which may be given under        
section 108, pay, in advance and in such manner as  may be specif ied, the amount to compensate the 
person affected by the grant of  subsidy in the manner the State Commission may direct, as a condition for 
the licence or any other person concerned to implement the subsidy provided for by  the State 
Government:  
Provided th at no such direction of the State Government shall be  operative if the payment is not made 
in accordance with the provisions  contained in this section and the tariff fixed by the State Commission 
shall be  applicable from the date of issue of orders by the Commission in this regard.  
66. Development of market .–The Appropriate Commission shall endeavour to promote the  
development of a market (including trading) in power in such manner as may  be specified and shall be 
guided by the National Electricity Policy r eferred to in  section 3 in this regard.  
PART VIII  
WORKS  
Works of licensees  
67. Provision  as to openin g up of streets, railways, etc. –(1) A licensee may, from time to time but 
subject always to the terms and conditions of  his licence, within his area of supply or transmission or 
when permitted by the  terms of his licence to lay down or place electric supply lines without the area of  
supply, without tha t area carry out works such as – 
(a) to open and break up the soil and pavement of any street,  railway or tramway;  
(b) to open and break up any sewer, drain or tunnel in or under  any street, railway or tramway;  
(c) to alter the position of any line or works or pipes, other than  a main sewer pipe;  
(d) to lay down and place electric lines, electrical plant and  other works;  
(e) to repair, alter or remove the same;  
(f) to do all other acts necessary for transmission or supply of  electricity.  
(2) The Appropriate Government may, by rules made by it in this behalf,  specify, – 
(a) the cases and circumstances in which the consent in writing  of the a ppropriate Government, 
local authority, owner or  occupier, as the case may be, shall be required for carrying  out works;  
(b) the authority which may grant permission in the  circumstances where the owner or occupier 
objects to  the carrying out of works;  38 
 (c) the nature and period of notice to be given by the licensee  before carrying out works;  
(d) the procedure and manner of consideration of objections and  suggestion s received in 
accordance with the notice referred to  in clause (c); 
(e) the determination and payment of compensation or rent to  the persons affected by works 
under this section;  
(f) the repairs and works to be carried out when emergency  exists;  
(g) the right of the owner or occupier to carry out certain works  under this section and the 
payment of expenses therefor;  
(h) the procedure for carrying out other works near sewers,  pipes or other electric lines or works;  
(i) the procedure for alteration of the position of pipes, electric  lines, electrical plant, telegraph 
lines, sewer lines, tunnels,  drains, etc.;  
(j) the procedure for fencing, guarding, lighting and other  safety measures relating to works on 
streets, railways,  tramways, sewers, drains or tunnels and immediate  reinstatement thereof;  
(k) the avoidance of pub lic nuisance, environmental damage  and unnecessary damage to the 
public and private property  by such works;  
(l) the procedure for undertaking works which are not  reparable by the Appropriate Government, 
licensee or local  authority;  
(m) the manner of deposit of amount required for restoration of  any railways, tramways, 
waterways, etc.;  
(n) the manner of restoration of property affected by such works  and maintenance thereof;  
(o) the procedure for deposit of compensation payable by the  licensee and furni shing of        
security; and  
(p) such other matters as are incidental or consequential to the  construction and maintenance of 
works under this section.  
(3) A licensee shall, in exercise of any of the powers conferred by or under  this section and the rules  
made thereunder, cause as little damage, detriment  and inconvenience as may be, and shall make full 
compensation for any damage,  detriment or inconvenience caused by him or by any one employed by 
him. 
(4) Where any difference or dispute [including amount of compensation  under sub -section ( 3)] arises 
under this section, the matter shall be determined by  the Appropriate Commission.  
(5) The Appropriate Commission, while determining any difference or dispute  arising under this 
section in addition to any compen sation under sub -section ( 3), may impose a penalty not exceeding the 
amount of compensation payable under  that sub -section.  
Provisions relating to o verhead lines  
68. Overhead lines .–(1) An overhead line  shall, with prior approval of the Appropriate Government, 
be installed or kept  installed above ground in accordance with the provisions of sub -section ( 2). 
(2) The provisions contained in sub -section ( 1) shall not apply – 
(a) in relation to an electric line which has a nominal voltage not  exceeding 11 kilovolts and is 
used or intended to be used for  supplying to a single consumer;  
(b) in relation to so much of an electric line as is or will be within  premises in the occupation or 
control of the person responsible for  its installation; or  39 
 (c) in such other cases, as may be prescribed.  
(3) The Appropriate Government shall, while granting approval under sub -section  (1), impose such 
conditions (including conditions as to the ownership  and operation of the line) as appear to it to be 
necessary.  
(4) The App ropriate Government may vary or revoke the approval at any  time after the end of such 
period as may be stipulated in the approval granted by  it. 
 (5) Where any tree standing or lying near an overhead line or where any  structure or other object 
which has been placed or has fallen near an overhead  line subsequent to the placing of such line, 
interrupts or interferes with, or is  likely to interrupt or interfere with, the conveyance or transmission of 
electricity  or the accessibility of any works, an Executiv e Magistrate or authority specified  by the 
Appropriate Government may, on the application of the licensee, cause  the tree, structure or object to be 
removed or otherwise dealt with as he or it  thinks fit.  
(6) When disposing of an application under sub -section ( 5), an Executive  Magistrate or authority 
specified under that sub -section shall, in the case of any  tree in existence before the placing of the 
overhead line, award to the person  interested in the tree such compensation as he thinks reasonable, and 
such person may recover the same from the licensee.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, the expression “tree” shall be  deemed to include any 
shrub, hedge, jungle growth or other plant.  
69. Notice to telegraph authority .–(1) A licensee shall, before  laying down or placing, within ten 
meters of any telegraph line, electric line,  electrical plant or other works, not being either service lines, or 
electric lines or  electrical plant, for the repair, renewal or amendment of existing works of which  the 
character or  position is not to be altered, – 
(a) submit a proposal in case of a new installation to an authority to be  designated by the Central 
Government and such authority shall  take a decision on the proposal within thirty days;  
(b) give not less th an ten days' notice in writing to the telegraph  authority in case of  repair, 
renewal or amendment of  existing  works , specifying – 
(i) the course of th e works or alterations proposed ; 
(ii) the manner in whi ch the works are to be utilised ; 
(iii) the amount and nature of the electricity to be transmitted;  
(iv) the extent to, and the manner in which (if at all), earth  returns are to be used , 
and the licensee shall conform to such reasonable requirements,  either general or special, as may be laid 
down by the telegraph authority  within that period for preventing any telegraph line from being  
injuriously affected by such works or alterations:  
Provided that in case of emergency (which shall be stated by the licensee  in writing to the telegraph 
authority) arising from defects in any of the electric  lines or electrical plant or other works of the licensee, 
the licensee shall be  required to give only such notice as may be possible after the necessity for the  
proposed new works or alterations has arisen.  
(2) Where the  works of the laying or placing of any service line is to be  executed , the licensee shall, 
not less than forty -eight hours before commencing  the work, serve upon the telegraph authority a notice 
in writing of his intention  to execute such works.  
  40 
 PART IX  
CENTRAL  ELECTRICITY  AUTHORITY  
Constitution and functions of Authority  
70. Constitution, etc., of Central Electricity Authority .–(1) There  shall be a body to be called the 
Central Electricity Authority to exercise such functions  and perform such duties as are assigned to it 
under this Act.  
(2) The Central Electricity Authority, established under section 3 of the  Electricity (Supply) Act, 
1948 (54 of 1948) and functioning as such immediately before the  appointed date, shall be the Central 
Electricity Authority for the purposes of this  Act and the Chairperson , Members, Secretary and other 
officers and employees  thereof shall be deemed to have been appointed under this Act and they shall  
continue to hold office on the same terms and conditions on which t hey were  appointed under the 
Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948.  
(3) The Authority shall consist of not more than fourteen Members (including  its Chairperson) of 
whom not more than eight shall be full -time Members to be  appointed by the Central Government.  
(4) The Central Government may appoint any person, eligible to be  appointed as Member of the 
Authority, as the Chairperson of the Authority, or,  designate one of the full -time Members as the 
Chairperson of the Authority.  
(5) The Members of the Authority shall  be appointed from amongst persons of  ability, integrity and 
standing who have knowledge of, and adequate  experience and capacity in, dealing with problems 
relating to engineering,  finance, commerce, economics or industrial matters, and at least one Member  
shall be appointed from each of th e following categories, namely: – 
(a) engineering with specialisation in design, construction, operation  and maintenance of 
generating stations;  
(b) engineering with specialisation in transmission and supply of  electricity ; 
(c) applied research in the field of electricity;  
(d) applied economics, accounting, commerce or finance.  
(6) The Chairperson and all the Members of the Authority shall hold office  during the pleasure of the 
Central Government.  
(7) The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive of the Authority.  
(8) The headquarters of the Authority shall be at Delhi.  
(9) The Authority shall meet at the head office or any other place at such time  as the Chairperson may 
direct, and shall observe such rules of procedure in  regard to the transaction of business at its meetings 
(including the quorum at its  meetings) as it may specify.  
(10) The Chairperson, or if he is unable to attend a meeting of the Authority,  any other Member 
nominated by the Chairperson in this behalf and in the  absence of such nomination or where there is no 
Chairperson, any Member  chosen by the Members present from among themselves shall preside at the  
meeting.  
(11) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Authority shall be  decided by a majo rity 
of votes of the Members present and voting, and in the  event of an equality of votes, the Chairperson or 
the person presiding shall have  the right to exercise a second or casting vote.  
(12) All orders and decisions of the Authority shall be authentica ted by the  Secretary or any other 
officer of the Authority duly authorised by the  Chairperson in this behalf.  41 
 (13) No act or proceeding  of the Authority shall be questioned or shall be  invalidated merely on the 
ground of existence of any vacancy in, or any defect in,  the constitution of, the Authority.  
(14) The Chairperson of the Authority and other full -time Members shall  receive such salary and 
allowances as may be determined by the Central  Government and other Members shall receive such 
allowances and  fees for  attending the meetings of the Authority, as the Central Government may  
prescribe.  
(15) The other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and  Members of the Authority 
including, subject to the provisions of sub -section ( 6), their terms of office shall be such as the Central 
Government may prescribe.  
71. Members not to have certain interest .–No Member of the Authority shall have any share or 
interest, whether in  his own name or otherwise, in any company or other body corporate or an  association 
of person s (whether incorporated or not)  or a firm engaged in the  business of generation, transmission, 
distribution and trading of electricity or  fuel for the generation thereof or in the manufacture of electrical 
equipment.  
72. Officers and s taff of Authority .–The Authority may appoint a Secretary and such other officers 
and employees as it considers necessary for the performance of its functions under  this Act and on such 
terms as to salary, remuneration, fee, allowance, pension,  leave and gr atuity, as the authority may in 
consultation with the Central  Government, fix:  
Provided that the appointment of the Secretary shall be subject to the  approval of the Central 
Government.  
73. Functions and duties of Authority .–The Authority shall perform such functions and duties as 
the Central  Government may prescribe o r direct, and in particular to – 
(a) advise the Central Government on the matters relating to the  national electricity policy, 
formulate short -term and perspective  plans for development of t he electricity system and co -ordinate 
the activities of the planning agencies for the optimal utilisation of  resources to subserve the interests 
of the national economy and to  provide reliable and affordable electricity for all consumers;  
(b) specify the t echnical standards for construction of electrical plants,  electric lines and 
connectivity to the grid;  
(c) specify the safety requirements for construction, operation and  maintenance of electrical 
plants and electric lines;  
(d) specify the Grid Standards for operation and maintenance of  transmission lines;  
(e) specify the conditions for installation of meters for transmission  and supply of electricity;  
(f) promote and assist in the timely completion of schemes and projects  for improving and 
augmenting the electricity system;  
(g) promote measures for advancing the skill of persons engaged in the  electricity industry;  
(h) advise the Central Government on any matter on which its advice  is sought or make 
recommendation to that Government on any  matter if, in the opinion of the Authority, the 
recommendation  would help in improving the generation, transmission, trading,  distribution and 
utilisation of electricity;  
(i) collect and record the data concerning the generation, transmission,  trading, distribution and 
utilisation of electricity and carry out  studies relating to cost, efficiency, competitiveness and such 
like matters;  42 
 (j) make public from time to time the information secured under this  Act, and provide for the 
publication of reports and investigations;  
(k) promote research in matters affecting the generation, transmission,  distribution and trading of 
electricity;  
(l) carry out, or cause to be carried out , any investigation for the  purposes of generating or 
transmitting or distributing electricity;  
(m) advise any State Government, licensees or the generating  companies on such matters which 
shall enable them to operate and  maintain the electricity system under their ownership or control in  an 
improved manner and where necessary, in co -ordination with  any other Government, licensee or the 
generating company  owning or having the control of another electricity system;  
(n) advise the Appropriate Government and the Appropriate  Commission on all technical matters 
relating to generation,  transmission and distribution of electricity; and  
(o) discharge such other functions as may be provided under this Act.  
Certain powers and directions  
74. Power to require statistics and returns .–It shall be the duty of every licensee, generating 
company or person  generating electricity for its or his own use to furnish to the Authority such  statistics, 
returns or other information relating to generation, transmission,  distribution, trading and use of electricity 
as it may require and at such times  and in such form and manner as may be specified by the Authority.  
75. Directions by Central Government to Authority .–(1) In the  discharge of its functions, the 
Authority shall be guided by such directions in  matters of policy involving public interest as the Central 
Government may give  to it in writing.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction relates to a  matter of policy involving 
public interest, the decision of the Central  Government thereon shall be final.  
PART X  
REGULATORY  COMMISSIONS  
Constitution, powers and functions of Central Commission  
76. Constitution of Central Commission .–(1) There shall be a  Commission to be known as the 
Central Electricity Regulatory Commission to  exercise the powers conferred on, and discharge the 
functions a ssigned to it  under this Act.  
(2) The Central Electricity Regulatory Commission, established under section  3 of the Electricity 
Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998 (14 of 1998) and functioning as such  immediately before the 
appointed date, shall be deemed to be the Central  Commission for the purposes of this Act and the 
Chairperson, Members,  Secretary, and other officers and employees thereof shall be deemed to have  been 
appointed under this Act and they shall continue to hold office on the  same terms and cond itions on 
which they were appointed under the Electricity  Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998:  
Provided that the Chairperson and other Members of the Central  Commission appointed, before the 
commencement of this Act, under the  Electricity Regulatory Commissio ns Act, 1998  (14 of 1998) , may, 
on the recommendations of  the Selection Committee constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 78, be  
allowed, to opt for the terms and conditions under this Act by the Central  Government.  
(3) The Central Commission shall be  a body corporate by the name aforesaid,  having perpetual 
succession and a common seal with power to acquire, hold and  dispose of property, both movable and 
immovable, and to contract and shall, by  the said name, sue or be sued.  43 
 (4) The head office of the Central Commission shall be at such place as the  Central Government may, 
by notification, specify.  
(5) The Central Commission shall consist of the following Members, namely: – 
(a) a Chairperson and three other Members;  
(b) the Chairperson of the Authority w ho shall be the Member, ex officio . 
(6) The Chairperson and Members of the Central Commission shall be  appointed by the Central 
Government on the recommendation of the Selection  Committee referred to in section 78.  
77. Qualifications for appointment of Members of Central  Commission .–(1) The Chairperson and 
the Members of the Central  Commission shall be persons having adequate knowledge of, or experience 
in, or  shown capacity in, dealing with, problems relating to engineering, law,  economics, commerce, 
finance or  management and shall be appointed in the  following manner, namely: – 
(a) one person having qualifications and experience in the field of  engineering with specialisation 
in generation, transmission or  distribution of electricity;  
(b) one person having qualifications and experience in the field of  finance;  
(c) two persons having qualifications and experience in the field of  economics, commerce, law or 
management:  
Provided that not more than one Member shall be appointed under the  same category under 
clause ( c). 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central  Government may appoint any 
person as the Chairperson from amongst persons  who is, or has been, a Judge of the Supreme Court or the 
Chief Justice of a High  Court:  
Provi ded that no appointment under this sub -section shall be made except  after consultation with the 
Chief Justice of India.  
(3) The Chairperson or any other Member of the Central Commission shall  not hold any other office.  
(4) The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive of the Central Commission.  
78. Constitution of Selection Committee to recommend Members .–(1) The Central Government 
shall, for the purposes of selecting the Members of  the Appellate Tribunal and the Chairperson and 
Members of the Central  Commission, constitute a Selection Comm ittee consisting of – 
(a) Member of the Planning Commission  incharge of the energy sector …………  Chairperson;  
(b)  Secretary -in-charge of the Ministry of the Central Government  dealing with the Department  
of Legal Affairs ………… . Member;  
(c)  Chairperson of the Public Enterprises Selection Board …… .Member;  
(d) a person to be nominated by the Central Government  in accordance with                             
sub-section ( 2)…………………  Member;  
(e) a person to be nominated by  the Central Government  in accordance with                              
sub-section ( 3)……………… .. Member;  
(f) Secretary -in-charge of the Ministry of the Central  Gover nment dealing with 
power ………… .Member.  
(2) For the purposes of clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government  shall nominate from 
amongst persons holding the post of chairperson or  managing director, by whatever name called, of any 
public financial institution  specified in section 4A of the Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 44 
 (3) For the purposes of clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1), the Central Government  shall, by notification, 
nominate from amongst persons holding the post of  director or the head of the institution, by whatever 
name called, of any research,  technical or management instituti on for this purpose.  
(4) Secretary -in-charge of the Ministry of the Central Government dealing  with Power shall be the 
Convenor of the Selection Committee.  
(5) The Central Government shall, within one month from the date of  occurrence of any vacancy by 
reason of death, resignation or removal of a  Member of the Appellate Tribunal or the Chairperson or a 
Member of the  Central Commission and six months before the superannuation or end of tenure  of the 
Member of the Appellate Tribunal or Member of the Central  Commission, make a reference to the 
Selection Committee for filling up of the  vacancy.  
(6) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson  and Members referred to 
in sub -section ( 5) within three months from the date  on which the ref erence is made to it.  
(7) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every  vacancy referred to it.  
(8) Before recommending any person for appointment as Member of the  Appellate Tribunal or the 
Chairperson or other Member of the Centra l Commission, the Selection Committee shall satisfy itself that 
such person does  not have any financial or other interest which is likely to affect prejudicially his  
functions as the Chairperson or Member.  
(9) No appointment of the Chairperson or other Member shall be invalid  merely by reason of any 
vacancy in the Selection Committee:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the  appointment of a person as the 
Chairperson of the Central Commission where  such person is, or has been , a Judge of the Supreme Court 
or the Chief Justice of  a High Court.  
79. Functions of Central Commission .–(1) The Central  Commission shall discharge t he following 
functions, namely: – 
(a) to regulate the tariff of generating companies owned or controlled  by the Central Government;  
(b) to regulate the tariff of generating companies other than those  owned or controlled by the 
Central Government specified in clause  (a), if such generating companies enter into or otherwise have 
a composite scheme for generation a nd sale of electricity in more  than one State;  
(c) to regulate the inter -State t ransmission of electricity ; 
(d) to determine tariff for inter -State transmission of electricity;  
(e) to issue licenc es to persons to function as transmission licensee  and electricity trader with 
respect to their inter -State operations;  
(f) to adjudicate upon disputes involving generating companies or  transmission licensee in regard 
to matters connected with clauses  (a) to ( d) above and to refer any dispute for arbitration;  
(g) to levy fees for the purposes of this Act;  
(h) to specify Grid Code having regard to Grid Standards;  
(i) to specify and enforce the standards with respect to quality,  continuity and reliability of service 
by licensees;  
  45 
 (j) to fix the trading margin in the inter -State trading of electricity, if  considered, necessary;  
(k) to discharge such other functions as may be assigned under this  Act. 
(2) The Central Commission shall advise the Central Government on all or  any of the follow ing 
matters, namely: – 
(i) formulation of National electricity Policy and tariff policy;  
(ii) promotion of competition, efficiency and economy in  activities of the electricity industry;  
(iii) promotion of investment in electricity industry;  
(iv) any other matter referred to the Central Commission by that  Government.  
(3) The Central Commission shall ensure transparency while exercising its  powers and discharging its 
functions.  
(4) In discharge of its functions, the Central Commission shall be guided by  the National Electricity 
Policy, National Electricity Plan and tariff policy  published under section 3.  
80. Central Advisory Committee .–(1) The Central Commission  may, by notification, establish with 
effect from such date as it may specify in  such notification, a Committee to be k nown as the Central 
Advisory Committee.  
(2) The Central Advisory Committee shall consist of not more than thirty -one members to represent 
the interests of commerce, industry, transport, agriculture,  labour, consumers, non -governmental 
organisations and academic and research  bodies in the electricity sector.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Central Commission shall be the ex officio  Chairperson of the Central 
Advisory Committee and the Members of that  Commission and Secretary to the Government of India in 
charg e of the Ministry  or Department of the Central Government dealing with Consumer Affairs and  
Public Distribution System shall be the ex officio  Members of the Committee.  
81. Objects of Central Advisory Committee .–The objects of the Central Advisory Committee shall 
be to advise the  Central Commission on – 
(i) major questions of policy;  
(ii) matters relating to quality, continuity and extent of service  provided by the licensees;  
(iii) compliance by the licensees with the conditions and requirements  of their licence;  
(iv) protection of consumer interest;  
(v) electricity supply and overall standards of performance by utilities.  
Constitution, powers  and functions of State Commissions  
82. Constitution of State Commission .–(1) Every State  Government shall, within six months from 
the appointed date, by notification,  constitute for the purposes of this Act, a Commission for the State to 
be known as  the (name of the State) Electricity Regulatory Commission:  
Provided that the State Electricity Regulatory Commiss ion, established by  a State Government under 
section 17 of the Electricity Regulatory Commissions  Act, 1998 (14 of 1998) and the enactments 
specified in the Schedule, and functioning as  such immediately before the appointed date, shall be the 
State Commission for  the purposes of this Act and the Chairperso n, Members, Secretary, and officers and 
other employees thereof shall continue to hold office, on the same  terms and conditions on which they 
were appointed under those Acts:  
Provided further that t he Chairperson and other Members of the State  Commission appointed, before 
the commencement of this Act , under the  Electricity Regulatory Commissions Act, 1998  (14 of 1998)  or 46 
 under the enactments specified  in the Schedule, may , on the recommendations of t he Selection Committee  
constituted under sub -section ( 1) of section 85, be allowed to opt for the terms  and conditions under this 
Act by the concerned State Government.  
(2) The State Commission shall be a body corporate by the name aforesaid,  having perpetual 
succession and a common seal, with power to acquire, hold  and dispose of property, both movable and 
immovable, and to contract and  shall, by the said name, sue or be sued.  
(3) The head office of the State Commission shall be at such place as the State  Government may, by 
notification, specify.  
(4) The State Commission shall consist of not more than three Members,  including the Chairperson.  
(5) The Chairperson and Members of the State Commission shall be  appointed by the State 
Government on the recommendation of a Selection  Committee referred to in section 85.  
83. Joint Commission .–(1) Notwithstanding anything to the  contrary contained in section 82, a Joint 
Commission may be constituted by an  agreement to be entered into – 
(a) by two or more Governments of States; or  
(b) by the Central Government, in respect of one or more Union  territories, and one or more 
Governments of States,  
and shall be in force for such period and shall be subject to renewal for  each further period, if any, as may 
be st ipulated in the agreement:  
Provided that the Joint Commissio n, constituted under section 21 A of  Electricity Regulatory 
Commissions Act, 1998 (14 of 1998) and functioning as such  immediately before the appointed day, shall 
be the Joint Commission for the  purposes of this Act and the Chairperson, Members, Secretary and other 
officers  and employees thereof shall be deemed to have been appointed as such under  this Act and they 
shall continue to hold office, on the same terms and  conditions on which they were appointed under the 
Electricity Regulatory  Commissions Act, 1998.  
(2) The Joi nt Commission shall consist of one  Member from each of the  participating States and 
Union t erritories and the Chairperson shall be  appointed from amongst the Members by consensus,  failing 
which by rotation.  
(3) An agreement under sub -section ( 1) shall contain provisions as to the  name of the Joint 
Commission, the manner in which the participating States may  be associated in the selection of the 
Chairperson and Members of the Joint  Commission, manner of appointment of Members and 
appointment of  Chairperson by rotation or consensus, places at which the Commission shall sit,  
apportionment among the participating States of the expenditure in connection  with the Joint 
Commission, manner in which the differences of opinion between  the Joint Commission and the State 
Government concerned would be resolved  and may also contain such other supplemental, incidental and 
consequential  provisions not inconsistent with this Act as may be deemed nece ssary or  expedient for 
giving effect to the agreement.  
(4) The Joint Commission shall determine tariff in respect of the participating  States or Union 
territories separately and independently.  
(5) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, the Central Government  may, if so authorised 
by all the participating States, constitute a Joint  Commission and may exercise the powers in respect of all 
or any of the matters  specified under sub -section ( 3) and when so specifically authori sed by the  
participating States.  
84. Qualifications for appointment of Chairperson and Members of  State Commission .–(1) The 
Chairperson and the Members of the State  Commission shall be persons of ability, integrity and standing 47 
 who have  adequate knowledge of, and hav e shown capacity in, dealing with problems  relating to 
engineering, finance, commerce, economics, law or management.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the State  Government may appoint any 
person as the Chairperson from amongst pers ons who is, or has been, a Judge of a High Court:  
Provided that no appointment under this sub -section shall be made except  after consultation with the 
Chief Justice of that High Court.  
(3) The Chairperson or any other Member of the State Commission shall not hold any other office.  
(4) The Chairperson shall be the Chief Executive of the State Commission.  
85. Constitution of Selection Committee to select Members of State  Commission .–(1) The State 
Government shall, for the purposes of selecting  the Members of  the State Commission, constitute a 
Selection Committee  consisting of – 
(a) a person who has been a Judge of the High Court …. Chairperson;  
(b) the Chief Secret ary of the concerned State ….Member;  
(c) the Chairperson of the Authority or  the Chairperson of the Central Commission ….. Member:  
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the  appointment of a person as the 
Chairperson who is or has been a Judge of the  High Court.  
(2) The State Government shall, within one month from the date of  occurrence of any vacancy by 
reason of death, resignation or removal of the  Chairperson or a Member and six months before the 
superannuation or end of  tenure of the Chairperson or Member, make a reference to the Selection  
Committee for filling up of the vacancy.  
(3) The Selection Committee shall finalise the selection of the Chairperson  and Members within three 
months from the date on which the reference is made  to it. 
(4) The Selection Committee shall recommend a panel of two names for every  vacancy refe rred to it.  
(5) Before recommending any person for appointment as the Chairperson or  other Member of the 
State Commission, the Selection Committee shall satisfy  itself that such person does not have any 
financial or other interest which is  likely to affect  prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson or 
Member, as  the case may be.  
(6) No appointment of Chairperson or other Member shall be invalid merely  by reason of any 
vacancy in the Selection Committee.  
86. Functions of State Commission .–(1) The State Commission  shall discharge th e following 
functions, namely: – 
(a) determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission and  wheeling of electricity, 
wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case may  be, within the State:  
Provided that where open access has bee n permitted to a  category of consumers under section 42, 
the State Commission  shall determine only the wheeling charges and surcharge thereon,  if any, for the 
said category of consumers;  
(b) regulate electricity purchase and procurement process of  distribution licensees including the 
price at which electricity shall  be procured from the generating companies or licensees or from  other 
sources through agreements for purchase of power for  distribution and supply within the State;  
(c) facilitate intra -State transmission and wheeling of electricity;  48 
 (d) issue licences to persons seeking to act as transmission licensees,  distribution licensees and 
electricity traders with respect to their  operations within the State;  
(e) promote co -generation and generatio n of electricity from  renewable sources of energy by 
providing suitable measures for  connectivity with the grid and sale of electricity to any person,  and 
also specify, for purchase of electricity from such sources, a  percentage of the total consumption of  
electricity in the area of a  distribution licensee;  
(f) adjudicate upon the  disputes between the licensees  and generating companies and to refer any 
dispute for arbitration;  
(g) levy fee for the purposes of this Act;  
(h) specify State Grid Code consistent  with the Grid Code specified  under clause ( h) of           
sub-section ( 1) of section 79;  
(i) specify or enforce standards with respect to quality, continuity  and reliability of service by 
licensees;  
(j) fix the trading margin in the intra -State trading of electricity, if  considered, necessary;  
(k) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it under this  Act. 
(2) The State Commission shall advise the State Government on all or any of  the following matters, 
namely: – 
(i) promotion of competition, efficiency and economy in activities of  the electricity industry;  
(ii) promotion of investment in electricity industry;  
(iii) reorgani sation and restructuring of electricity industry in the  State;  
(iv) matters concerning generation, transmission , distribution and  trading of electricity or any 
other matter referred to the State  Commission by that Government.  
(3) The State Commission shall ensure transparency while exercising its  powers and discharging its 
functions.  
(4) In discharge of its functions , the State Commission shall be guided by the  National Electricity 
Policy, National Electricity Plan and tariff policy published  under section 3.  
87. State Advisory Committee .–(1) The State Commission  may, by notification, establish with 
effect from such date as it may specify in  such notification, a Committee to be known as the State 
Advisory Committee.  
(2) The State Advisory Committee shall consist of not more than twenty -one members to represent 
the interests of commerce, industry, transport, agricultur e, labour, consumers, non -governmental 
organisations and academic and research  bodies in the electricity sector.  
(3) The Chairperson of the State Commission shall be the ex officio  Chairperson of the State Advisory 
Committee and the Members of the State  Commission and the S ecretary to State Government in charge of 
the Ministry or  Department dealing with Consumer Affairs and Public Distribution System shall  be the  
ex officio  Members of the Committee.  
88. Objects of State Advisory Committee .–The objects of  the State Advisory Committee shall be to 
advise the  Commission on – 
(i) major questions of policy;  
(ii) matters relating to quality, continuity and extent of service  provided by the licensees;  
(iii) compliance by licensees with the conditions and requirements of  their licence ; 49 
 (iv) protection of consumer interest; and  
(v) electricity supply and overall standards of performance by utilities.  
Appropriate Commission – other provisions  
89. Term of office and conditions of service of Members .–(1) The  Chairperson or other Member 
shall hold office for a term of five years from the  date he enters upon his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson or other Member in the Central  Commission or the State Commission 
shall not be eligible for re -appointment in  the same capacity as the Chairperson or a Member in that 
Commission in which  he had earlier held office as such : 
Provided further that no Chairperson or Member shall hold office as such  after he has attained the age 
of sixty -five years.  
(2) The salary, allowan ces and other terms and conditions of service of the  Chairperson and Members 
shall be such as may be prescribed by the  Appropriate Government:  
Provided that the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of  service of the Members, shall 
not be varie d to their disadvantage after  appointment.  
(3) Every Member shall, before entering upon his office, make and subscribe  to an oath of office and 
secrecy in such form and in such manner and before  such authority as may be prescribed.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained i n sub -section ( 1), a Member may – 
(a) relinquish his office by giving in writing to the Appropriate  Government a notice of not less 
than three months; or  
(b) be removed from his office in accordance with the provisions of  section 90.  
(5) Any member ceasin g to hold office as such shall – 
(a) not accept any commercial employment for a period of two years  from the date he ceases to 
hold such office; and   
(b) not represent any person before the Central Commission or any  State Commission in any  
manner.  
Explanation. –For the purposes of this sub -section , “commercial  employment ” means employment in 
any capacity in any organi sation which has been a party to the proceedings before the Appropriate  
Commission or employment in any capacity under, or agency of, a person  engaged in trading, 
commercial, industrial or financial business in  electricity industry and includes a director of a company or 
partner of a  firm or setting up practice either independently or as partner of a firm or  as an advisor or a  
consultant.  
90. Removal of Member .–(1) No Member shall be removed  from office except in accordance with 
the provisions of this section.  
(2) The Central Government , in the case of a Member of the Central  Commission, and the State 
Government, in the case of a Member of the State  Commission, may by order remov e from office any 
Member, if he – 
(a) has been adjudged an insolvent;  
(b) has been convicted of an offence which, in the opinion of the  Appropriate Government, 
involves moral turpitude;  
(c) has  become physically or mentally incapable of acting as a  Member;  50 
 (d) has acquired such financial or other interest as is likely to affect  prejudicially his functions as 
a Member;  
(e) has so abused his position as to render his continuance in office  prejudicial to the public 
interest; or  
(f) has been guilty of proved misbehaviour:  
Provided that no Member shall be removed from his office on any ground  specified in clauses ( d), (e) 
and ( f) unless the Chairperson of the Appellate  Tribunal on a reference being made to him in this behalf 
by the Central  Government  or the State Government, as the case may be, has, on an inquiry,  held by him 
in accordance with such procedure as may be prescribed by the  Central Government, reported that the 
Member ought on such  ground or  grounds to be removed.  
(3) The Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be,  may, in consultation with 
the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal suspend any  Member of the Appropriate Commission in 
respect of whom a reference ha s been made to the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal, under           
sub-section ( 2) until the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be, has  passed 
orders on receipt of the report of the Chairperson of the Appellate  Tribunal, on such reference : 
Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the  Chairperson of the Appropriate 
Commission who, at the time of his appointment  as such is a sitting Judge of the Supreme Court or the 
chief Justice of a High  Court or a Judge  of a High Court.  
Proceedings and powers of Appropriate Commission  
91. Secretary, officers and other employees of Appropriate Commission .–(1) The Appropriate 
Commission may appoint a Secretary to exercise such  powers and perform such duties as may be 
specified.  
(2) The Appropriate Commission may, with the approval of the Appropriate  Government, specify the 
numbers, nature and categories of other officers and  employees.  
(3) The salaries and allowances payable to, and other terms and conditions  of servic e of, the 
Secretary, officers and other employees shall be such as may  be specified with the approval of the 
Appropriate Government.  
(4) The Appropriate Commission may appoint consultants required to assist  that Commission in the 
discharge of its functions  on the terms and conditions as  may be specified.  
92. Proceedings of Appropriate Commission .–(1) The  Appropriate Commission shall meet at the 
head office or any other place at such  time as the Chairperson may direct, and shall observe such rules of 
procedure in  regard to the transaction of business at its meetings (including the quorum at its  meetings) as 
it may specify.  
(2) The Chairperson, or if he is unable to attend a meeting of the Appropriate  Commission, any other 
Member nominated by the Chairp erson in this behalf  and, in the absence of such nomination or where 
there is no Chairperson, any  Member chosen by the Members present from amongst themselves, shall 
preside  at the meeting.  
(3) All questions which come up before any meeting of the Appropri ate Commission shall be decided 
by a majority of votes of the Members present and  voting, and in the event of an equality of votes, the 
Chairperson or in his absence,  the person presiding shall have a second or casting vote.  
(4) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 3), every Member shall have  one vote.  
(5) All orders and decisions of the Appropriate Commission shall be  authenticated by its Secretary or 
any other officer of the Commission duly  authorised by the Chairperson in this behalf.  51 
 93. Vacancies , etc. , not to invalidate proceedings .–No act or proceedings of the Appropriate 
Commission shall be questioned  or shall be invalidated merely on the ground of existence of any vacancy 
or defect in the constitution of the Appropriate Commission.  
94. Powers of Appropriate Commission .–(1) The Appropriate  Commission shall, for the purposes 
of any inquiry or proceedings under this Act,  have the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the 
Code of Civil  Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) in respect of the follow ing matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and  examining him on oath;  
(b) discovery and production of any document or other material object  producible as evidence;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) requisitioning  of any public record;  
(e) issuing commission for the examination of witnesses;  
(f) reviewing its decisions, directions and orders;  
(g) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
(2) The Appropriate Commission shall have the powers to pass such interim  order in any proceeding, 
hearing or matter before the Appropriate Commission,  as that Commission may consider appropriate.  
(3) The Appropriate Commission may authorise any person, as it deems fit,  to represent the interest of 
the consumers in the proceedin gs before it.  
95. Proceedings before Commission. –All proceedings before the Appropriate Commission shall be 
deemed to  be judicial proceedings within the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian  Penal Code 
(45 of 1860) and the Appropriate Commission shall be deemed to be a civil court  for the purposes of 
sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 
96. Powers of entry and seizure .–The Appropriate Commission or any officer, not below the rank of 
a Gazetted Officer specially  authorised in this behalf by the Commission, may  enter any building or place 
where the Commission has reason to believe that any  document relating to the subject matter of the 
inquiry may be found, and may  seize any such document or take extracts or copie s therefrom subject to 
the provisions of section 100 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , in so far as it  may be 
applicable.  
97. Delegation .–The Appropriate Commission may, by general or special order in writing,  delegate to 
any Member, Secretary, officer of the Appropriate Commission or  any other person subject to such 
conditions, if any, as may be specified in the  order, such of its powers and functions under this Act 
(except the powers to  adjudicate disputes under section 79 an d section 86 and the powers to make  
regulations under section 178 or section 181) as it may deem necessary.  
Grants, Fund , Accounts, Audit and Report  
98. Grants a nd loans by Central Government. –The Central Government may, after due 
appropriation  made by  Parliament in this behalf, make to the Central Commission grants and loans of  
such sums of money as that Government may consider necessary.  
99. Establishment of Fund by Central Government .–(1) There  shall be constituted a Fund to be 
called the Central Electricity Regulatory  Commission Fund and there shall be credited thereto – 
(a) any grants and loans made to the Central Commission by the  Central Government under 
section 98;  
(b) all fees received by the Central Commission under this Act;  52 
 (c) all sums received by the Central Commission from such other  sources as may be decided upon 
by the Central Government.  
(2) The Fun d shall be applied for meeting – 
(a) the salary, allowances and other remuneration of Chairperson,  Members, Secretary, officers 
and other employees of the Central  Commission;  
(b) the expenses of the Central Commission in discharge of its function s under section 79;  
(c) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.  
(3) The Central Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of India, 
prescribe the manner of applying the Fund for meeting  the expenses specified in clause ( b) or clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 2). 
100. Accounts and audit of Central Commission .–(1) The Central  Commission shall maint ain 
proper accounts and other relevant records and  prepare an annual statement of accounts in such form as 
may be prescribed by  the Central Government in consultation w ith the Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India.  
(2) The accounts of the Central Commission shall be audited by the  Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India at such intervals as may be specified  by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with 
such audit shall be  payable by the Central Commission  to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -General of India and any person appointed  by him  in connection 
with the audit  of the accounts of the Central  Commission under this Act shall have the same rights and 
privileges and  authority in connection with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General  of India 
has in connection with the audit of the Government accounts and, in  particular, shall have the right to 
demand the production of books, accounts,  connected vouchers and other documents and pap ers and to 
inspect any of the  offices of the Central Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the Central Commission, as certified by the Comptroller  and Auditor -General of 
India or any other person appointed by him in this  behalf, together with the audit report thereon, shall be 
forwarded annually to  the Central Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid, as  
soon as may be after it is received, before each House of Parliament.  
101. Annual r eport of Central Commission .–(1) The Central  Commissio n shall prepare once every 
year, in such form and at such time as may  be prescribed, an annual report giving a summary of its 
activities during the  previous year and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the Central  Government.  
(2) A copy of the repor t received under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as  may be after it is 
received, before each House of Parliament.  
102. Grants and Loans by State Government .–The State Government may, after due appropriation 
made by Legislature  of a State in this behalf, make to the State Commission grants and loans of such  
sums of money as that Government may consider necessary.  
103. Establishment of Fund by State Government .–(1) There shall  be constituted a Fund to be 
called the State Electricity Regulatory Commi ssion  fund and there shall be credited thereto – 
(a) any grants and loans made to the State Commission by the State  Government under       
section 102;  
(b) all fees received by the State Commission under this Act;  
(c) all sums received by the State Commission from such other sources as  may be decided upon 
by the State Government.  
  53 
 (2) The Fu nd shall be applied for meeting – 
(a) the salary, allowances and other remuneration of Chairperson, Members,  Secretary, officers 
and other employees of the State Commission;  
(b) the expenses of the State Commission in discharge of its function s under  section 86;  
(c) the expenses on objects and for purposes authorised by this Act.  
(3) The State Government may, in consultation with the Comptroller and  Auditor -General  of India, 
prescribe the manner of applying the Fund for meeting  the expenses specified in clause ( b) or clause ( c) of 
sub-section ( 2). 
104. Accounts and audit of State Commission .–(1) The State  Commission shall maintain proper 
accounts and other relevant records and  prepare annual sta tement of accounts in such form  as may be 
prescribed by the  State Government in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India.  
(2) The Accounts of the State Commission shall be audited by the  Comptroller and Auditor -General 
of India at such intervals as may be specified  by him and any expenditure incurred in connection with 
such audit shall be  payable by the State Commission to the Comptroller and Auditor -General of  India.  
(3) The Comptroller and Auditor -Gener al of India and any person appointed by  him in connection 
with the audit of the accounts of the State Commission under  this Act shall have the same rights and 
privileges and authority in connection  with such audit as the Comptroller and Auditor -General of India 
generally has in  connection with the audit of Government accounts and, in particular, shall have  the right 
to demand the production of books, accounts, connected vouchers and  other documents and papers and to 
inspect any of the offices of the State  Commission.  
(4) The accounts of the State Commission, as certified by the Comptroller and  Auditor -General of 
India or any other person appointed by him in this behalf,  together with the audit report thereon shall be 
forwarded annually to the State  Government and that Government shall cause the same to be laid , as soon 
as may be after it is received, before the State Legislature.  
105. Annual r eport of State Commission .–(1) The State  Commission shall prepare once every year 
in such form and at such ti me as may  be prescribed, an annual report giving a summary of its activities 
during the  previous year and copies of the report shall be forwarded to the State  Government.  
(2) A copy of the repo rt received under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon  as may  be after it is 
received, before the State Legislature.  
106. Budget of Appropriate Commission .–The Appropriate Commission shall prepare, in such form 
and at such time  in each financial year as may be prescribed, its budget for the next financial year,  
show ing the estimated receipts and expenditure of that Commission and  forward the same to the 
Appropriate Government.  
107. Directions by Central Government .–(1) In the discharge of  its functions, the Central 
Commission shall be guided by such directions in  matters of policy involving public interest as the 
Central Government may give  to it in writing.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction relates to a matter of  policy involving 
public interest, the decision of the Central Government thereon  shall be final.  
108. Directions by State Government .–(1) In the discharge of  its functions, the State Commission 
shall be guided by such directions in matters  of policy involving public interest as the State Government 
may give to it in  writing.  
(2) If any question arises as to whether any such direction relates to a matter of  policy involving 
public interest, the decision of the State Government thereon  shall be final.  54 
 109. Directions to Joint Commission .–Notwithstanding anything contained in this  Act, where any 
Joint Commission  is established under section 83 – 
(a) the Government of the State, for which the Joint Commission is  established, shall be 
competent to give any direction under this Act only  in cases where such direction relates to matter 
within the exclusive  territorial jurisdiction of the State;  
(b) the Central Government alone shall be competent to give any direction  under this Act where 
such direction relates to a matter within the  territorial jurisdiction of two or more States or perta ining 
to a Union  territory if the participating Governments fail to reach an agreement or the  participating 
States or majority of them request the Central Government  to issue such directions.  
PART XI  
APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL  FOR ELECT RICITY  
110. Establishment of  Appellate Tribunal .–The Central Government shall, by notification, establish 
an Appellate  Tribunal to be known as the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity to hear appeals  against the 
orders of the adjudicating officer or the Appropriate Commission  1[under t his Act  or any other law for the 
time being in force] . 
111. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal .–(1) Any person aggrieved by  an order made by an adjudicating 
officer under this Act (except under section  127) or an order made by the Appropriate Commission under 
this Act may  prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal for Electricity:  
Provided that any person appealing against the order of the adjudicating  officer levying any penalty  
shall, while filing the appeal , deposit the amount of  such penalty:  
Provided furth er that where  in any particular case, the Appellate Tribunal  is of the opinion that the 
deposit of such penalty would cause undue hardship to  such person, it may dispense with such deposit 
subject to such conditions as it  may deem fit to impose so as to sa feguard the realisation of penalty.  
(2) Every appeal under sub -section ( 1) shall be filed within a period of forty -five days from the date 
on which a copy of the order made by the adjudicating  officer or the Appropriate Commission is received 
by the aggrie ved person and  it shall be in such form, verified in such manner and be accompanied by such 
fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may entertain an appeal after the  expiry of the said period of 
forty -five days if it is satisfied that there was  sufficient cause for not filing it within that period.  
(3) On receipt of an appeal under sub -section ( 1), the Appellate Tribunal may,  after giving the parties 
to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such  orders thereon as it thinks  fit, confirming, 
modifying or setting aside the order  appealed against.  
(4) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the  parties to the appeal and 
to the concerned adjudicating officer or the Appropriate  Commission, as the cas e may be.  
(5) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub -section ( 1) shall  be dealt with by it as 
expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it  to dispose of the appeal finally within one 
hundred and eighty days from the  date of  receipt of the appeal:  
Provided that where any appeal could not be disposed of within the said  period of one hundred and 
eighty days, the Appellate Tribunal shall record its  reasons in writing for not disposing of the appeal 
within the said period.  
(6) The Appellate Tribunal may, for the purpose of examining the legality,  propriety or correctness of 
any order made by the adjudicating officer or the  Appropriate Commission under this Act, as the case 
may be, in relation to any  proceeding, on its own motion o r otherwise, call for the records of such  
proceedings and make such order in the case as it thinks fit.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2010, s. 16 and the Schedule, for “under this Act ” (w.e.f. 24 -8-2010).  55 
 112. Composition of Appellate Tribunal .–(1) The Appellate  Tribunal shall consist of a Chairperson 
and three other Members.  
(2) Subject  to the provisions  of this Act, – 
(a) the jurisdiction of the Appellate Tribunal may be exercised by  Benches thereof;  
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson of the Appellate  Tribunal with two or more 
Members of the Appellate Tribunal as  the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal may deem fit:  
Provided that every Bench constituted under this clause  shall include at least one Judicial 
Member and one Technical  Member;  
(c) the Benches of the Appellate Tribunal shall ordinarily sit at Delhi  and such other places as t he 
Central Government may, in  consultation with the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal, notify;  
(d) the Central Government shall notify the areas in relation to which  each Bench of the Appellate 
Tribunal may exercise jurisdiction.  
(3) Notwithstanding an ything contained in sub -section ( 2), the Chairperson  of the Appellate Tribunal 
may transfer a Member of the Appellate Tribunal from  one Bench to another Bench.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this Chapter, – 
(i) “Judicial Member ” means a Member of the Appe llate Tribunal appointed as such under           
sub-clause ( i) of caluse ( b) of sub -section  (1) of section 113, and includes the Chairperson of the 
Appellate Tribunal;  
(ii) “Technical Member ” means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal  appointed as such under 
sub-clause ( ii) or sub -clause ( iii) of clause ( b) of sub -section  (1) of section 113.  
113. Qualification s for appoin tment of Chairperson and Member  of Appellate Tribunal .–(1) A 
person shall not be qualified for  appointment as the Chairperson of the Ap pellate Tribunal or a Member 
of the  Appellate Tribunal unless he – 
(a) in the case of the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal, is, or has  been, a judge of the 
Supreme Court or the Chief Justice of a High  Court; and  
(b) in the case of a Me mber of the Appellate Tribunal, – 
(i) is, or has been, or is qualified to be, a Judge of a High Court;  or 
(ii) is, or has been, a Secretary for at least one year in the  Ministry or Department of the 
Central Government dealing  with economic affairs or matters or infrast ructure; or  
(iii) is, or has been, a person of ability and standing, having  adequate knowledge or 
experience in dealing with the  matters relating to electricity generation, transmission and  
distribution and regulation or economics, commerce, law or  managem ent. 
(2) The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the  Central Government after 
consultation with the Chief Justice of India.  
(3) The Members of the Appellate Tribunal shall be appointed by the  Central Government on the 
recommendation  of the Selection Committee  referred to in section 78.  
(4) Before appointing any person for appointment as Chairperson or other  Member of the Appellate 
Tribunal, the Central Government shall satisfy itself  that such person does not have any financial or ot her 
interest which is likely to  affect prejudicially his functions as such Chairperson or Member.  56 
 114. Term of o ffice.–The Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal or a Member of the Appellate  
Tribunal shall hold office as such for a term of three years from the date on  which he enters upon his 
office:  
Provided that such Chairperson or other Member shall be eligible for  re-appointment for a second 
term of three years:  
Provided further that no Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal or  Member of the Appellate Tri bunal 
shall hold office  as such after he has attained, – 
(a) in the case of the Chairp erson of the Appellate Tribunal , the age of  seventy years;  
(b) in the case of a Member of the Appellate Tribunal, the age of sixty -five years.  
115. T erms and conditions of  service. –The salary and allowances payable to, and the other terms 
and conditions  of service of, the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal and Members of the  Appellate 
Tribunal shall be such as may be prescribed by the Central  Government : 
Provided that ne ither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and  conditions of service of the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal or a Member  of the Appellate Tribunal shall be varied to his 
disadvantage after appointment.  
116. Vacancies .–If, for reason other tha n temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the  office of the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal or a Member of the Appellate  Tribunal, the Central Government 
shall appoint another person in accordance  with the provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and the 
proceedings may be  continued before the Appellate Tribunal from the stage at which the vacancy is  filled.  
117. Resignation and r emoval .–(1) The Chairperson of the  Appellate Tribunal or a Member of the 
Appellate Tribunal may, by notice in  writing under his hand addressed to the Central Government, resign 
his office:  
Provided that the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal or a Member of  the Appellate Tribunal shall, 
unless he is permitted by the Central Government  to relinquish his office sooner, co ntinue to hold office 
until the expiry of three  months from the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed  as 
his successor enters upon his office or until the expiry of term of office,  whichever is the earliest.  
(2) The Chairperson of  the Appellate Tribunal or a Member of the Appellate  Tribunal shall not be 
removed from his office except by an order by the Central  Government on the ground of proved 
misbehaviour or incapacity after an  inquiry made by a judge of the Supreme Court as the Central 
Government may  appoint for this purpose in which the Chairperson or a Member of the Appellate  
Tribunal concerned has been informed of the charges against him and given a  reasonable opportunity of 
being heard in respect of such charges.  
1[117A. Qualifications , terms and conditions o f service of Chairperson and Membe r.–  
Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, the qualifications, appointment , term of office, salaries 
and allowances, resignation, removal and the other  terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and 
other Members of the Appellate Tribunal appointed after the commencement of Part XIV of Chapter VI 
of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall be governed by the provisions of section 184 of that Act:  
Provi ded that the Chairperson and Member appointed before the commencement of Part XIV of 
Chapter VI of the Finance Act, 2017  (7 of 2017) , shall continue to be governed by the provisions of this 
Act, and the rules made thereunder as if the provisions of section  184 of the Finance Act, 2017  had not 
come into force.]  
118. Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances. –(1) In the event of the occurrence of 
any vacancy in the office  of the  Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal by reason of his death, resignation 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 7 of 2017, s. 180 (w.e.f. 26 -5-2017).  57 
 or otherwise, the senior -most Member of the Appellate Tribunal shall act as the  Chairperson of the 
Appellate Tribunal until the date on which a new  Chairperson, appointed in accordan ce with the 
provisions of this Act to fill such  vacancy, enters upon his office.  
(2) When the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal is unable to discharge his  functions owing to 
absence, illness or any other cause, the senior -most Member  of the Appellate T ribunal shall discharge the 
functions of the Chairperson of the  Appellate Tribunal until the date on which the Chairperson of the 
Appellate  Tribunal resumes his duties.  
119. Officers and other employees of Appellate Tribunal .–(1) The  Central Government shall 
provide the Appellate Tribunal with such officers and  other employees as it may deem fit.  
(2) The officers and other employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall discharge  their functions under 
the general superintendence of the Chairperson of the  Appellate Tribunal.  
(3) The salaries and allowances and other terms and conditions of service of  the officers and other 
employees of the Appellate Tribunal shall be such as may  be prescribed by the Central Government.  
120. Procedure and powers of Appellate  Tribunal .–(1) The  Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound 
by the procedure laid down by the Code  of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice  and, subject to the other provisions of this Act, the Appellate T ribunal shall 
have  powers to regulate its own procedure.  
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its  functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the  Code of Civil Procedure, 1908  (5 of 1908) , while 
trying a suit, in respect of the following  matters, namely: – 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and  examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) subj ect to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian  Evidence Act, 1872                 
(1 of 1 872), requisitioning any public record or document  or copy of such record or document from 
any office;  
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of wit nesses or  documents;  
(f) reviewing its decisions;  
(g) dismissing a representation of default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal or any representation for  default or any order passed by it 
ex parte ; 
(i) any other matter which may be prescribed by the Central  Government.  
(3) An order made by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be  executable by the Appellate 
Tribunal as a decree of civil court and, for this  purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers 
of a ci vil court.  
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 3), the Appellate  Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local  jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree  made by that court . 
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be  judicial proceedings within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian  Penal Code  (45 of 1860)  and the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the  purposes of section s 345 and 346 of the C ode of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) . 58 
 1[121. Power of Appellate Tribunal .–The Appellate Tribunal may, after hearing the Appropriate 
Commission  or other interested party, if any, from time to time, issue such orders, instructions  or 
directions as it may deem fit, to any Appropriate Commission for the  performance of its statutory 
functions under this Act.]  
122. Distribution of business amongst Benches and transfer of cases from one Bench to another 
Bench. –(1) Where Benches are constituted, the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal may,  from time to 
time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the business of the Appellate Tribunal  
amongst the Benches and also provide for the matters which may be dealt with by each Bench.  
(2) On the application of an y of the parties and after notice to the parties, and after hearing such of 
them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion without such notice, the Chairperson of the 
Appellate Tribunal may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal,  to any other Bench.  
123. Decision to be by majority .–If the Members of the Appellate Tribunal of a Bench consisting of 
two Members differ in opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on  which they differ, and 
make a reference to the Chairperson of the Appellate  Tribunal who shall either hear the point or points 
himself or refer the case for  hearing on such point or points by one or more of the other Members of the  
Appellate Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided according to the  opinion of the majority of 
the Members of the Appellate Tribunal who have  heard the case, including those who first heard it.  
124. Right of appellant to take assistance of legal practitioner and of  Appropriate Commission 
to appoint presenting office rs.–(1) A person  preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under this 
Act may either appear  in person or take the assistance of a legal practitioner of his choice to present his  
case before the Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.  
(2) The Appropria te Commission may authorise one or more legal  practitioners or any of its officers 
to act as presenting officers and every person  so authorised may present the case with respect to any 
appeal before the  Appellate Tribunal, as the case may be.  
125. Appeal t o Supreme Court .–Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal,  may, file an appeal to the Supreme Court within sixty days from the date of  communication of 
the decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal, to him, on any  one or mo re of the grounds specified in 
section 100 of the Code of Civil  Procedure,  1908  (5 of 1908) : 
Provided that the Supreme Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant  was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal within the said period,  allow it to be filed within a further period not 
exceeding sixty days.  
PART XII  
INVESTIGATION AND ENFORCEMENT  
126. Assessment .–(1) If on an inspection of any place or  premises or after inspection of the 
equipments, gadgets, machines, devices found  connected or u sed, or after inspection of records 
maintained by any person, the  assessing officer comes to the conclusion that such person is indulging in  
unauthoris ed use of electricity, he shall provisionally assess to the best of his  judgment the electricity 
charges payable by such person or by any other person  benefited by such use.  
(2) The order of provisional assessment shall be served upon the  person in occupation or possession 
or in charge of the place or premises in such  manner as may be prescribed.  
2[(3) The pe rson, on whom an o rder has been served under sub -section  (2), shall be entitled to file 
objections, if any, against the provisional assessment  before the assessing officer, who shall, after 
affording a reasonable opportunity  of hearing to such person, pass a final order of assessment within 
                                                             
1. Subs.  by Act 57 of 2003, s. 4, for section 121 (w.e.f.  27-1-2004 ). 
2. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s. 11, for sub -section ( 3) (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  59 
 thirty days  from the date of service of such order of provisional assessment , of the electricity  charges 
payable by such person.]  
(4) Any person served with the order of provisional assessment  may,  accept such assessment and 
deposit the assessed amount with the licensee  within seven days of service of such provisional assessment 
order upon him:  
1*   *   *   *   * 
2[(5) If the assessing officer reaches to the conclusion that unauthorised use of  electricity has taken 
place, the assessment shall be made for the entire period during  which such unauthoris ed use of electricity 
has taken place and if, however, the period  during which such unauthorised use of electricity has taken 
place cannot be ascertained,  such period shall be limited to a period of twelve months immediately 
preceding the date  of inspection.]  
(6) The assessment under this section shall be made at a rate equal to  3[twice] the tariff applicable for 
the relevant  category of services specified  in sub -section ( 5). 
Explanation .–For the purpos es of this section, – 
(a) “assessing officer ” means an officer of a State Government or Board or  licensee, as the case 
may be, designated as such by the State Government;  
(b) “unauthorised use of electricity ” means the usage of electricity – 
(i) by any artificial means; or  
(ii) by a means not authorised by the concerned person or  authority or licensee; or  
(iii) through a tampered meter; or  
4[(iv) for the purpose other than for which the usage of electricity  was authorised; or  
(v) for the premises or areas other than those for which the  supply  of electricity was 
authoris ed.] 
127. Appeal to Appellate Authority .–(1) Any person aggrieved by  the final order made under 
section 126 may, within thirty days of the said order,  prefer an appeal in such form, verified in such 
manner and be accompanied by  such fee as may be specified by the State Commission, to an appellate 
authority  as may be prescribed.  
(2) No appeal against an order of assessment under sub -section ( 1) shall be  enterta ined unless an 
amount equal to 5[half of the assessed amount] is deposited  in cash or by way of bank draft with the 
licensee and documentary evidence of  such deposit has been enclosed along with the appeal.  
(3) The appellate authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall dispose of the  appeal after hearing the 
parties and pass appropriate order and send copy of  the order to the assessing officer and the appellant.  
                                                             
1. The proviso omitted by Act 26 of 2007, s . 11 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub -section ( 5)  (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
3. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for “one-and-half times ” (w.e.f. 15-6-2007 ). 
4. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub -clause  ( iv) (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007) . 
5. Subs. by s. 12, ibid., for  “one-third of the assessed amount ” (w.e.f. 15-6-2007 ). 
 
 
 
 
 
 60 
 (4) The order of the appellate authority refe rred to in sub -section ( 1) passed  under sub -section ( 3) 
shall be final.  
(5) No appeal shall lie to the appellate authority referred to in sub -section ( 1) against the final order 
made with the consent of the parties.  
(6) When a person defaults in making payment of assessed amount, he, in  addition to the assessed 
amount shall be liable to pay, on the expiry of thirty  days from the date of order of assessment, an amount 
of interest at the rate of  sixteen per cent.  per annum compounded every six months.  
128. Investigation of certain matters .–(1) The Appropriate  Commission may, on being satisfied that 
a licensee has failed to comply with any  of the conditions of licence or a generating company or a 
licensee has failed to  comply with any of the provisions of th is Act or the rules or regulations made  
thereunder, at any time, by order in writing, direct any person (hereafter in this  section referred to as 
“Investigating Authority ”) specified in the order to  investigate the affairs of any generating company or 
licensee and to report to  that Commission on any investigation made by such Investigating Authority:  
Provided that the Investigating Authority may, wherever necessary,  employ any auditor or any other 
person for the purpose of assisting him in any  investigation  under this section.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in section 235 of the  Companies Act, 1956    
(1 of 1956) , the Investigating Authority may, at any time, and shall, on  being directed so to do by the 
Appropriate Commission, cause an  inspection to  be made, by one or more of its officers, of any licensee 
or generating company  and his books of account; and the Investigating Authority shall supply to the  
licensee or generating company, as the case may be, a copy of his report on  such inspection.  
(3) It shall be the duty of every manager, managing director or other officer of  the licensee or 
generating company, as the case may be, to produce before the  Investigating Authority directed to make 
the investigation under sub -section ( 1), or inspection under sub -section ( 2), all such books of account, 
registers and other  documents in his custody or power and to furnish him with any statement and  
information relating to the affairs of the licensee or generating company, as the  case may be, as the said 
Investigating Authority may require of him within such  time as the said Investigating Authority may 
specify.  
(4) Any Investigating Authority, directed to make an investigation under sub -section  (1), or 
inspection under sub -section ( 2), may examine  on oath any  manager, managing director or other officer of 
the licensee or generating  company, as the case may be, in relation to his business and may administer  
oaths accordingly.  
 (5) The Investigating Authority, shall, if it has been directed by the  Appropriate Commission to 
cause an inspection to be made, and may, in any  other case, report to the Appropriate Commission on any 
inspection made under  this section.  
(6) On receipt of any report under sub -section ( 1) or sub -section ( 5), the  Appropriate Commission 
may, after giving such opportunity to the licensee or  generating company, as the case may be, to make a 
representation in  connection with the report as in the opinion of the Appropriate Commis sion seems 
reasonable, by order in writing – 
(a) requi re the licensee or the generating company to take such action  in respect of any matter 
arising out of the report as the Appropriate  Commission may think fit; or   
(b) cancel the licen ce; or   
(c) direct the generating company to cease to carry on the busines s of generation of electricity.  
(7) The Appropriate Commission may, after giving reasonable notice to the  licensee or the generating 
company, as the case may be, publish the report  submitted by the Investigating Authority under           
sub-section ( 5) or such portion  thereof as may appear to it to be necessary.   61 
 (8) The Appropriate Commission may specify the minimum information to  be maintained by the 
licensee or the generating company in their books, the  manner in which such information shall be 
maintain ed, the checks and other  verifications to be adopted by licensee or the generating company in that  
connection and all other matters incidental thereto as are, in its opinion,  necessary to enable the 
Investigating Authority to discharge satisfactorily its  functions under this section.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, the expression “licensee or the  generating company ” 
shall include in the case of a licensee incorporated in  India – 
(a) all its subsidiaries formed for the purpose of carrying on the business of generation or 
transmission or distribution or trading  of electricity exclusively outside India; and  
(b) all its branches whether situated in India or outside India.  
(9) All expenses of, and incidental to, any investigation made under this  section shall be defrayed by 
the licensee or the generating company, as the case  may be, a nd shall have priority over the  debts due 
from the licensee or the  generating company and shall be recoverable as an arrear of land revenue.  
129. Orders for securing c ompliance .–(1) Where the Appropriate  Commission, on the basis of 
material in its possession, is satisfied that a licensee  is contravening, or is likely to contravene, any of the 
conditions mentioned in his  licence or conditions for grant of exemption or the licensee or the generating  
company has contravened or is likely to contravene any of the provisions of this  Act, it shall, by an order, 
give such directions as may be necessary for the  purpose of securing compliance with that condition or 
provision.  
(2) While giving direction under sub -section ( 1), the Appropriate  Commission shall have due regard 
to the extent to which any person is likely to  sustain loss or damage due to such contravention.  
130. Procedure for issuing directions by Appropriate Commissio n.–The Appropriate 
Commission, before issuing any direction under section  129, shall – 
(a) serve notice in the manner as may be specified to the concerned  licensee or the generating 
company;  
(b) publish the notice in the manner as may be specified for the  purpose of bringing the matters to 
the attention of persons, likely to  be affected, or affected;  
(c) consider suggestions and objections from the concerned licensee or  generating company and 
the persons, likely to be affected, or  affected.  
PART XIII  
REORGANISATION  OF BOARD  
131. Vesting of property of Board in State Government .–(1) With  effect from the date on which a 
transfer scheme, prepared by the State  Government to give effect to the objects and purposes of this Act, 
is published or  such further da te as may be stipulated by the State Government (hereafter in this  Part 
referred to as the effective date), any property, interest in property, rights  and liabilities which 
immediately before the effective date belonged to the State  Electricity Board (hereinafter referred to as 
the Board) shall vest in the State  Government on such terms as may be agreed between the State 
Government and  the Board.  
(2) Any property, interest in property, rights and liabilities vested in the State  Government under   
sub-section ( 1) shall be re -vested by the State Government in  a Government company or in a company or 
companies, in accordance with the  transfer scheme so published along with such other property, interest 
in property, rights and liabilities of the State Govern ment as may be stipulated in  such scheme, on such 
terms and conditions as may be agreed between the State  Government and such company or companies 
being State Transmission Utility  or generating company or transmission licensee or distribution licensee, 
as the case may be : 
Provided that the transfer value of any assets transferred hereunder shall  be determined, as far as may 
be, based on the revenue potential of such assets at  such terms and conditions as may be agreed between 62 
 the State Government and  the St ate Transmission Utility or generating company or transmission licensee 
or distribution licensee, as the case may be.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this section, where, – 
(a) the transfer scheme involves the transfer of any property or rights to  any person or 
undertaking not wholly owned by the State  Government, the scheme shall give effect to the transfer 
only for  fair value to be paid by the transferee to the State Government;  
(b) a transaction of any description is effected in pursuance of a transfer   scheme, it shall be 
binding on all persons including third parties  and even if such persons or third parties have not 
consented to it.  
(4) The State Government may, after consulting the Government company or  company or companies 
being State Trans mission Utility or generating company  or transmission licensee or distribution licensee, 
referred to in sub -section ( 2) (hereinafter referred to as the transferor), require such transferor to draw up 
a transfer scheme to vest in a transferee being any othe r generating company or  transmission licensee or 
distribution licensee, the property, interest in property,  rights and liabilities which have been vested in the 
transferor under this section,  and publish such scheme as statutory transfer scheme under this Act. 
(5) A transfer scheme under thi s section may – 
(a) provide for the formation of subsidiaries, joint venture companies  or other schemes of 
division, amalgamation, merger, reconstruction  or arrangements which shall promote the profitability 
and viability  of the resulting entity, ensure economic efficiency, encourage  competition and protect 
consumer interests;  
(b) define the property, interest in property, rights and liabilities to be  allocated – 
(i) by specifying or describing the property, rights and  liabilities in question; or  
(ii) by referring to all the property, interest in property, rights  and liabilities comprised in a 
described part of the  transferor's undertaking; or  
(iii) partly in one way and partly in the other;  
(c) provide that any rights or liabilities stipulated or described in the  scheme shall be enforceable 
by or against the transferor or the  transferee;  
(d) impose on the transferor an obligation to enter into such written  agreements with or execute 
such other instruments in favour of any  other subsequent transferee as may be stipulated in the 
scheme;  
(e) mention the functions and duties of the transferee;  
(f) make such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions  as the transferor considers 
appropriate including provision  stipulat ing the order as taking effect; and  
(g) provide that the transfer shall be provisional for a stipulated  period.  
(6) All debts and obligations incurred, all contracts entered into and all  matters and things engaged to 
be done by the Board, with the Board or  for the  Board, or the State Transmission Utility or generating 
company or transmission  licensee or distribution licensee, before a transfer scheme becomes effective 
shall,  to the extent specified in the relevant transfer scheme, be deemed to have been  incurred, entered 
into or done by the Board, with the Board or for the State  Government or the transferee and all suits or 
other legal proceedings instituted  by or against the Board or transferor, as the case may be, may be 
continued or  instituted by or again st the State Government or concerned transferee, as the case  may be.  
(7) The Board shall cease to be charged with and shall not perform the  functions and duties with 
regard to transfers made on and after the effective  date.  63 
 Explanation .–For the purpose s of this Part, – 
(a) “Government company ” means a Government Company formed  and registered under the 
Companies Act, 1956  (1 of 1956) . 
(b) “company ” means a company to be formed and registered under  the Companies Act, 1956    
(1 of 1956) to undertake generation or transmission  or distribution in accordance with the scheme 
under this Part.  
132. Use of proceeds of  sale or transfer of Board, etc .–In the event that a Board or any utility 
owned or controlled by the  Appropriate Government is sold or transfer red in any manner to a person who 
is not owned or controlled by the Appropriate Government, the proceeds from  such sale or transfer shall 
be utilised in priority to all other dues in the following  order, namely :– 
(a) dues (including retirement benefits due ) to the officers and  employees of such Board or utility, 
who have been affected by the  aforesaid sale or transfer;  
(b) payment of debt or other liabilities of the transferor as may be  required by the existing loan 
covenants.  
133. Provisions relating to of ficers and employees .–(1) The State  Government may, by a transfer 
scheme, provide for the transfer of the officers  and employees to the transferee on the vesting of 
properties, rights and liabilities  in such transferee as provided under section 131.  
 (2) Upon such transfer under the transfer scheme, the personnel shall hold  office or service under the 
transferee on such terms and conditions as may be  determined in accordance with the transfer scheme:  
Provided that such terms and conditions on the transfer shall not in any  way be less favourable than 
those which would have been applicable to them if  there had been no such transfer under the transfer 
scheme:  
Provided further that the transfer can be provisional for a stipulated  period.  
Explanation .–For the pu rposes of this section and the transfer scheme, the  expression “officers and 
employees ” shall mean all officers and employees who  on the date specified in the scheme are the officers 
and employees of the Board  or transferor, as the case may be.  
134. Paymen t of compensation or damages on transfer .–Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947  (14 of 1947)  or any other law for the time being in force and except for 
the provisions made in  this Act, the transfer of the employment of the officers and employees referred to  
in sub -section ( 1) of section 133 shall not entitle such officers and employees to  any compensation or 
damages under this Act, or any other Central or State law,  save as provided in the transfer scheme.   
PART XIV  
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES  
135. Theft of Electricity .–1[(1) Whoever, dishonestly, –  
(a) taps, makes or causes to be made any connection with overhead,  underground or under water 
lines or cables, or service wires, or service  facilities of a licensee or supplier , as the case may be; or  
(b) tampers a meter, installs or uses a tampered meter, current reversing  transformer, loop 
connection or any other device or method which interferes  with accurate or proper registration, 
calibration or metering of electric  current or otherwise results in a manner whereby electricity is 
stolen or  wasted; or  
                                                             
1. Subs. by A ct 26 of 2007, s. 13, for sub -section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15-6-2007).  
 64 
 (c) damages or destroys an electric meter, apparatus, equipment, or wire  or causes or allows any 
of them to be so damaged or destroyed as to interfere  with the proper or a ccurate metering of 
electricity; or  
(d) uses electricity through a tampered meter; or   
(e) uses electricity for the purpose other than for which the usage of  electricity was authorised,   
so as to abstract or consume or use electricity shall be punishable with  imprisonment for a term which 
may extend to three years or with fine or with  both:  
Provided that in a case where the load abstracted, consumed, or used or  attempted abstraction or 
attempte d consumption or attempted use – 
(i) does not exceed 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall not  be less than 
three times the financial gain on account of such theft of  electricity and in the event of second or 
subsequent conviction the fine  imposed shall not be less than six times the financial gain on 
account of such  theft of electricity;  
(ii) exceeds 10 kilowatt, the fine imposed on first conviction shall not be less  than three times 
the financial gain on account of such theft of electricity and  in the event of second or subsequent 
conviction, the sent ence shall be  imprisonment for a term not less than six months , but which may 
extend to  five years and with fine not less than six times the financial gain on account  of such 
theft of electricity:  
Provided further that in the event of second and subsequent  conviction of a  person where the load 
abstracted, consumed, or used or attempted abstraction or  attempted consumption or attempted use 
exceeds 10 kilowatt, such person shall  also be debarred from getting any supply of electricity for a 
period which shall  not be less than three months but may extend to two years and shall also be  
debarred from getting supply of electricity for that period from any other source  or generating station:  
Provided also that if it is proved that any artificial means or means not  authoris ed by the Board or 
licensee or supplier, as the case may be, exist for the  abstraction, consumption or use of electricity by 
the consumer, it shall be  presumed, until the contrary is proved, that any abstraction, consumption or 
use of electricity h as been dishonestly caused by such consumer.  
(1A) Without prejudice to the provisions of this Act, the licensee or supplier, as  the case may be, 
may, upon detection of such theft of electricity, immediately  disconnect the supply of electricity:  
Provided th at only such officer of the l icensee or supplier, as authoris ed for  the purpose by the 
Appropriate Commission or any other officer of the licensee  or supplier, as the case may be, of the 
rank higher than the rank so authoris ed shall disconnect the supply l ine of electricity:  
Provided further that such officer of the licensee or supplier, as the case may  be, shall lodge a 
complaint in writing relating to the commission of such offence  in police station ha ving jurisdiction 
within twenty -four hours from the ti me of  such disconnection:  
Provided also that the licensee or supplier, as the case may be, on deposit or  payment of the 
assessed amount or electricity charges in accordance with the  provisions of this Act, shall, without 
prejudice to the obligation to lodg e the  complaint as referred to in the second proviso to this clause, 
restore the supply  line of electricity within forty -eight hours of such deposit or payment.]  
(2) 1[Any officer of the licensee o r supplier as the case may be, authoris ed] in this behal f by the State 
Government may – 
(a) enter, inspect, break open and search any place or premises in  which he has reason to believe that 
electricity 2[has been or is  being ] used unauthorisedly;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s. 13, for “Any officer authoris ed” (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007)  
2. Subs. by Act 57 of 2003, s. 5, for “has been, is being, or is likely to be, ” (w.e.f. 27 -1-2004).  65 
 (b) search, seize and remove all such devices, instruments, wires and any other facilitator or 
article which 1[has been, or is being ] used for  unauthoris ed use of electricity;  
(c) examine or seize any books of account or documents which in his  opinion shall be useful for 
or relevant to, any proceedings in  respect of the  offence under sub -section ( 1) and allow the person  
from whose custody such books of account or documents are  seized to make copies thereof or take 
extracts therefrom in his  presence.  
(3) The occupant of the place of search or any person on his behalf shal l remain present during the 
search and a list of all things seized in the course of  such search shall be prepared and delivered to such 
occupant or person who  shall sign the list:  
Provided that no inspection, search and seizure of any domestic places  or do mestic premises shall be 
carried out between sunset and sunrise except in  the presence of an adult male member occupying such 
premises.  
(4) The provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , relating to search  and seizure 
shall apply, as f ar as may be, to searches and seizure under this Act.  
136. Theft of electric lines and materials .–(1) Whoever,  dishonestly – 
(a) cuts or removes or takes way or transfers any electric line,  material or meter from a tower, 
pole, any other installation or place  of installation or any other place, or site where it may be 
rightfully  or lawfully stored, deposited, kept, stocked, situated or located , including during 
transportation, without the consent of the licensee  or the owner, as the case may be, whether o r not 
the act is done for  profit or gain; or  
 (b) stores, possesses or otherwise keeps in his premises, custody or  control, any electric line, 
material or meter without the consent of  the owner, whether or not the act is committed for profit or 
gain;  or 
(c) loads, carries, or moves from one place to another any electric line,  material or meter without 
the consent of its owner, whether or not  the act is done for profit or gain,  
is said to have committed an offence of theft of electric lines and materials, an d shall be punishable with 
imprisonment for a term which may extend to three  years or with fine or with both.  
(2) If a person, having been convicted of an offence punishable under sub -section  (1) is again guilty 
of an offence punishable under that sub -section, he  shall be punishable for the second or subsequent 
offence for a term of  imprisonment which shall not be less than six months but which may extend to  five 
years and shall also be liable to fine which shall not be less than ten  thousand rupees.  
137. Punishment for receiving stolen property .–Whoever, dishonestly receives any stolen electric 
line or material knowing  or having reasons to believe the same to be stolen property, shall be punishable  
with imprisonment of either description for a term which m ay extend to three  years or with fine or with 
both.  
138. Interference with meters or works of licensee .–(1) Whoever, – 
(a) unauthorisedly connects any meter, indicator or apparatus with  any electric line through which 
electricity is supplied by a licensee  or disconnects the same from any such electric line; or  
(b) unauthorisedly reconnects any meter, indicator or apparatus with  any electric line or other 
works being the property of a licensee  when the said electric line or other works has or have been cut 
or disconnected; or  
                                                             
1. Subs.  by Act 57 of 2003,  s. 5,  for “has been, is being, or is likely to be, ” (w.e.f. 27 -1-2004).   66 
 (c) lays or causes to be laid, or connects up any works for the purpose  of communicating with any 
other works belonging to a licensee; or  
(d) maliciously injures any meter, indicator, or apparatus belonging to  a license e or wi lfully or 
fraudulently alters the index of any such  meter, indicator or apparatus or prevents any such meter, 
indicator  or apparatus from duly registering,   
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may  extend to three years, or with fine which 
may exte nd to ten thousand  rupees, or with both, and , in the case of a continuing offence, with a daily  fine 
which may extend to five hundred rupees; and if it is proved that any  means exist for making such 
connection as is referred to in clause ( a) or such re -connection as is referred to in clause ( b), or such 
communication  as is referred to in clause ( c), for causing such alteration or prevention as is  referred to in 
clause ( d), and that the meter, indicator or apparatus is  under the custody or control of the consumer, 
whether it is his property or  not, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that such  connection, 
reconnection, communication, alteration, prevention or  improper use, as the case may be, has been 
knowingly and wilfully  caused by such c onsumer.  
1[139. Negligently brea king or damaging works. –Whoever, negligently breaks, injures, throws 
down or damages any  material connected with the supply of electricity, shall be punishable with fine  
which may extend to ten thousand rupees.  
140. Penalty for intentionally injuring works .–Whoever, with intent to cut off the supply of 
electricity, cuts or injures, or  attempts to cut or injure, any electric supply line or works, shall be 
punishable  with fine which may extend to ten thousand rupees.]  
141. Exti nguishing public lamps .–Whoever, maliciously extinguishes any public lamp shall be 
punishable  with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees.  
142. Punishment for non -compliance of directions by Appropriate  Commission .–In case any 
complaint is filed before the Appropriate Commission by any  person or if that Commission is satisfied 
that any person has contravened any of  the provisions of this Act or the rules or regulations made 
thereunder, or any  direction issued by the Commission, the Appropriate Com mission may after  giving 
such person an opportunity of being heard in the matter, by order in  writing, direct that, without prejudice 
to any other penalty to which he may be  liable under this Act, such person shall pay, by way of penalty, 
which shall not  exceed one lakh rupees for each contravention and in case of a continuing failure  with an 
additional penalty which may extend to six thousand rupees for every  day during which the failure 
continues after contravention of the first such  direction.  
143. Power  to adjudicate .–(1) For the purpose of adjudging  under this Act, the Appropriate 
Commission shall appoint any of its Members to  be an adjudicating officer for holding an inquiry in such 
manner as may be  prescribed by the Appropriate Gove rnment , after givin g any person concerned  a 
reasonable opportunity of being heard for the purpose of imposing any  penalty.  
(2) While holding an inquiry, the adjudicating officer shall have power to  summon and enforce the 
attendance of any person acquainted with the facts  and circumstances of the case to give evidence or 
produce any document which  in the opinion of the adjudicating officer, may be useful for or relevant to 
the subject -matter of the inquiry, and if, on such inquiry, he is satisfied that the  person has failed to  
comply with the provisions of section 29 or section 33 or  section 43, he may impose such penalty as he 
thinks fit in accordance with the  provisions of any of those sections.  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 57 of 2003, s. 6, for sections 139 and 140 (w.e.f. 27 -1-2004).  67 
 144. Factors to be taken into a ccount by adjudicating officer. –While adjudicating  the quantum of 
penalty under section 29 or section 33  or section 43, the adjudicating officer shall have due regard to the 
following  factors, namely: – 
(a) the amount of disproportionate gain or unfair advantage, wherever  quantifiable, made as a 
result of the default;  
(b) the repetitive nature of the default.  
145. Civil court  not to have jurisdiction .–No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in  respect of any matter which an assessing officer referred to in section 126 or an appellate 
authority referred to in section 127 or the adjudicating officer  appointed under this Act is empowered by 
or under this Act to determine and  no injunction shall be granted by any court or other authority in respect 
of any  action taken or to be  taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this  Act. 
146. Punishment for non -compliance of orders or directions .–Whoever, fails to comply with any 
order or direction given under this Act,  within such time as may be specified in the said order o r direction 
or contravenes  or attempts or abets the contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or any  rules or 
regulations made thereunder, shall be punishable with imprisonment for  a term which may extend to three 
months or wit h fine  which may ext end to one  lakh rupees, or with both in respect of each offence and in 
the case of a  continuing failure, with an additional fine which may extend to five thousand  rupees for 
every day during which the failure continues after conviction of the  first such of fence:  
1[Provided that nothing contained in this section shall apply to the orders,  instructions or directions 
issued under section 121.]  
147. Penalties not to affect other liabilities .–The penalties imposed under this Act shall be in 
addition to, and not in derogation of, any liability in respect of payment of compensation or, in the case  of 
a licensee, the revocation of his licence which the offender may have incurred.  
148. Penalty where works belong to Government .–The provisions of this Act shall, so far  as they 
are applicable, be deemed to  apply also when the acts made punishable thereunder are committed in the 
case of electricity supplied by or of works belonging to the Appropriate Government.  
149. Offences by companies .–(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who at the time the offence was  committed was in charge of and was responsible 
to the company for the conduct  of the business of the company, as well as the company shall be deemed 
to be  guilty of having committed the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded  against and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such  person liable to any 
punishment if he proves that the offence was committed  without his knowledge or that he had exercised 
all due diligence to prevent the  commission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence  under this Act has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the  offence has  been committed with the consent or 
connivance of or is attributable  to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other 
officer of  the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be  deemed to be guilty 
of hav ing committed such offence and shall be liable to be  proceeded against and punished accordingly.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, – 
(a) “company ” means a body corporate and includes a firm or other  association of individuals; 
and  
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 57 of 2003, s . 7 (w.e.f. 27 -1-2004).  
 68 
 (b) “director ”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm.   
150. Abetment .–(1) Whoever abets an offence punishable under  this Act, shall, notwithstanding 
anything contained in the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) , be punished with the punishment provide d for 
the offence.  
(2) Without prejudice to any penalty or fine which may be imposed or  prosecution proceeding which 
may be initiated under this Act or any other law  for the time being in force, if any officer or other 
employee of the Board or the  licensee  enters into or acquiesces in any agreement to do, abstains from 
doing,  permits, conceals or connives at any act or thing whereby any theft of electricity  is committed, he 
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may  extend to three years, or  with fine, or with 
both.  
1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1) of section 135, sub -section  (1) of section  
136, section 137 and section 138, the licence or certificate of  competency or permit or such other 
authorisation issued under the rules made or  deemed to have been made under this Act to any person who 
acting as an  electrical contractor, supervisor or worker abets the commission of an offence  punishable 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 135, sub -section ( 1) of section 136,  section  137, or section 138, on his 
conviction for such abetment, may also be  cancelled by the licensing authority:  
Provided that no order of such cancellation shall be made without giving such  person an opportunity 
of being heard.  
Explanation .–For the purposes o f this sub -section, “licencing authority ” means  the officer who for the 
time being in force is issuing or renewing such licence or  certificate of competency or permit or such 
other authorisation.]  
151. Cognizance of offences .–No court shall take cognizance  of an offence punishable under this Act  
except upon a complaint in writing made by  the Appropriate Government or  Appropriate Commission or 
any of their officer authoris ed by them or a Chief  Electrical Inspector or an Electrical Inspector or 
licensee or th e generating  company, as the case may be, for this purpose :  
2[Provided that the court may also take cognizance of an offence punishable under  this Act upon a 
report of a police officer filed under section 173 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) : 
Provided further that a special court constituted under section 153 shall be  competent to take 
cognizance of an offence without the accused being committed  to it for trial.]  
3[151A.  Power of police to investigate. –For the purposes of investig ation of an offence punishable 
under this Act,  the police officer shall have all the powers as provided in Chapter XII of the  Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) .  
151B.  Certain offences to be cognizable and non -bailable. –Notwithstanding anything contained in 
the Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974) , an offence punishable under sections 135 to 140 or 
section 150 shall be  cognizable and non -bailable.]  
152. Compounding of offences. –(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), the Appropriate Government or any officer authorised by it in this behalf 
may accept from any consumer or person who committed or who is reasonably suspected of having 
committed  an  offence of  theft of  electricity  punishable  under  this  Act, a  sum of  money  by   way  of  
compounding of the offence as specified in the Table below:  
 
                                                             
1. Ins. by Act 26 of 2007, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
2. Ins. by s.15, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
3. Ins. by s.16, ibid. (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007 ). 69 
 TABLE  
 
Nature of    Service  Rate at which the sum of money for  compounding  to be collected per 
Kilowatt  (KW)/Horse Power  (HP)   or part thereof for Low Tension 
(LT) supply and per  Kilo Volt Ampere  (KVA) of contracted demand 
for High Tension (HT)  
(1) (2) 
1. Industrial Service  
2. Commercial Service  
3. Agricultural Service  
4. Other Services  twenty thousand rupees;  
ten thousand rupees;  
two thousand rupees;  
four thousand rupees : 
Provided that the Appropriate Government may, by notification in the  Official Gazette, amend the 
rates specified in the Table above.  
(2) On payment of the sum of money in accordance with sub -section ( 1), any  person in custody in 
connection with that offence shall be set at liberty and no  proceedings shall be instituted or continued 
against such consumer or person in  any criminal court.  
(3) The  acceptance of the sum of money for compounding an offence in  accordance with               
sub-section ( 1) by the Appropriate Government or an officer  empowered in this behalf shall be deemed to 
amount  to an acquittal within the meaning of section 300 of the Code of Criminal  Procedure, 1973           
(2 of 1974) . 
(4) The Compounding of an offence under sub -section ( 1) shall be allowed only  once for any person 
or consumer.  
PART XV  
SPECIA L COURTS  
153. Constitution of Special Courts .–(1) The State Government  may, for the purposes of providing 
speedy trial of offences referred to in  1[sections 135 to 140 and section 150], by notification in the 
Official Gazette,  constitute as many Special Courts as may be necessary for such area or areas, as  may be 
specified in  the notification.  
(2) A Special Court shall consist of a single Judge who shall be appointed by  the State Government 
with the concurrence of the High Court.  
(3) A person shall not be qualified for appointment as a Judge of a Special  Court unless he was, 
immediately before such appointment, an Additional  District and Sessions Judge.  
(4) Where the office of the Judge of a Special Court is vacant, or such Judge is  absent from the 
ordinary place of sitting of such Special Court, or he is  incapacitated by illn ess or otherwise for the 
performance of his duties, any  urgent business in the Spe cial Court shall be disposed of – 
(a) by a Judge, if any, exercising jurisdiction in the Special Court;  
(b) where there is no such other Judge available, in accordance with  the direction of District and 
Sessions Judge having jurisdiction over  the ordinary place of sitting of Special Court, as notified 
under sub -section  (1). 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s. 17, for “sections 135 to 139 ” (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  70 
 154. Procedure and power of Special Court .–(1) Notwithstanding  anything contained in the Code 
of Criminal  Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , every offence  punishable under 1[sections 135 to 140 and 
section 150] shall be triable only by  the Special Court within whose jurisdiction such offence has been 
committed.  
(2) Where it appears to any court in the course of any  inquiry or trial that an  offence punishable under 
1[sections 135 to 140 and section 150]  in respect of any offence that the  case is one which is triable by a 
Special Court constituted under this Act for the  area in which such case has arisen, it shall transfer such 
case to such Special  Court, and thereupon such case shall be tried and disposed of by such Special  Court 
in accordance with the provisions of this Act : 
Provided that it shall be lawful for such Special Court to act on the  evidence, if any, re corded by any 
court in the case of presence of the accused  before the transfer o f the case to any Special Court : 
Provided further that if such Special Court is of opinion that further  examination, cross -examination 
and re -examination of any of the witnesse s whose evidence has already been recorded, is required in the 
interest of justice, it  may re -summon any such witness and after such further examination,                  
cross - examination  or re-examination, if any, as it may permit, the witness shall be  discharged.  
(3) The Special Court may, notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section  (1) of section 260 or 
section 262 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , try the offence referred to in 1[sections 
135 to 140 and section 150]  in a summary way in accordance  with the procedure prescribed in the said 
Code and the provisions of sections 263  to 265 of the said Code shall, so far  as may be, apply to such 
trial: 
Provided that where in the course of a summary trial under this sub -section, it appears to the Special 
Court that the nature of the case is such that it is  undesirable to try such case in summary way, the Special 
Court shall recall any  witness who may have been examined and proceed to re -hear the case in the  
manner provided by  the provisions of the said Code for the trial of such offence:  
Provided further that in the case of any conviction in a summary trial  under this section, it shall be 
lawful for a Special Court to pass a sentence of  imprisonment for a term not exceeding fi ve years.  
(4) A Special Court may, with a view to obtaining the evidence of any person  supposed to have been 
directly or indirectly concerned in or privy to, any offence  tender pardon to such person on condition of 
his making a full and true  disclosure of the circumstances within his knowledge relating to the offence 
and to every other person concerned whether as principal or abettor in the  commission thereof, and any 
pardon so tendered shall, for the purposes of  section 308 of the Code of Criminal Procedur e, 1973           
(2 of 1974) , be deemed to have been  tendered under section 307 thereof.  
(5) The 2[Special Court shall] determine the civil liability against a consumer  or a person in terms of 
money for theft of energy which shall not be less than an  amoun t equivalent to two times of the tariff rate 
applicable for a period of twelve  months preceding the date of detection of theft of energy or the exact 
period of  theft if determined whichever is less and the amount of civil liability so  determined shall be 
recovered as if it were a decree of civil court.  
(6) In case the civil liability so determined finally by the Special Court is less  than the amount 
deposited by the consumer or the person, the excess amount so  deposited by the consumer or the person, 
to the  Board or licensee or the  concerned person,  as the case may be, shall be refunded by  the  Board  or 
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s. 18, for “sections 135 to 139 ” (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
2. Subs. by  s. 18, ibid., for “Special Court may ” (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007 ). 
 
 
 71 
 licensee  or the concerned person, as the case may be, within a fortnight from the date of  communication 
of the order of the Special Court together with interest at the  prevailing Reserve Bank of India prime 
lending rate for the period from the date  of such deposit till the date of payment.  
Explanation .–For the purposes of this section, “civil liability ” means loss or  damage incurred by the 
Board or l icensee or the concerned person, as the case  may be, due to the commission of an offence 
referred to in 1[sections 135 to 140 and section 150 .] 
155. Special Court to have powers of Court of Session .–Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the 
Code of Criminal Procedure,  1973  (2 of 1974) , in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, shall  apply to the proceedings before the Special Court and for the purpose of the  provisions of 
the said enactments, the Special Court shall be d eemed to be a  Court of Session and shall have all powers 
of a Court of Session and the person  conducting a prosecution before the Special Court shall be deemed to 
be a Public  Prosecutor.  
156. Appeal and revision .–The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers  
conferred by Chapters XXIX and XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973  (2 of 1974) , as if the 
Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court  is a Distri ct Court, or as the case 
may be , the Cour t of Session , trying cases  within the local limits of jurisdiction of the High Court.  
157. Review .–The Special Court may , on a petition or otherwise and in order to prevent  miscarriage 
of justice, review its judgment or order passed under section 154, but  no such review petition shall be 
entertained except on the ground that it was  such order passed under a mistake of fact, ignorance of any 
material fact or any  error app arent on the face of the record : 
Provided that the Special Court shall not allow any rev iew petition and  set aside its previous order or 
judgment without hearing the parties affected.  
Explanation .–For the purpos es of this Part, “Special Courts ” means the Special  Courts constituted 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 153.   
PART XVI  
DISPUTE RESOLUTION  
Arbitration  
158. Arbitration. –Where any matter is, by or under this Act, directed to be determined by  arbitration, 
the matter shall, unless it is otherwise expressly provided in the  licence of a licensee, be determined by 
such person or persons as the Appropriate  Commission may nominate in that behalf on the application of 
either party; but  in all other respects the arbitration shall be subject to the provisions of the  Arbitration 
and Conciliation Act, 1996  (26 of 1996) . 
  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s.18, for “sections 135 to 139 ” (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
 
 72 
 PART XVII  
OTHER PROVISIONS  
Protective clauses  
159. Protection of railways, highways, airports and canals, docks,  wharfs and piers. –No person 
shall, in the generation, transmission, distribution, supply or  use of electricity, in any way injure any 
railway, highway, airports, tramway,  canal or water -way or any dock, wharf or pier vested in or 
controlled by a local  authority, or obstruct or interfere with the traffic on any railway, airway,  tramway, 
canal or water -way.  
160. Protection of telegraphic, telephonic  and ele ctric signalling lines. –(1) Every person 
generating, transmitting, distributing, supplying or using  electricity (hereinafter in this section referred to 
as the "operator") shall take all  reasonable precautions in constructing, laying down and placing his 
electric  lines, electrical plant and other works and in working his system, so as not  injuriously to affect, 
whether by induction or otherwise, the working of any wire  or line used for the purpose of telegraphic, 
telephone or electric signa lling communicati on, or the currents in such wire or line.  
(2) Where any difference or dispute arises between the operator, and the  telegraph authority as to 
whether the operator has constructed, laid down or  placed his electric lines, electrical plant or other 
works, or w orked his system, in  contravention of sub -section ( 1), or as to whether the working of any 
wire, line or  current is or is not injuriously affected thereby, the matter shall be referred to the  Central 
Government and the Central Government, unless it is of opinion that the  wire or line has been placed in 
unreasonable proximity to the electric lines,  electrical plant or works of the operator after the construction 
of such lines, plant  or works, may direct the operator to make such alterations in, or additions  to, his  
system as may be necessary in order to comply with the provisions of this  section, and the operator shall 
make such alterations or additions accordingly:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the repair, renewal  or amendment of any 
electric line or electrical plant so long as the course of the  electric line or electrical plant and the amount 
and nature of the electricity  transmitted thereby are not altered.  
(3) Where the operator makes default in complying with the requirements o f this section, he shall 
make full compensation for any loss or damage incurred by  reason thereof, and, where any difference or 
dispute arises as to the amount of  such compensation, the matter shall be determined by arbitration.  
Explanation .–For the purpos es of this section, a telegraph line shall be deemed  to be injuriously 
affected if telegraphic, telephonic or electric signa lling communication by means of such line is, whether 
through induction or  otherwise, prejudicially inte rfered with by an electric l ine, electrical plant or  other 
work or by any use made thereof.  
161. Notice of accidents and inquiries.–(1) If any accident occurs in  connection with the generation, 
transmission, distribution, supply or use of  electricity in or in connection with,  any part of the electric 
lines or electrical plant  of any person and the accident results or is likely to have resulted in loss of  human 
or animal life or in any injury to a human being or an animal, such  person shall give notice of the 
occurrence and of any such loss or injury actually  caused by the accident, in such form and within such 
time as may be prescribed,  to the Electrical Inspector or such other person as aforesaid and to such other  
authorities as the Appropriate Government may by general or spe cial order,  direct.  
(2) The Appropriate Government may, if it thinks fit, require any Electrical  Inspector, or any other 
person appointed by it in this behalf, to inquire and  report – 
(a) as to the cause of any accident affecting the safety of the public,  which may have been 
occasioned by or in connection with, the  generation, transmission, distribution, supply or use of 
electricity,  or 73 
 (b) as to the manner in, and extent to, which the provisions of this Act  or rules and regulations 
made thereunder or of an y licence, so far  as those provisions affect the safety of any person, have 
been  complied with.  
(3) Every Electrical Inspector or other person holding an inquiry under sub -section  (2) shall have all 
the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil  Proce dure, 1908  (5 of 1908)  for the purpose of 
enforcing the attendance of witnesses and  compelling the production of documents and material objects, 
and every person  required by an Electrical Inspector be legally bound to do so within the meaning  of 
section 176 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
162. Appointment of Chief Electrical Inspector and Electrical  Inspector .–(1) The Appropriate 
Government may, by notification, appoint  duly qualified persons to be Chief Electrical Inspector or 
Electrical Inspector s and  every such Inspector so appointed shall exercise the powers and perform the  
functions of a Chief Electrical Inspector or an Electrical Inspector under this Act  and exercise such other 
powers and perform such other functions as may be  prescribed withi n such areas or in respect of such 
class of works and electric  installations and subject to such restrictions as the Appropriate Government 
may direct.  
(2) In the absence of express provision to the contrary in this Act, or any rule  made thereunder, an 
appeal shall lie from the decision of a Chief Electrical  Inspector or an Electrical Inspector to the 
Appropriate Government or if the  Appropriate Government, by general or special order so directs, to an  
Appropriate Commission.  
163. Power for licensee to ente r premises and to remove fittings or  other apparatus of licensee .–
(1) A licensee or any person duly  authorised by a licence may, at any reasonable time, and on informing 
the occupier of his intention, enter any premises to which electricity is, or has been,  supplied by him, of 
any premises or land, under, over, along, across, in or upon  which the electric supply -lines or other works 
have been lawfully placed by him  for the purpose of – 
(a) inspecting, testing, repairing or altering the electric supply -lines, meters, fittings, works and 
apparatus for the supply of electricity  belonging to the licensee; or  
(b) ascertaining the amount of electricity supplied or the electrical  quantity contained in the 
supply; or  
(c) removing where a supply of electricity is no longer required, or  where the licensee is 
authorised to take away and cut off such  supply, any electric supply -lines, meters, fittings, works or  
apparatus belonging to the licensee.  
(2) A licensee or any person authorised as aforesaid may also, in pursu ance of  a special order in this 
behalf made by an Executive Magistrate and after giving  not less than twenty -four hours noti ce in writing 
to the occupier, – 
(a) enter any premises or land referred to in sub -section ( 1) for any of the  purposes mentioned 
therein;  
(b) enter any premises to which electricity is to be supplied by him, for the  purpose of examining 
and testing the electric wires fittings, works and  apparatus for the use of electricity belonging to the 
consumer.  
(3) Where a consumer refuses to allow a licensee or any person authorised as  aforesaid to enter his 
premises or land in pursuance of the provisions of sub -section  (1) or, sub -section ( 2), when such licensee 
or person has so entered,  refuses to allow him to perform any act which he is aut horised by those         
sub-sections  to perform, or fails to give reasonable facilities for such entry or  performance, the licensee 
may, after the expiry of twenty -four hours from the  service of a notice in writing on the consumer, cut off 
the supply to t he consumer  for so long as such refusal or failure continues, but for no longer.  74 
 164. Exercise of powers of Telegraph Authority in certain cases .–The Appropriate Government 
may, by order in writing, for the placing of  electric lines or electrical plant for  the transmission of 
electricity or for the  purpose of telephonic or telegraphic communications necessary for the proper  co-
ordination of works, confer upon any public officer, licensee or any other  person engaged in the business 
of supplying electricity u nder this Act, subject to  such conditions and restrictions, if any, as the 
Appropriate Government may  think fit to impose and to the provisions of the Indian Telegraph Act, 1885  
(13 of 1885) , any of  the powers which the telegraph authority possesses under that Act with respect  to the 
placing of telegraph lines and posts for the purposes of a telegraph  established or maintained, by the 
Government or to be so established or  maintained.  
165. Amendment of sections 40 and 41 of Act 1 of 1894 .–(1) In section 40, sub-section ( 1) of clause 
(b) and section 41, sub -section ( 5) of the Land  Acquisition Act, 1894, the term “work ” shall be deemed to 
include electricity  supplied or to be supplied by means of the work to be constructed.  
(2) The Appropriate Government may, on recommendation of the  Appropriate Commission in this 
behalf, if it thinks fit, on the application of any  person, not being a company desirous of obtaining any 
land for its purposes,  direct that he may acquire such land under the provisions of the Land  Acquisition 
Act, 1894  (1 of 1894)  in the same manner and on the same conditions as it might  be acquired if the person 
were a company.  
PART XVIII  
MISCELLANEOUS  
166. Coordination Forum .–(1) The Central Government shall  constitute a coordination forum 
consisting of the Chairperson of the Central  Commission and Members thereof, the Chairperson of the 
Authority,  representatives of generating companies and transmission licensees engaged in  inter-State 
transmission of electricity for smooth and coordinated development  of the power system in the country.  
(2) The Central Government shall also constitute a forum of regulators  consisting of the Chairperson 
of the Central Commission and Chairpersons of the  State Commissions.  
(3) The Chairperson of the Central Com mission shall be the Chairperson of  the Forum of regulators 
referred to in sub -section ( 2). 
(4) The State Government shall constitute a Coordination Forum consisting of  the Chairperson of the 
State Commission and Members thereof representatives  of the generating companies, transmission 
licensee and distribution licensees  engaged in generation, transmission and distribution of electricity in 
that State  for smooth and coordinated development of the power system in the State.  
(5) There shall be a committee  in each district to be constituted by the  Appropriate Government – 
(a) to coordinate and review the extension of electrification in each  district;  
(b) to review the quality of power supply and consumer satisfaction;  
(c) to promote energy efficiency and its  conservation.  
167. Exemption of electric lines or electrical plants from attachment in  certain cases .–Where any 
electric lines or electrical plant, belonging to a licensee are  placed in or upon any premises or land not 
being in the possession of the  licensee, such electric lines or electrical plant shall not be liable to be taken 
in execution under any process of any civil court or in any proceedings in  insolvency against the person in 
whose possession the same may be.  
168. Protection of action taken in good faith .–No suit, prosecution or other proceeding shall lie 
against the Appropriate  Government or Appellate Tribunal or the Appropriate Commission or any  officer 
of Appropriate Government, or any Member, Officer or o ther employee  of the Appellate Tri bunal or any 
Members, officer or other employees of the  Appropriate Commission or the assessing officer or any 75 
 public servant for  anything done or in good faith purporting to be done under this Act or the rules  or 
regulations made thereunder.  
169. Members,  officers, etc. , of Appellate Tribunal, Appropriate  Commission to be public 
servants. –The Chairperson, Members, officers and other employees of the Appellate  Tribunal and the 
Chairperson, Members, Secretary, officers and other employees  of the Appropriate Commission and the 
assessing officer referred to in section  126 shall be deemed, when acting or purporting to act in pursuance 
of any of the  provisions of this Act to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of  the Indian 
Penal Code  (45 of 1860) . 
170. Recovery of penalty payable under this Act .–Any penalty payable by a person under this Act, 
if not paid, may be  recovered as if it were an arrear of land revenue.  
171. Services of notices, orders or documents .–(1) Every notice,  order or document by or under this 
Act required, or authorised to be addressed  to any person may be served on him by delivering the same 
after obtaining  signed acknowledgement receipt therefor or by registered post or such means of  delivery 
as may be prescribed – 
(a) where the Appropriate Government is the addressee, at the office  of such officer as the 
Appropriate Government may prescribe in  this behalf;  
(b) where the Appropriate Commission is the addressee, at the office  of the Appropriate 
Commission;  
(c) where a company is th e addressee, at the registered office of the  company or, in the event of 
the registered office of the company not  being in India, at the head office of the company in India;  
(d) where any other person is the addressee, at the usual or last known  place of abode or business 
of the person.  
(2) Every notice, order or document by or under this Act required or  authorised to be addressed to the 
owner or occupier of any premises shall be  deemed to be properly addressed if addressed by the 
description of the owner or occupier of the premises (naming the premises), and may be served by 
delivering  it, or a true copy thereof, to some person on the premises, or if there is no person  on the 
premises to whom the same can with reasonable diligence be delivered,  by affixing  it on some 
conspicuous part of the premises.  
172. Transitional provisions .–Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act, – 
(a) a State Electricity Board constituted under the repealed laws shall  be deemed to be the State 
Transmission Util ity and a licensee  under the provisions of this Act for a period of one year from the  
appointed date or such earlier date as the State Government may  notify, and shall perform the duties 
and functions of the State  Transmission Utility and a licensee in acc ordance with the  provisions of 
this Act and rules and regulations made thereunder:  
Provided that the State Government may, by notification,  authorise the State Electricity Board to 
continue to function as the  State Transmission Utility or a licensee for su ch further period  beyond the 
said period of one year as may be mutually decided by  the Central Government and the State 
Government;  
(b) all licences, authorisations , approvals, clearances and permissions  granted under the 
provisions of the repealed laws ma y, for a  period not exceeding one year from the appointed date or 
such earlier period, as may be notified by the Appropriate Government,  continue to operate as if the 
repealed laws were in force with  respect to such licences, authorisations, approvals, cle arances and  
permissions, as the case may be, and thereafter such licences,  authorisations, approvals, clearances 
and permissions shall be  deemed to be licences, authorisations, approvals, clearances and  permission 76 
 under this Act and all provisions of this Act shall  apply accordingly to such licences, authori sations, 
approvals,  clearances and permissions;  
(c) the undertaking of the State Electricity Boards established under  section 5 of the Electricity 
(Supply) Act, 1948  (54 of 1948)  may after the expiry  of the period specified in clause ( a) be 
transferred in accordance  with the provisions of Part XIII of this Act;  
(d) the State Government may, by notification, declare that any or all  the provisions contained in 
this Act, shall not apply in that State  for suc h period, not exceeding six months from the appointed 
date,  as may be stipulated in the notification.  
173. Inconsistency in laws .–Nothing contained in this Act or any rule or regulation made thereunder  
or any instrument having effect by virtue of this Act,  rule or regulation shall  have effect in so far as it is 
inconsistent with any other provisions of the  Consumer Protection Act, 1986 (68 of 1986) or the Atomic 
Energy Act, 1962  (33 of 1962)  or the Railways  Act, 1989  (24 of 1989) . 
174. Act to have overridin g effect .–Save as otherwise provided in section 173, the provisions of this 
Act shall  have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any  other law for the 
time being in force or in any instrument having effect by virtue  of any law  other than this Act.  
175. Provisions of this Act to be in addition to and not in derogation  of other laws .–The 
provisions of this Act are in addition to and not in derogation of any  other law for the time being in force.  
176. Power of Central Government t o make rules .–(1) The Central  Government may, by 
notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of  this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing  power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) the time within which the objection and suggestions on the draft  National Electricity Plan to 
be invited by the Authority under the  proviso to sub -section ( 4) of section 3;  
(b) the additional requirements 1[relating to the capital ade quacy,  creditworthiness or code of 
conduct] under sixth proviso to section  14; 
(c) the payment of fees for application for grant of licence under sub -section  (1) of section 15;  
(d) the constitution and functions of the National Load Despatch  Centre under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 26;  
(e) the works of licensees affecting the property of owner or occupier  under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 67;  
(f) such other cases which may be prescribed under clause ( c) of sub -section  (2) of section 68;  
(g) allowances and fees payable to other  Members for attending the  meetings of Authority under 
sub-section ( 14) of section 70.  
(h) other terms and conditions of service of the Chairperson and  Members of the Authority under 
sub-section ( 15) of section 70;  
(i) the functions a nd duties of the Central Electricity Authority  under section 73;  
(j) the salary, allowances and other conditions of service of  Chairperson and Member of Central 
Commission under sub -section  (2) of section 89;  
                                                             
1. Subs. by Act 26 of 2007, s . 19, for “(including the capital adequacy, creditworthiness or code of conduct) ” (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
 77 
 (k) the form and manner in which and the authority before whom  oath of office and secrecy 
should be subscribed under sub -section  (3) of section 89;  
(l) the procedure to be pres cribed by the Central Government  under  the pro viso to sub -section ( 2) 
of section 90;  
 (m) any other matter required to be  prescribed under clause ( g) of sub -section  (1) of section 94;  
(n) the form in which the Central Commission shall prepare its  annual statement of accounts 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 100;  
(o) the form in which and time at which the Central Commission shall  prepare its annual report 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 101; 
(p) the form in which and time at which the Central Commission  shall prepare its budget under 
section 106;  
(q) the form and the manner of verifying such form, and fee for filing  appeal u nder                  
sub-section ( 2) of section 111;  
(r) the salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and  conditions of service of the 
Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal  and Members of the Appellate Tribunal under section 115;  
(s) the salar y and allowances and other conditions of service of the  officers and employees of the 
Appellate Tribunal under sub -section  (3) of section 119;  
(t) the additional matters in respect of which the Appellate Tribunal  may exercise the powers of a 
civil court under clause ( i) of sub -section  (2) of section 120;  
(u) the authority to whom the appeal shall be filed under sub -section  (1) of section 127;  
(v) manner of holding inquiry by an adjudicating officer under sub -section  (1) of section 143;  
(w) the form in which and the time at which service of notices to any  person or to the Central 
Government for the purpose under sub -section  (1) of section 161;  
(x) the powers to be exercised and the functions to be performed by  the Inspectors under         
sub-section ( 1) of section 162;  
(y) the manner of delivery of every notice, order or document to be  served under sub -section ( 1) 
of section 171;  
(z) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
177. Powers of Authority to make regulations .–(1) The  Authority may, by notification, make 
regulations consistent with this Act and  the rules generally to carry out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the power  conferred in sub -section ( 1), 
such regulations may provide for all or any of the  following matters, namely: – 
(a) the Grid Standards under section 34;  
(b) suitable measures relating to safety and electric supply under  section 53;  
(c) the installation and operation of meters under section 55;  
(d) the rul es of procedure for transaction of business under sub -section  (9) of section 70;  
(e) the technical standards for construction of electrical plants and  electric lines and connectivity 
to the grid under clause ( b) of section 73;  
(f) the form and manner in wh ich and the time at which the State  Government and licensees shall 
furnish statistics, returns or other  information under section 74.  78 
 (g) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified;  
(3) All regulations made by the Authority under this Act shall be subject to  the conditions of previous 
publication.  
178. Powers of Central Commission to make regulations .–(1) The  Central Commission may, by 
notification make  regulations consistent with this  Act and the rules generally to carry out the provisions of 
this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the power contained  in sub -section ( 1), 
such regulations may provide for all or any of follo wing  matters, namely: – 
(a) period to be specified under the first proviso to section 14;  
(b) the form and the manner of the application under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(c) the manner and particulars of notice under sub -section ( 2) of section 15;  
(d) the conditions of licence under section 16;  
(e) the manner and particulars of notice under clause ( a) of sub -section  (2) of section 18;  
(f) publication of alterations or amendments to be made in the  licence under clause  (c) of         
sub-section ( 2) of se ction 18;  
(g) Grid Code under sub -section ( 2) of section 28;  
(h) levy and collection of fees and charge from generating companies  or transmission utilities or 
licensees under sub -section ( 4) of section 28;  
(i) rates, charges and terms and conditions in respect of intervening  transmission facilities under 
proviso to section 36;  
(j) payment of the transmissio n charges and a surcharge under sub-clause  (ii) of clause ( d) of  
sub-section ( 2) of section 38;  
(k) reduction 1*** of surcharge and cross subsidies under second proviso to sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 38;  
(l) payment of transmission charges and a surcharge under sub -clause  (ii) of clause  (c) of     
section 40;  
(m) reduction 1*** of surcharge and cross -subsidies under the second  proviso to sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( c) of section 40;  
(n) proportion of revenues from other business to be utilised for  reducing the transmission and 
wheeling charges under proviso to  section 41;  
(o) duties of electricity trader under sub -section ( 2) of section 52;  
(p) standards of performance of a licensee or class of licensees under  sub-section ( 1) of       
section 57;  
(q) the period within which information to be furnished by the  licensee under sub -section  (1) of 
section 59;  
2 [(r) the manner of reduction of cross -subsidies under clause ( g) of section 61;]  
                                                             
1. The words “and elimination ” omitted by Act 26 of 2007, s. 20 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for clause ( r) (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  79 
 (s) the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff under  section 61;  
(t) details to be furnished by licensee or generating company under  sub-section ( 2) of section 62;  
(u) the procedures for calculating the expected revenue from tariff  and charges under               
sub-section ( 5) of section 62;  
(v) the manner of making an application before the Central  Commission and the fee payable 
therefor under sub -section ( 1) of section 64;  
(w) the manner of publication of application under sub -section ( 2) of section 64;  
(x) issue of tariff order with modifications or conditions under sub -section  (3) of section 64;  
(y) the manner by which development of market in power including  trading specified under 
section 66;  
(z) the powers and duties of the Secretary of the Central Commission  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 91;  
(za) the terms and conditions of service of the Secretary, officers and  other employees of Central 
Commission under sub -section ( 3) of section  91; 
(zb) the rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub -section  (1) of section 92;  
(zc) minimum information to be maintained by a licensee or the  generating company and the 
mann er of such information to be  maintained under sub -section ( 8) of section 128;  
(zd) the manner of service and publication of notice under section 130;  
(ze) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified by regulations.  
(3) All regulations made by the  Central Commission under this Act shall be  subject to the conditions 
of previous publication.  
179. Rules and regulation s to be laid before Parliament. –Every rule made by the Central 
Government, every regulation made by  the Authority, and every regulation made by the Central 
Commission shall be  laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of the Parliament,  while 
it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in  one session or in two or more 
successive sessions, an d if, before the expiry of the  session immediately following the session or the 
successive sessions aforesaid,  both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or regulation or 
agree  that the rule or regulation should not be made, the rule or regul ation shall  thereafter have effect only 
in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case  may be; so, however, that any such modification or 
annulment shall be without  prejudice to the validity of anything previously done under that rule or  
regulation.  
180. Powers of State Governments to make rules .–(1) The State  Government may, by notification, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of  this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power,  such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: – 
(a) the payment of fees for application for grant of licence under sub -section  (1) of section 15;  
(b) the works of licensees affecting the property of other persons under  sub-section  (2) of   
section 67;  
(c) such other matters which may be prescribed under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2) of section 68;  
(d) the salary, allowances and other terms and conditions of service of  the Chairperson and 
Members of the State Commission under sub -section (2) of section 89;  80 
 (e) the form and manner in which and the authority before whom oath  of office and secrecy 
should be subscribed under sub -section ( 3) of section 89;  
(f) any other matter required to be prescribed by the State  Commission under clause (g) of       
sub-section ( 1) of section 94;  
(g) the manner of applying the Fund under sub -section ( 3) of section  103; 
(h) the form in which and the time at which the State Commission shall  prepare its annual 
accounts under sub -section ( 1) of section 104;  
(i) the form in which and the time at which the State Commission shall  prepare its annual report 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 105;  
(j) the form in which and the time at which the State Commission shall  prepare its budget under 
section 106;  
(k) manner of  service of provisional order of assessment under sub -section  (2) of section 126;  
(l) manner of holding inquiry by an adjudicating officer under sub -section  (1) of section 143;  
(m) the form in which and the time at which notice to the Electrical  Inspector under                 
sub-section ( 1) of section 161;  
(n) the manner of delivery of every notice, order or document under  sub-section ( 1) of        
section 171; and   
(o) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed.  
181. Powers  of State Commissions to make regulations .–(1) The  State Commissions may, by 
notification, make regulations consistent with this  Act and the rules generally to carry out the provisions 
of this Act.  
(2) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the power  contained in sub -section ( 1), 
such regulations may provide for all or any of the  following matters, namely: – 
(a) period to be specified under the first proviso to section 14;  
(b) the form and the manner of application under sub -section ( 1) of section 15;  
(c) the manner and particulars of application for licence to be  published under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 15;  
(d) the conditions of licence unde r section 16;  
(e) the manner and particulars of notice under clause  (a) of sub -section  (2) of section 18;  
(f) publication of the alterations or amendments to be made in the  licence under clause ( c) of              
sub-section ( 2) of section 18;  
(g) levy and collection of fees and charges from generating companies  or licensees under                
sub-section ( 3) of section 32;  
(h) rates, charges and the term s and conditions in respect of  intervening transmission facilities 
under proviso to section 36;  
(i) payment of the transmission charges and a surcharge under sub -clause  (ii) of clause  (d) of     
sub-section ( 2) of section 39;  81 
  (j) reduction 1*** of surcharge and cross subsidies under second  proviso to sub -clause  (ii) of 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section  39; 
(k) manner and utilisation of payment and surcharge under the  fourth proviso to sub -clause  (ii) of 
clause ( d) of sub -section ( 2) of section 39;  
(l) payment of the transmission charges and a surcharge under sub -clause  (ii) of clause ( c) of 
section 40;  
 (m) reduction 1*** of surcharge and cross subsidies under second  proviso to sub -clause ( ii) of 
clause ( c) of section 40;  
(n) the manner of payment of surcharge under the fourth proviso to  sub-clause ( ii) of clause ( c) of 
section 40;  
(o) proportion of revenues from other business to be utilised for  reducing the transmission and 
wheeling charges under the proviso to  section 41;  
(p) reduction  1*** of surcharge and cross -subsidies under the third  proviso to sub -section ( 2) of 
section 42;  
(q) payment of additional charges on charges of wheeling under sub -section  (4) of section 42; 
(r) guidelines under sub -section ( 5) of section 42;  
(s) the time and manner for settlement of grievances under sub -section  (7) of section 42;  
(t) the period to be specified by the State Commission for the purposes  specified under            
sub-section  (1) of section 43;  
(u) methods and principles by which charges for electricity shall be  fixed under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 45;  
(v) reasonable security payable to the distribution licensee under  sub-section ( 1) of section 47;  
(w) payment of interest on  security under sub -section ( 4) of section 47;  
(x) electricity supply code under section 50;  
(y) the proportion of revenues from other business to be utilised for  reducing wheeling charges 
under  the proviso to section 51;  
(z) duties of electricity trader under sub -section ( 2) of section 52;  
(za) standards of performance of a licensee or a class of licensees under  sub-section ( 1) of  
section 57;  
(zb) the period within which information to be furnished by the licensee under  sub-section ( 1) of 
section 59;  
2[(zc) the manner of reduction of cross -subsidies under clause ( g) of section 61;]  
(zd) the terms and conditions for the determination of tariff under section 61;  
                                                             
1. The words “and elimination ” omitted by Act 26 of 2007, s . 21 (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  
2. Subs. by s. 20, ibid., for clause ( zc) (w.e.f. 15 -6-2007).  82 
 (ze) details to be furnished by licensee or generating company under  sub-section ( 2) of section 62;  
(zf) the methodologies and procedures for calculating the expected  revenue from tariff and 
charges under sub -section ( 5) of section  62; 
(zg) the manner of making an application before the State Commission and the  fee payable 
therefor under sub -section ( 1) of section 64;  
(zh) issue of tariff order with modifications or conditions under sub -section  (3) of section 64;  
(zi) the manner by which development of market in power including  trading specified under 
section 66;  
(zj) the powers and duties of the Secretary of the State Commission  under sub -section ( 1) of 
section 91;  
(zk) the terms and conditions of service of the secretary, officers and other employees of the State 
Commission under sub -section ( 2) of section 91;  
(zl) rules of procedure for transaction of business under sub -section  (1) of section 92;  
(zm) minimum information to be maintained by a licensee or the  generating company and the 
manner of such information to be  maintained under sub -section ( 8) of section 128;  
(zn) the manner of service and publication of notice under section 130;  
(zo) the form of preferring the appeal and the manner in which such  form shall be verified and the  
fee for preferring the appeal under  sub-section ( 1) of section 127;  
(zp) any other matter which is to be, or may be, specified.  
(3) All regulations made by the State Commission under this Act shall be  subject to the condition of 
previous publication.  
182. Rules and regulations to be laid before State Legislature .–Every rule made by the State 
Government and every regulation made by  the State Commission shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each  House of the State Legislature where it con sists of two Houses, or where such  
Legislature consists of one House, before that House.  
183. Power to remove difficulties .–(1) If any difficulty arises in  giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order  published, make su ch provisions not inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Act,  as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of  two years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after  it is made, before each 
House of Parliament.  
184. Provisions of Act not to apply in certain cases .–The provisions of this Act shall not apply to 
the Ministry or Department  of the Ce ntral Government dealing with Defence, Atomic Energy or such 
other  similar Ministries or Departments or undertakings or Boards or institutions  under the control of such 
Ministries or Departments as may be notified by the  Central Government.  
185. Repeal and  saving .–(1) Save as otherwise provided in this Act,  the Indian Electricity Act, 1910  
(9 of 1910) , the Electricity (Supply) Act, 1948 (54 of 1948)  and the  Electricity Regulatory Commissions 
Act, 1998 (14 of 998) are hereby repealed.   
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, – 
(a) anything done or any action taken or purported to have been done  or taken including any rule, 
notification, inspection, order or notice  made or issued or any appointment, confirmation or 83 
 declaration  made or any licence, permission, author isation or exemption  granted or any document or 
instrument executed or any direction  given under the repealed laws shall, in so far as it is not  
inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, be deemed to have  been done or taken under the 
corre sponding prov isions of this Act;  
(b) the provisions contained in sections 12 to 18 of the Indian  Electricity Act, 1910  (9 of 1910)  
and rules made thereunder shall have effect  until the rules under section s 67 to 69 of this Act are 
made;  
(c) the Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 made under section 37 of the  Indian Electricity Act, 1910   
(9 of 1910)  as it stood before such repeal shall  continue to be in force till the regulations under section 
53 of this  Act are made;  
(d) all rules made under sub -section ( 1) of section 69 of the Electricity  (Supply) Act, 1948   
(54 of 19 48) shall continue to have effect until such rules are  rescinded or modified, as the case may 
be; 
(e) all directives issued, before the commencement of this Act, by a  State Government under the 
enactments specified in the Schedule  shall continue to apply for the period for which such directions  
were issued by the State Government.  
(3) The provisions of the enactments specified in the Schedule, not  inconsistent with the provisions of 
this Act, shall apply to  the States in which  such enactments are applicable.  
(4) The Central Government may, as and when considered necessary, by  notification, amend the 
Schedule.  
(5) Save as otherwise provided in sub -section ( 2), the mention of particular  matters in that section , 
shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general  application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 
1897  (10 of 1897) , with regard to the effect  of repeals.  
  84 
 THE SCHEDULE  
ENACTMENTS  
[See sub-section ( 3) of section 185]  
1. The Orissa Electricity Reform Act, 1995 (Orissa Act No. 2 of 1996) . 
2. The Haryana Electricity Reform Act, 1997 (Haryana Act No. 10 of 1998) . 
3. The Andhra Pradesh Electricity Reform Act, 1998 (Andhra Pradesh Act  No. 30 of 1998) . 
4. The Uttar Pradesh Electricity Reform Act, 1999  (Uttar Pradesh Act No. 24  of 1999) . 
5. The Karnataka Electricity Reform Act, 1999 (Karnataka Act No. 25 of 1999) . 
6. The Rajasthan Electricity Reform Act, 1999 (Rajasthan Act No. 23 of 1999) . 
7. The Delhi Electricity Reforms Act, 2000 (Delhi Act No.  2 of 2001) . 
8. The Madhya Pradesh Vidyut Sudhar Adhiniyam, 2000 (Madhya Pradesh  Act No. 4 of 2001) . 
1[9. The Gujarat Electricity Industry (Reorganisation and Regulation) Act, 2003 (Gujarat Act No. 24 
of 2003).]   
                                                             
1. Ins. by S.O. No. 1039( E), dated 5-9-2003.  
--------------------------The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003--------------------------
1 
 THE FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND BUDGET MANAGEMENT ACT, 2003  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
__________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title, extent and commencement.  
2. Definitions.  
3. Fiscal policy statements to be laid before Parliament.  
4. Fiscal management principles.  
5. Borrowing from Reserve Bank.  
6. Measures for fiscal transparency.  
7. Measures to enforce compliance.  
7A. Laying of review reports.  
8. Power to make rules.  
9. Rules to be laid before each House of Parliament.  
10. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
11. Jurisdiction of ci vil courts barred.  
12. Application of other laws  not barred.  
13. Power to remove difficulties.  
 
  2 
 THE FISCAL RESPONSIBILITY AND BUDGET MANAGEMENT ACT, 2003  
ACT No. 39 OF 2003  
[26th August , 2003.]  
An Act to provide for the responsibility of the Central Government to ensure inter -generational 
equity in fiscal management and long -term macro -economic stability by 1*** removing fiscal 
impediments in the effective conduct of monetary policy and prudentia l debt management 
consistent with fiscal sustainability through limits on the Central Government borrowings, 
debt and deficits, greater transparency in fiscal operations of the Central Government and 
conducting fiscal policy in a medium -term framework and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fourth Year of th e Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title, extent and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Fiscal Responsibility 
and Budget Management Act, 2003.  
(2) It extends to the whole of India.  
(3) It shall come into force on such date2 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint in this behalf.  
2. Defini tions.—In this Act, unless t he context otherwise  requires, — 
(a) “fiscal deficit ” means the excess of total disbursements, from the Consolidated Fund of India, 
excluding repayment of debt, ov er total receipts into the Fund  (excluding the debt receipts),  during a 
financial year;  
3[ 4[(aa) “Central Government debt” at any date means — 
(i) the total outstanding liabilities of the Central Government on the security of the 
Consolidated Fund of India, including external debt valued at current exchange rates;  
(ii) the total outstanding liabilities in the public account of India;  and 
 (iii) such financial liabilities of any body corporate or other entity owned or controlled by 
the Central Government, which the Government is to repay or service from the annual financial 
statement, reduced by the cash balance ava ilable at the end of that date; ] 
(b) “fiscal indicators ” means the measures such as numerical ceilings and proportions to gross 
domestic product, as may be prescribed, for evaluation of the fiscal position of the Central 
Government;  
3[ 5[(bb) “general Government debt” means the sum total of the debt of the Cent ral Government 
and the State Governments, excluding inter -Governmental liabilities; ] 
6[(bc) “gross domestic product” means the sum of the gross value added by all resident 
production units plus that part of taxes, less subsidies, on products, which is not included in the 
valuation of output, during a financial year, reckoned at current market prices, as published by the 
Central Statistics Office from time to time ;] 
(c) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
6[(ca) „„real gross domestic product‟‟ means gross domestic product, reckoned at constant prices, 
as published by the Central Statistics Office from time to time;  
(cb) „„real output growth‟‟ means growth in real gross domestic product;]  
                                                           
1. The words “achieving s ufficient revenue surplus and” o mitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 210 (w.e.f 31-3-2018 ). 
2. 5th July, 2004,  vide notification No . G.S.R. 395(E), dated 2nd July, 2004, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
3. Ins. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 146 (w. e. f. 28 -5-2012).  
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s . 211, for  clause ( aa) (w.e.f 31-3-2018) . 
5. Subs. by s. 211, ibid., for clause  (bb) (w.e.f 31-3-2018 ). 
6. Ins.  by s. 211, ibid. (w.e.f 31-3-2018 ). 3 
 (d) “Reserve Bank ” mean s the Reserve Bank of India constituted under sub -section ( 1) of             
section 3 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
1*    *    *   *   * 
3.Fiscal policy s tatements to be laid before Parliament .—(1) The Central Government shall lay in  
each financial year before both Houses of Parliament the following statements of fiscal policy along with 
the annual financial statement a nd 2[demands for grants except the Medium -term Expenditure Framework 
Statement ], namely: — 
(a) the Medium -term Fiscal Policy Statement;  
(b) the Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement;  
(c) the Mac ro-economic Framework Statement;  
3[(d) the Medium -term E xpenditure Framework Statement.]  
3[(1A) The statements referred to in clauses ( a) to ( c) of sub -section ( 1) shall be followed up with the 
Medium -term Expenditure Framework Statement with detailed analysis of underlying assumptions.  
(1B) The Central Government shall lay the Medium -term Expenditure Framework Statement referred 
to in clause ( d) of sub -section ( 1) before both House s of Parliam ent, immediately , following the s ession 
of Parliament in which the policy statements referred to in clauses ( a) to ( c) were laid under sub -section  
(1).] 
(2) The Medium -term Fiscal Policy Statement shall set forth a three -year rolling target for prescribed 
fiscal indicators with specification of underlying assumptions.  
(3) In particular , and without prejudice to the provisions contained in sub -section ( 2), the          
Medium -term Fiscal Policy Statement shall include an assessmen t of sustainability relating to — 
4*    *    *  *   * 
 (ii) the use of capital receipts including market borrowings for generating productive assets.  
(4) The Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement shall, inter alia , contain — 
(a) the policies of the Central Government for the ensuing financial year relating to taxation, 
expenditure, market borrowings and other liabilities, lending and investments, pricing of administered 
goods and services, securities and description of other activities such as underwriting and guarante es 
which have potential budgetary implications;  
(b) the strategic priorities of the Central Government for the ensuing financial year in the fiscal 
area;  
(c) the key fiscal measures and rationale for any major deviation in fiscal measures pertaining to 
taxation, subsidy, expenditure, administered pricing and borrowings;  
(d) an evaluation as to how the current policies of the Central Government are in conformity with 
the fiscal management principles set out in section 4 and the objectives set out in the Medi um-term 
Fiscal Policy Statement.  
(5) The Macro -economic Framework S tatement shall contain an  assessment of the growth prospects 
of the economy with specification of underlying assumptions.  
(6) In particular and without prejudice to the generality of the fo regoing  provisions the M acro-
economic Framework S tatement shall contain an assessment relating to — 
(a) the growth in the gross domestic product;  
(b) the fiscal balance of the Union Government as reflected in the 5*** gross fiscal balance;  
(c) the external sector balance of the economy as reflected in the current account bala nce of the  
balance of payments.  
                                                           
1. Clause s (e) and ( f) omitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 211  (w.e.f. 31-3-2018 ). 
2. Subs. by  Act 23 of 2012, s. 147 , for “demand for grants” (w. e. f. 28 -5-2012).  
3. Ins. by  s. 147 , ibid. (w. e. f. 28 -5-2012).  
4.  Item ( i) omitted by Act 13 of 2018, s. 212 (w.e.f. 31-3-2018 ). 
5.  The words “revenue balance and” o mitted by s. 212 , ibid.  (w.e.f. 31-3-2018 ). 
 4 
 1[(6A) (a) The Medium -term Expenditure Framework Statement shall set forth a three -year rolling 
target for prescribed expenditure indicators wit h specification of underlyin g assumptions and risk 
involved . 
(b) In particular and without prejudice to the  provisions contained in clause  (a), the Medium -term 
Expenditure Framework State ment shall, inter alia , contain — 
(i) the expenditure commitment of major policy changes involving new service, new 
instruments of service, new scheme s and programmes;  
(ii) the explicit contingent liabilities, which are in the form of stipulated annuity payments 
over a multi -year time -frame;  
2*    *   *   *  * 
(7) The Medi um-term Fiscal Policy Statement, 3[the Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement,   the Medium -
term Expenditure Framework Statement ] and the Macro -economic Framework Statement referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) shall be in such form as may be prescribed.  
4[4. Fiscal management p rinciples .—(1) The Central Government shall, — 
(a) take appropriate measures to limit the fiscal deficit upto three per cent. of gross domestic 
product by the 31st March, 2021;  
(b) endeavour to ensure that — 
(i) the general Government debt does not exceed sixty per cent.;  
(ii) the Central Government debt does not exceed forty per cent.,  
of gross domestic product by the end of financial year 2024 -2025;   
(c) not give additional guarantees with respect to any loan on s ecurity of the Consolidated Fund of 
India in excess of one -half per cent. of gross domestic product, in any financial year;  
(d) endeavour to ensure that the fiscal targets specified in clauses ( a) and ( b) are not exceeded after 
stipulated target dates.  
(2) The Central Government shall prescribe the annual targets for reduction of fiscal deficit for the 
period beginning from the date of commencement of Part XV of Chapter VIII of the Finance Act, 2018 
and ending on the 31st March, 2021:  
Provided that exceedin g annual fiscal deficit target due to ground or grounds of national security, act 
of war, national calamity, collapse of agriculture severely affecting farm output and incomes, structural 
reforms in the economy with unanticipated fiscal implications, decli ne in real output growth of a quarter 
by at least  three per cent. points below its average of the previous four quarters, may be allowed for the 
purposes of this section.  
(3) Any deviation from fiscal deficit target under sub -section ( 2) shall not exceed one -half per cent. of 
the gross domestic product in a year.  
(4) The Central Government shall, in case of increase in real output growth of a quarter by at least 
three per cent. points above its average of the previous four quarters, redu ce the fiscal deficit by at least 
one-quarter per cent. of the gross domestic product in a year.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act  23 of 2012, s. 147  (w. e. f. 28 -5-2012).  
2. Item ( iii) omitted  by Act 13 of 2018, s. 212, (w.e.f. 31-3-2018 ). 
3. Subs. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 147,  for “the Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement” (w.e.f. 28 -5-2012).  
4. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 213, for section 4 (w.e.f. 31 -3-2018 ). 5 
 (5) Where the fiscal deficit is allowed to vary from the target prescribed under the proviso to         
sub-section ( 2) or deviation is initiated under sub -section ( 4), a statement explaining the reasons thereof 
and the path of return to annual prescribed targets under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be, 
before both the Houses of Parliament. ] 
5. Borrowing from Reserve Bank .—(1) The Central Government shall not borrow from the Reserve 
Bank.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Central Government may borrow from 
the Reserve Bank by way of advances to meet temporary excess of cash disbursement over cash receipts 
during any financ ial year in accordance with the agreements which may be entered into by that 
Government with the Reserve Bank:  
Provided that any advances made by the Reserve Bank to meet temporary excess cash disbursement 
over cash receipts in any financial year shall be repayable in accordance with the provisions contained in 
sub-section ( 5) of section 17 of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934( 2 of 1934 ). 
1[(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Reserve Bank may subscribe to the 
primary issues of C entral Government Securities due to ground or grounds specified in the proviso to sub -
section ( 2) of section 4.]  
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), the Reserve Bank may buy and sell the 
Central Government securities in the secondar y market  2[or converts Central Government Securities held 
by it with other Securities of the Central Government as mutually agreed between the Reserve Bank and 
the Central Government ]. 
6. Measures for fiscal transparency .—(1) The Central Government shall take suitable measures to 
ensure greater transparency in its fiscal operations in public interest and minimise as far as practicable, 
secrecy in the preparation of the annual financial statement and demands for grants.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provision, the Central 
Government shall, at the time of presentation of annual financial statement and demands for grants, make 
such disclosures and in such form as may be prescribed.  
7. Measures to enforce compliance .—(1) The Minister -in-charge of the Ministry of Finance shall 
review, 3[on half -yearly basis] , the trends in receipts and expenditure in relation to the budget and place 
before both Houses of Parliament the outcome of such re views.  
4[(1A) The Central Government shall prepare a mon thly statement of its accounts.]  
(2) Whenever there is either shortfall in revenue or excess of expenditure over the 5[prescribed levels]  
during any period in a financial year, the Central Government shall take appropriate measures for 
increasing revenue or for reducing the expenditure (including curtailing of the sums authorised to be paid 
and applied from and out of the Consolidated Fund of India under any Act so as to provide for t he 
appropriation of such sums):  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to the expenditure charged on the Consolidated 
Fund of India under clause ( 3) of article 112 of the Constitution or to any ot her expenditure which is 
required to be incurred under any agreement or contract or such other expenditure which cannot be 
postponed or curtailed.  
(3)(a) Except as provided under this Act, no deviation in meeting the obligations cast on the Central 
Governm ent under this Act, shall be permissible without approval of Parliament.  
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 214, for sub-section ( 3) (w.e.f. 31-3-2018 ).    
2. Ins. by s . 214, ibid. (w.e.f.  31-3-2018 ). 
3. Subs. by s. 215, ibid., for  “every quarter” (w.e.f. 31-3-2018 ). 
4. Ins. by s. 215, ibid. (w.e.f. 31-3-2018 ). 
5. Subs. by  s. 215, ibid.,  for  “pre-specified levels mentioned in the Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement and the rules made under 
this Act” (w.e.f. 31-3-2018 ).  6 
 (b) Where, owing to unforeseen circumstances, any deviation is made in meeting the obligations cast 
on the Central Government under this Act, the Minister -in-charge of the Ministry of  Finance shall make a 
statement in both Houses of Parliament explaining — 
(i) any deviation in meeting the obligations cast on the Central Government under this Act;  
(ii) whether such deviation is substantial and relates to the actual or the potential budge tary 
outcomes; and  
(iii) the remedial measures the Central Government proposes to take.  
1[7A. Laying of review reports. —The Central Government may entrust the Comptroller and 
Auditor -General of India to review periodically as required, the compliance of the provisions of this Act 
and such reviews shall be laid on the table of both House s of Parliament. ] 
8. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Governme nt may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the annual targets to be specified under sub -section ( 2) of section 4;  
(b) the fiscal indicators to be prescribed for the purpose of sub -section ( 2) of section 3;  
2[(ba) the expenditure indicators with specification s of underlying assumptions and risk involved 
under clause ( a) of sub -section ( 6A) of section 3 ;] 
(c) the  forms of the Medium -term Fiscal Policy Statement , 3[Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement, 
Medium -term Expenditure Framework Statement ] and Macro -economic Frame Work Statement 
referred to in sub -section ( 7) of section 3;  
4*   *   *   *  * 
(d) the  disclosures and form in which such disclosures shall be made under sub -section ( 2) of 
section 6;  
 5[(da) the level of short fall in revenue or excess of expenditure under sub -section ( 2) of             
section 7;]  
(e) any other matter which is required to  be, or may be, prescribed.  
9. Rules to be laid before each House of Parliament .—Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, 
as soon as may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total 
period of thirty days wh ich may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and 
if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, 
both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Hou ses agree that the rule should not be 
made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may 
be; so, however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of 
anything  previously done under that rule.  
10. Protectio n of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against the Central Government or any officer of the Central Government for anything which is in 
good faith done or intended to be done under this A ct or the rules made thereunder . 
11. Jurisdiction of civil cou rts barred. —No civil court shall have jurisdiction to question the 
legality of any action taken by, or any decision of, the Central Government, under this Act.  
12. A pplication of other laws not barred. —The provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of, the provisions of any other law for the time being in force.  
                                                           
1. Ins. by Act 23 of 2012, s. 149 (w. e. f.  28 -5-2012).  
2. Ins. by s. 150, ibid. (w. e. f. 28 -5-2012).  
3. Subs. by s. 150, ibid.,  for “Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement” (w.e.f. 28 -5-2012).  
4. Clause ( ca) omitted by Act of 13 of 2018, s. 216 (w.e.f. 31-3-2018 ).    
5. Ins. by s. 216, ibid. (w.e.f .  31-3-2018 ).  7 
 13. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving ef fect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no or der shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Pa rliament.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
--------------------------The Industrial Development Bank (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2003--------------------------
 
1 
 THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK (TRANSFER OF  UNDERTAKING AND 
REPEAL) ACT, 2003  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions.  
CHAPTER II  
TRANSFER AND VESTING OF THE UNDERTAKING OF DEVELOPMENT BANK IN COMPANY  
3. Undertaking of Development Bank to vest in Company . 
4. General effect of transfer and vesting of undertaking . 
5. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of Development  Bank . 
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
6. Concession, etc., to be deemed to have been granted to Company . 
7. Tax exemption or benefit to continue to have effect . 
8. Guarantee to be operative . 
9. Shares, bonds and debentures to be deemed to be approved  securities . 
10. Act to have overriding effect . 
11. Application of other laws not bar red. 
12. Amendment to certain enactments . 
13. Substitution in Acts, rules, regulations or notifications by  Company in place of Development 
Bank . 
14. Power to remove difficulties.  
15. Repeal and saving of Act 18 of 1964.  
THE SCHEDULE . 
   
2 
  
THE INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT BANK (TR ANSFER OF  UNDERTAKING AND 
REPEAL) ACT, 2003  
ACT NO. 53 OF 2003  
[30th December , 2003.]  
An Act to provide for the transfer and vesting of the undertaking of  the Industrial Development 
Bank of India to, and in, the Company to be  formed and registered as a Company under the 
Companies Act, 1956 to  carry on banking business and for matters connected therewith or  
incidental thereto and also to repeal the Industrial Development Bank  of India Act, 1964.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fourth Year of the Republic of  India as  follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Industrial Development Bank 
(Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act,  2003.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government  may, by notification, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “appointed day ” means such date as the Central Government may, by  notification, appoint 
under section 3;  
(b) “Company ” means the Industrial Development Bank of India Limited to  be formed and 
registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956);  
(c) “Development Bank ” means the Industrial Development Bank of India  established under            
sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of  the Industrial  Development Bank of India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964);  
(d) “notification ” means a notification published in the Official  Gazette;  
(e) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted under  the Reserve Bank of India 
Act, 1934 (2 of 1934 ). 
CHAPTER II  
TRANSFER AND VESTING OF THE UNDERTAKING OF DEVELOPMENT BANK IN COMPANY  
3. Undertaking of Development Bank to vest in Company .—(1) On such date  as the Central 
Government may, by notification, appoint, there shall be  transferred to, and vest in, the Company, the 
undertaking of  Development Bank.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Banking Regulation Act,  1949 (10 of 1949), the 
Company referred to in sub -section ( 1) shall be  deemed to be a banking company within the meaning of 
clause ( c) of section 5 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 and as such shall carryon banking business in 
accordance with the provisions of that Act, in  addition to the business which may be carried on and 
transacted by the  Development Bank:  
Provided that such Com pany shall not be requir ed to — 
(a) obtain licence under section 22 of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949  (10 of 1949);  
(b) maintain for a period of five years from the appointed day the  percentage of assets required to 
be maintained under section 24 of the  said Act.  
(3) The provisions of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949)  shall, as far as may be, to the 
extent they are not repugnant to any  provision of this Act, apply to such Company.  
                                                           
1. 2nd July, 2004, vide notification No . S.O. 769(E) dated 2nd July, 2004, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( ii).  
3 
 (4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Banking Regulation  Act,1949 (10 of 1949), the Central 
Government may, in consultation with the  Reserve Bank of India, by notification, direct that any of the  
provisions of that Act  specified in the notification — 
(a) shall not apply to the Company; or  
(b) shall apply to the Company, only with such exceptions,  modifications and the adaptations as 
may be specified in the  notification.  
(5) A copy of every notification proposed to be issued under sub-section  (4), shall be laid in draft 
before each House of Parliament,  while it is  in session, for a total period of thirty days which may be  
comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if,  before the expiry of the session 
immediately following the session or  the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree i n 
disapproving  the issue of the notification or both Houses agree in making any  modification in the 
notification, the notification shall not be issued  or, as the case may be, shall be issued only in such 
modified form as  may be agreed upon by both the Hous es. 
4. General effect of transfer and vesting of undertaking .—(1) The  Central Government, being the 
shareholder of the Development Bank and  every other shareholder of the Development Bank immediately 
before the  appointed day shall be deemed to be registere d on and from the  appointed day as a shareholder 
of the Company to the extent of the face  value of the shares held by such shareholder.  
(2) The undertaking of the Development Bank which is transferred to,  and which vest in, the 
Company under section 3 shal l be deemed to  include all business, assets, rights, powers, authorities and  
privileges and all properties, movable and immovable, real and  personal, corporeal and incorporeal, in 
possession or reservation,  present or contingent of whatever nature and wher esoever situate  including 
lands, buildings, vehicles, cash balances, deposits, foreign  currencies, disclosed and undisclosed reserves, 
reserve fund, special  reserve fund, benevolent reserve fund, any other fund, stocks,  investments, shares, 
bonds, debentur es, security, management of any  industrial concern, loans, advances and guarantees given 
to any person  or industrial concern, tenancies, leases and book debts and all other  rights and interests 
arising out of such property as were immediately  before the appointed day in the ownership, possession or 
power of the  Development Bank in relation to its undertaking, within or without  India, all books of 
account, registers, records and documents relating  thereto and shall also be deemed to include all 
borrowings,  liabilities  and obligations of whatever kind within or without India then  subsisting of the 
Development Bank in relation to its respective  undertaking.  
(3) All contracts, deeds, bonds, guarantees, powers of attorney, other  instruments and working 
arrangem ents subsisting immediately before the  appointed day and affecting the Development Bank shall 
cease to have  effect or to be enforceable against the Development Bank and shall be  of as full force and 
effect against or in favour of the Company in  which the u ndertaking of the Development Bank has vested 
by virtue of  this Act and enforceable as fully and effectually as if instead of the  Development Bank, the 
Company had been named therein or had been a  party thereto.  
(4) Any proceeding or cause of action pendin g or existing immediately  before the appointed day by or 
against the Development Bank in relation  to its undertaking may, as from the appointed day, be continued 
and enforced by or against the Company in which the undertaking of the  Development Bank has ve sted 
by virtue of this Act as it might have been  enforced by or against the Development Bank if this Act had 
not been  enacted and shall cease to be enforceable by or against the Development  Bank.  
5. Provisions in respect of officers and other employees of Development  Bank .—(1) Every officer 
or other employee of the Development Bank  (except a director of the Board or the chairman and 
managing director  or any whole -time director) serving in the employment immediately  before the 
appointed day shall, in so far as such officer or other  employee is employed in connection with the 
undertaking which has  vested in the Company by virtue of this Act, become, as from the  appointed day, 
an officer or, as the case may be, other employee of the Company  and shall hold his o ffice or service 
therein by the same tenure , at the same remuneration, upon the same terms and conditions, with  the same 
obligations and with the same rights and privileges as to  leave, leave fare concession, welfare scheme, 
medical benefit scheme,  insuran ce, provident fund, other funds, retirement, voluntary retirement , gratuity 
and other benefits as he would have held under the  Development Bank if its undertaking had not vested in 
the Company and  shall continue to do so as an officer or, as the case may b e, other employee  of the 
Company or until the expiry of a period of six months  from the appointed day, if such officer or other 
employee opts not to  continue to be the officer or other employee of the Company within such  period.   
4 
 (2) Where an officer or oth er employee of the Development Bank opts under  sub-section ( 1) not to be 
in employment or service of the  company, such officer or other employee shall be deemed to have  
resigned.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial Disputes Act,  1947 ( 14 of 1947), or in any 
other law for the time being in force, the  transfer of the services of any officer or other employee of the  
Development Bank to the Company shall not entitle such officer or other  employee to any compensation 
under this Act or under any other law for  the time being in force and no such claim shall be entertained by 
any court, tribunal or other authority.  
(4) The officers and other employees who have retired before the  appointed day from the service of 
the Development Bank and are enti tled to any benefits, rights or privileges shall be entitled to receive the  
same benefits, rights or privileges from the Company.  
(5) The trust of the provident fund or the gratuity fund of the  Development Bank and any other bodies 
created for the welfare of officers or employees would continue to discharge their functions in  the 
Company as was being done hitherto in the Development Bank and any  tax exemption granted to the 
provident fund or the gratuity fund or  pension fund would continue to be applied to the Company.  
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or in the Companies  Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or in 
any other law for the time being in force or  in the regulations of the Development Bank, no director of the  
Board, chairman and managing direct or or any whole -time director or any  other person entitled to manage 
the whole or substantial part of the  business and affairs of the Development Bank shall be entitled to any  
compensation against the Development Bank or the Company for the loss  of office or for the premature 
termination of any contract of  management entered into by him with the Development Bank.  
CHAPTER III  
MISCELLANEOUS  
6. Concession, etc., to be deemed to have been granted to Company .—With  effect from the 
appointed day, all fiscal and other concessions,  licences, benefits, privileges and exemptions granted to 
the Development Bank, in connection with the affairs and business of the  Development Bank under any 
law for the time being in force shall be  deemed to have been granted to the Comp any. 
7. Tax exemption or benefit to continue to have effect .—(1) Where any  exemption from, or any 
assessment with respect to, any tax has been  granted or made or any benefit by way of set off or carry 
forward of  any unabsorbed depreciation or investment allowance or other allowance  or loss has been 
extended or is available to the Development Bank under  the Income -tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961), such 
exemption, assessment or  benefit shall continue to have effect in relation to the Company.  
(2) Where any paymen t made by the Development Bank is exempted from  deduction of tax at source 
under any provision of the Income -tax Act,1961 (43 of 1961), such exemption will continue to be 
available as if  the provisions of the said Act made applicable to the Development Ban k were operative in 
relation to the Company.  
(3) The transfer and vesting of the undertaking of the Development Bank  or any part thereof in terms 
of section 3 shall not be construed as a  transfer within the meaning of the Income -tax Act, 1961               
(43 of 1961) or  any other law for the time being in force.  
8. Guarantee to be operative .—Any guarantee given for or in favour of  the Development Bank with 
respect to any loan, lease, finance or other assistance  shall continue to be operative in relation t o the 
Company.  
9. Shares, bonds and debentures to be deemed to be approved  securities .—Notwithstanding 
anything contained in any other law for the  time being in force, the shares, bonds and debentures of the 
Company  shall be deemed to be approved securitie s for the purposes of the  Indian Trusts Act, 1882           
(2 of 1882) and the Insurance Act, 1938 (4 of1938).  
10. Act to have overriding effect .—The provisions of this Act shall  have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained  in any  enactment other than this Act or in any instrument 
having effect  by virtue of any enactment other than this Act.  
11. Application of other laws not barred .—The provisions of this Act  shall be in addition to, and 
not in derogation of the provisions of any  other law for the time being in force.   
5 
 12. Amendment to certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the  Schedule to this Act shall 
be amended in the manner provided therein.  
13. Substitution in Acts, rules, regulations or notifications by  Company in pla ce of Development 
Bank .—In every Act, rule, regulation or notification  in force on the appointed day, — 
(a) for the words “Industrial Development Bank of India ”, wherever they  occur, the words 
“Industrial Development Bank of India Limited referred to  in cla use ( b) of section 2 of the Industrial 
Development Bank  (Transfer of Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2003 ” shall be substituted;  
(b) for the words “Development Bank ”, wherever they occur, the words  “Industrial Development 
Bank of India Limited referred to in clause ( b) of section 2 of the Industrial Development Bank 
(Transfer of  Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2003 ” shall be substituted;  
(c) for the words and figures “the Development Bank means the  Industrial Development Bank of 
India, established under section 3  of the Industrial Development Bank of India Act, 1964 (18 of 
1964) ”, the words, brackets, letter and figures “the Industrial Development Bank of  India Limited 
referred to in clause ( b) of section 2 of the Industrial  Development Bank (Transfer of Undertaki ng 
and Repeal) Act, 2003 ” shall  be substituted.  
(d) for the words and figures “the Industrial Development Bank of India , established under 
section 3 of the Industrial Development Bank of  India Act, 1964 (18 of 1964) ”, the words, brackets, 
letter and figure s “the Industrial Development Bank of India Limited referred to  in clause ( b) of 
section 2 of the Industrial Development Bank ( Transfer  or Undertaking and Repeal) Act, 2003 ” shall 
be substituted.  
14. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in  giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government  may, by order published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions  
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to it  to be necessary or expedient for 
removi ng the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of three  years from the date of 
commencement of this Act.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as maybe after it is made, before each 
House of Parliamen t. 
15. Repeal and saving of Act 18 of 1964 .—(1) On the appointed day, the  Industrial Development 
Bank of India Act, 1964, shall stand repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of the Industrial Development Bank of  India Act, 1964, the provisions 
of section 30A of the Act so repealed  will continue to be applicable in respect of the arrangement entered  
into by the Development Bank with an industrial concern up to the  appointed day and the Company will 
be entitled to act upon and enforce  the same as fully and e ffectually as if this Act has not been enacted.  
   
6 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 12)  
AMENDMENTS TO CERTAIN ENACTMENTS  
PART I  
AMENDMENTS TO THE RESERVE BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1934  
(2 OF 1934)  
AMENDMENTS  
1. In section 2, clause ( bvii) shall be omitted.  
2. In section 17,— 
(a) in sub -sections ( 4G) and ( 4H), the words “the Development Bank or ” shall be omitted;  
(b) in sub -sections ( 4-I), (8A) and ( 12B), the words “the Development  Bank ” shall be omitted.  
3. In section 42, in sub -section ( 1), in the Explanation , in clause  (c), in sub -clause ( ii), the words “or 
from the Development Bank ” shall be omitted.  
4. In section 45 -I, in clause ( bb), in sub -clause ( iv), the item ( a) shall be omitted.  
5. In section 46C, in sub -section ( 2), clauses ( a) and ( b) shall be  omitted.  
PART II  
AMENDMENTS TO THE BANKING REGULATION ACT, 1949  
(10 OF 1949)  
AMENDMENTS  
1. In section 5, clause ( ffa) shall be omitted.  
2. In section 34A, in sub -section ( 3), the words “the Development  Bank ” shall be omitted.  
3. In section 36AD, in sub -section ( 3), the words “the Development  Bank, ” shall be omitted.  
PART III  
AMENDMENT TO THE INDUSTRIAL DISPUTES ACT, 1947  
(14 OF 1947 ) 
AMENDMENT  
In section 2, in clause ( bb), the words “the Industrial Development  Bank of India ” shall be omitted.  
PART IV  
AMENDMENTS TO  THE SMALL INDUSTRIES DEVELOPMENT BANK OF INDIA ACT, 1989  
(39 OF 1989)  
AMENDMENTS  
In section 2, — 
(a) for clause ( h), the following claus e shall be substituted, namely: — 
„(h) “industrial concern in the small scale sector ” means any concern engaged  or to be 
engaged in, — 
(i) the manufacture, preservation or processing of goods;  
(ii) shipping;  
(iii) mining including development of mines;  
(iv) the hotel industry;   
7 
 (v) the transport of passengers or goods by road or by water or by air or  by ropeway or by 
lift; 
(vi) the generation, storage or distribution of electricity or any  other form of energy;  
(vii) the maintenance, repair, testing or servicing of machinery or  equipment of any 
description or vehicles or vessels or motor boats or  trailers or tractors;  
(viii) assembling, repairing or packing any article with the aid of  machinery or power;  
(ix) the setting up of, or development of, an industrial area or an industrial  estate;  
(x) fishing or providing shore facilities for fishing or mainten ance thereof ; 
(xi) providing special or technical knowledge or other services for the promotion  of 
industrial growth;  
(xii) providing engineering, technical, financial, management,  marketing or other services 
or facilities for industry;  
(xiii) service industry such as altering, ornamenting, polishing,  finishing, oiling, washing, 
cleaning or otherwise treating or adapting  any article or substance with a view to its use, sale, 
transport,  delivery or disposal;  
(xiv) providing medical, health or other allie d services;  
(xv) providing services relating to information technology,  telecommunication or 
electronics;  
(xvi) leasing, sub -leasing or giving on hire -purchase of industrial  plants, equipments, 
machinery or other assets including vehicles, ships  and aircra ft; 
(xvii) such other activity as the Central Government may, having regard  to the objects of 
this Act, by notification, specify in this behalf; or  
(xviii) the research and development of any concept, technology,  design, process or 
product whether in relat ion to any of the matters  aforesaid, including any activities specified 
under sub -clause ( xvii), or any other matter and which is regarded as a small -scale 
undertaking  under section 11B of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951         
(65 of  1951).  
Explanation .—The expression “processing of goods ” includes any art or  process for producing, 
preparing or making an article by subjecting any  material to a manual, mechanical, chemical, 
electrical or any other  like operation.‟;  
(b) after clause ( la), the following cla uses shall be inserted, namely: — 
„(lb) “Reserve Bank ” means the Reserve Bank of India constituted  under the Reserve Bank of 
India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934);  
(lc) “scheduled bank ” means a bank for the time being included in the  Second Schedule to the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); ‟; 
(c) clause ( q) shall be omitted.  
--------------------------The Offshore Areas Mineral (Development and Regulation) Act, 2002--------------------------
  1 
 THE OFFSHORE AREAS MINERAL (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 2002  
___________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of Union control.  
3. Application . 
4. Definitions.  
 
CHAPTER II  
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ACQUISITION OF OPERATING RIGHTS IN THE OFFSHORE AREA S 
5. Reconnais sance, exploration or production to be under permit, licence or lease.  
6. Grant of operating right.  
7. Termination of operating right.  
8. Reservation of areas.  
9. Power of  close areas.  
10. Availability of areas for grant of permit, licence or lease . 
11. Grant of reconnaissance permit.  
12. Grant of exploration licence.  
13. Grant of production lease.  
14. Period of commencement of operating rights.  
15. Power o f Central Government to authoris e survey,  research and scientific investigations in areas 
covered under operating rights.  
16. Royalty.  
17. Fixed rent.  
18. Contribution towards International Seabed Authority.  
19. Safety of persons and property.  
20. Prevention and control of pollution and protection of marine environm ent. 
21. Power of Central Government and administering authority to issue directions . 
 
CHAPTER III  
POWER OF ENTRY, INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE  
22. Power of entry, inspection, search and seizure.  
 
CHAPTER IV  
OFFENCES  
23. Offences.  
24. Offences by companies.  
25. Place of trial. 
26. Previous sanction of Central Government for prosecution.  
27. Offences triable by Court of Session.  
 
 
    2 
 CHAPTER V  
CIVIL LIABILITY AND ADJUDICATION  
SECTIONS  
28. Civil liability and adjudication.  
 
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Extension of enactments to offshore areas.  
30. Compounding of offences.  
31. Recovery of certain sums as arrears of land revenue.  
32. Delegation of powers.  
33. Protection of action taken in good faith.  
34. Appeals.  
35. Power to make rules.  
36. Relaxation in specific cases.  
37. Persons to be public servants.  
38. Removal of difficulties.  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE . 
THE  SECOND SCHEDULE.  
 
 
    3 
 THE OFFSHORE AREAS MINERAL (DEVELOPMENT AND REGULATION) ACT, 2002  
ACT NO. 17 OF 2003  
[30th January , 2003.]  
An Act to provide for development and regulation of mineral resources in the territorial waters, 
continental shelf, exclusive economic zone and other maritime zones of India and to provide 
for matters connected t herewith or incidental thereto.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -third Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
CHAPTER I  
PRELIMINARY  
1. Short title and commencement. —(1) This Act may be called the Offshore Areas Mineral 
(Develop ment and Regulation) Act, 2002.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Declaration as to expediency of Union control .—It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the 
public interest that the Union should take under its control the regulatio n of mines and the development of 
minerals in offshore areas to the extent herei n after provided.  
3. Application. —(1) This Act shall apply to all minerals in the offshore areas including any mineral 
prescribed by notification under clause ( g) of sub-section ( 1) of section 2 of the Atomic Energy Act, 1962 
(33 of 1962) except mineral oils an d hydrocarbo ns related thereto.  
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of this Act shall be in addition to, and not 
in derogation of, any o ther law for the time being in force in the offshore areas.  
4. Definitions. —In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “administering authority ” means an authority notified, in the Official Gazette, by the Central 
Governmen t for the purposes of this Act;  
(b) ''atomic minerals ” means the minerals included in atomic minerals specified in Part B of the 
First Schedule to the Mines and Minerals (Development and Regu lation) Act, 1957 (67 of 1957);  
(c) “Coast Guard ” means the Coast Guard constituted under the Coast Guard Act, 1978                           
(30 of 1978);  
(d) “exploration licence ” means a li cence granted under section 12;  
(e) “exploration operation ” means any operation undertaken for the purpose of exploring, locating 
or proving the mineral deposits;  
(f) “holder”, in relation to any operating right, means the lessee, licensee or permittee, as the case 
may be, in r espect of such operating right;  
(g) “hydrocarbon ” means very large group of chemical compounds composed of carbon and 
hydro gen; 
(h) “Indian national ” means a citizen of India and includes a firm or other association, if all the 
members of the firm or, as the case may be, the members of the asso ciation, are citizens of India;  
(i) “lessee” means the person in whose name t he prod uction lease is granted;  
(j) “licensee” means the person in whose name the exploration licence is granted;  
(k) “mine” means any place in the offshore area wherein any exploration or production operation 
is carried on, together with any vessel, erection, ap pliance, artificial island or platform and premises 
in the offshore area used for the purposes of explor ation, winning, treating or preparing minerals, 
obtaining or extracting any mineral or metal by any mode or method , and includes any area covered  
by an exploration licence or production lease where exploration or productio n operation has been, or 
is bein g, or may be, carried on un der the provisions of this Act;  
                                                           
1. 15th January, 2010, vide notification no. S.O. 338(E), dated by 11th February, 2010, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary,                 
Part II, se c. 3(ii).   4 
 (l) “mineral” includes all minerals except mineral oil and hydrocar bon resources relating thereto;  
(m) “mineral oil ” includes natural gas and petroleum;  
(n) “offshore area ” means the territorial waters, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone and 
other maritime zones of India under the Territorial Waters, Continental Shelf, Exclusive Economi c 
Zone and Other Maritim e Zones Act, 1976 (80 of 1976);  
(o) “operating right ” means the right of holder of a reconnaissance permit, or an exploration 
licence, or a production le ase; 
(p) “permittee ” means the person in whose name the re connaissance permit i s granted;  
(q) “pollution of offshore environment ” means the introduction by any person, directly or 
indirectly, of substances or energy into the offshore environment which results, or is likely to result, 
in deleterious effect on living resources and marine life, hazards to human health, hindrance to mar ine 
activities, including fishing and other legitimate uses of the offshore areas and impairment of quality 
of sea water for use  and reduction of amenities;  
(r) “prescribed ” means prescribe d by rules made under this Act;  
(s) “production operation ” means an y operation undertaken for the purpose of winning any 
mineral from the offshore area and includes any operation directly or indirectly necessary there  for or 
incidental thereto;  
(t) “production lease ” means a lease granted under section 13 which confers an  exclusive right for 
the purpose of un dertaking production operation;  
(u) “reconnaissance operation ” means any preliminary geo -scientific survey undertaken for the 
purpose of searchin g or locating mineral deposits;  
(v) “reconnaissance permit ” means a permit granted under section 11 for the purpose of 
undertaking reconnaissance operation;  
(w) “vessel” includes any ship, boat, sailing vessel or any other vessel of any description.  
CHAPTER II  
GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ACQUISITION OF OPERATING RIGHT S IN THE OFFSHORE AREAS  
5. Re connais sance, exploration or production to be under permit, licence or lease .—(1) No 
person shall undertake any reconnaissance operation, exploration operation or production operation in the 
offshore areas, except unde r and in accordance with the pre scribed terms and conditions of a 
reconnaissance permit, exploration licence or production lease granted under this Act  and the rules made 
thereunder:  
Provided that nothing in this sub -section shall apply to any reconnaissance operation or exploration 
operation undertaken by the Geological Survey of India, Atomic Minerals Directorate of Exploration and 
Research, the Chief Hydrographer  to the Government of India of Naval Hydrographic Office of the Indian 
Navy, the National Instit ute of Oceanography, the National Institute of Ocean Technology of Department 
of Ocean Development of the Government of India, or any other agency duly authorised in this behalf by 
the Central Government.  
(2) A permittee or li censee or lessee shall furnish — 
(a) all data, as the case may be, relating to reconnaissance operation or mineral exploration or 
mining such as bathymetry, geomorphology, mineral distribution, anomaly maps, sections, core logs, 
location maps, plans, struc tures, contour maps, chemical a nalysis, data on current tides, waves, wind, 
other geophysical and geotechnical data and any other data collected during exploration operation or 
mining operation, to the Director -General, Geological Survey of India, Kolkata and the Controller 
General, Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur;  
(b) all information pertaining to atomic minerals collected, as the case may be, during 
reconnaissance operation or exploration operation or mining operation, to the Secretary to the 
Government of India dealing with the Atomic Energy, Director -General, Geological Survey of India, 
Kolkata and the Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur;  
   5 
 (c) a six monthly report on the work done by him stating the number of persons engaged and 
disclosing in full the geological, geophys ical, geochemical, geo -environmental or other valuable data 
collected by him during the period under report, to the Direc tor-General, Geological Survey of India, 
Kolkata and the Controller General, Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur and the report shall be 
submitted within three months of the closing of the period to which it relates:  
Provided that in the case of investigations pertaining to the atomic minerals, such report shall also 
be submitted to the Secretary to the Government of India dealing with the Ato mic Energy;  
(d) a full report of the work done by him and all information relevant to mineral resources 
collected by him during the course of exploration operation of the area covered by the licence within 
three months of the expiry of the licence, or aban donment of operation or termination of the licence, 
whichever is earlier, to the Director -General, Geological Survey of India, Kolkata and the Controller 
General, Indian Bureau of Mines, Nagpur and shall also give therein reasons and indicate whether the 
whole or any part of the report or data submitted by h im should be kept confidential.  
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in this A ct, the Central Government may — 
(a) authorise seaward artillery practice under the Seaward Artillery Practice Act, 1949                      
(8 of 1949);  
(b) provide for, by notification in the Official Gazette, special measures to ensure public safety 
and interest, the defence of India and civil defence, conduct of the naval operations and exercises, 
national security and o ther strategic considerations an d the matters connected therewith during wa r 
like conditions or otherwise.  
(4) No operating right shall be granted or renewed otherwise than in accordance with the provisions 
of this Act and the rules made thereunder and any  reconnaissance permit, exploration licence or 
production lease granted, renewed or acquired in contravent ion of the provisions of this Act or any rules 
made thereunder, shall be void.  
6. Grant of operating right. —The Central Government shall not grant an operating right to any 
person unless such person — 
(a) is an Indian national, or a company as defined in section 3 of the Compa nies Act,                
1956 (1 of 1956)  ; and  
(b) satisfies such c onditions as may be prescribed:  
Provided that no production lease for atomic minerals or prescribed substances may be granted 
without consultation with the Department of the Government of India dealing with the Atomic Energy.  
7. Termination of operating right. —(1) Where the Central Government, after consultation with the 
administering authority, is of the opinion that it is expedient in the interest of development and regulation 
of offshore mineral resources, preservation of natural environment and prevention of pollution, avoidance 
of danger to public health or c ommunication, ensuring safety of any offshore structure or conservation of 
mineral resources, the Central Government may prematurely terminate any operating righ t in respect of 
any mineral in any o ffshore area or part thereof.  
(2) No order for premature te rmination of operating right under sub -section ( 1) shall be made except 
after giving the holder of operating right a reasona ble opportunity of being heard.  
(3) Where the holder of any operating right fails to commence operation within the period specified in 
section 14 or discontinues the operation for a period of two years, the operating right shall lapse from the 
date of execution of the lease or, as the case may be, discontinuance of the operation : 
Provided that the administering authority, on an applica tion made by the holder of operating right and 
after being satisfied that such non -commencement of operation or discontinuation thereof, is due to the 
reasons beyond  the control of the holder of op erating right, may condone such non -commencement or 
discont inuation.  
8. Reservation of areas. —(1) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, reserve any offshore area not already held under any operating right, for the purposes of     6 
 the Central Government and, where it proposes t o do so, it shall, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify the boundaries of such area and the mineral or minerals in respect of whi ch such area shall be 
reserved.  
(2) The Central Government may, from time to time, by notification in the  Official Gazette, 
dereserve, any area reserved under sub -section ( 1), in the interest of development and regulation of the 
offshore mineral.  
9. Power to close areas. —(1) The Central Government may, in the public interest, by order in 
writing and communica ted to the permittee, licensee or lessee, as the case may be, close any area either in 
part or whole, covered under any operating right, fo r the preservation of natural environment and 
prevention of pollution, or to avoid danger to public health, or commun ication, or to ensure safety of any 
offshore structure or platform, or for the conservation of offshore mineral, or for national security or for 
any other strategic consideration.  
(2) Any area, either in part or whole closed under sub -section ( 1) and inclu ded in any operating right, 
shall, from the date of such order, be deemed to be excluded for the purposes of the operating right and 
the holder of the operating right shall not u ndertake any operation in the area covered under such order 
from the date spec ified therein.  
10. Availability of areas for grant of permit, licence or lease. —(1) Within six months from the 
date of commencement of this Act, and subsequently at such times as may be considered necessary in this 
behalf by the administering authority, it  shall, by no tification in the Official Gazette, declare the parts of 
the offshore areas which shall be available for grant of reconnaissance permit, explorati on licence or 
production lease.  
(2) Any application for the grant of reconnaissance permit, explo ration licence or production lease in 
respect of any area not covered by a notification issued under sub -section ( 1) shall be deemed to be 
premature and no applicatio n shall be entertained therefor.  
(3) Operating rights shall be granted in standard block o f five minutes longitude by five minutes 
latitude and such grant may cover more than one standard block which shall be contiguous.  
11. Grant of reconnaissance permit .—(1) The administering authority may grant a non -exclusive 
reconnaissance permit to any pe rson eligible under section 6 for grant of operating right.  
(2) The period for which a reconnaissance permit may be granted under sub -section ( 1) shall be for a 
period specified in such permit which shall  not exceed two years.  
(3) A reconnaissance permit g ranted under sub -section ( 1) may be renewed for a period not exceeding 
two years if, after a review of the progress made during the period of such grant, the administering 
authority is satisfied that a fu rther period is necess ary to complete the reconnaiss ance operation.  
(4) The area that may be granted under one reconnaissance permit shall not exceed a block of two 
degree la titude by two degree longitude.  
(5) The administering authority may grant reconnaissance permits to more than one person in respect 
of the same area for the same mineral deposits in the interest of offshore mineral development.  
12. Grant of exploration licence .—(1) The administering authority may grant an explora tion licence 
to any person who — 
(a) is eligible under section 6 for grant of operating right;  
(b) produces, to the satisfaction of the administering authority, evidence that such person 
possesses the requisite technical ability and financial resources to undertake exploration operation 
based on such scientific pa rameters, as may  be prescribed;  
(c) submits a work programme for the area applied for, prepared in such manner and supported by 
such data as may be prescribed, setting forth the activities proposed to be carried out during the 
period of the exploration li cence including t he intended exp loration schedule and methods to be used, 
an estimated schedule of expenditure, measures to prevent pollution and protect the environment and 
to monitor the effectiveness of environmental safeguards subject to the modificat ions which the 
administering aut hority m ay make in such work programme;  
(d) undertakes not to deviate from the work programme for exploration licence approved by t he 
administering authority; and    7 
 (e) has fulfilled, to the satisfaction of administering authority, all his stat utory obligations under 
any operating rig ht previously — 
(i) granted; or  
(ii) transferred in  the prescribed manner,  
to him.  
(2) The administering authority may, if there is any reasonable cause to believe that any person, to 
whom an exploration licence has  been granted, has violated any undertaking given under clause ( d) of 
sub-section ( 1), terminate the exploration licenc e.  
(3) All applications for the grant of exploration licence received within the prescribed time and which 
satisfy the conditions specif ied in sub -section ( 1) shall be considered together and while making a 
selection for the grant of exploration licence, the administering authority shall follow the procedure given 
below, namely: — 
(a) where only one application is received in respect of an area, the administering authority may 
grant the explor ation licence to the applicant;  
(b) where two or more applications are received in respect of the same area or substantially the 
same area, the order of preference  shall be as follows, namely: — 
(I) preference shall be given to an applicant who requires the mineral for use in an industry 
either already owned by the applicant or who has taken sufficient  steps to set -up such industry:  
Provided that where there are more than one application of such categ ory, the administering 
authority may grant licence based on a  comparative evaluation of the — 
(i) nature, quality and experience of the technical perso nnel employed by the applicant;  
(ii) financial resources of t he applicant;  
(iii) nature and quantum of the  exploration work  proposed by the applicant; and  
(iv) nature, quality and quantum of data submitted along wit h the programme of 
exploration;  
(II) in case of other applicants, not covered under sub -clause (I), the administering authority 
may grant licence b ased on a comparative evaluation of matters stated in items ( i) to ( iv) of the 
proviso to sub -clause ( I).  
(4) The period for which an exploration licence may be grante d shall not exceed three years.  
(5) An exploration licence granted under sub -section ( 1) may be renewed for a period not exceeding 
two years if, after a review, the administering authority is satisfied that the licensee has been conducting 
the exploration operation in accordance with the work programme approved by the administering 
authority regarding such licence and longer period of renewal of the licence is considered necessary to 
enable the licensee to complete exploration.  
(6) The area that may be granted under exploration licence shall not exceed a block of thirty minutes 
latitu de by thirty minutes longitude:  
Provided that if the administering authority is of the opinion that in the interest of the development of 
any mineral, it is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, permit any person to 
acquire a n area i n excess of the area spe cified in this sub -section.  
13. Grant of production lease. —(1) The administering authority shall grant a prod uction lease to 
any person who — 
(a) is eligible under section 6 for grant of opera ting right;  
(b) produces, to the satisfaction of the administering authority, evidence that such person 
possesses the requisite technical ability and financial resources to undertake production operation 
based on such scientific parameters as may be prescr ibed;  
(c) submits a work programm e for the systematic development of the mineral deposits of the area 
applied for, prepared in such manner and supported by such data as may be prescribed and obtained 
through exploration operat ion, setting forth the activiti es proposed to be carried out du ring the period 
of the lease including the resources assessment of the area, the intended schedule of commercial 
production, methods and technologies to be used for commercial production and processing,   8 
 measures to be tak en to protect the environment and t o monitor the effectivene ss of environmental 
safeguards;  
(d) undertakes not to deviate from work programme for production lease approved by t he 
administering authority; and  
(e) has fulfilled, to the satisfaction of the administering authority, all the stat utory obligations 
under an y operating right previously — 
(I) granted; or  
(II) transferred in  the prescr ibed manner,  
to him:  
Provided that a licensee shall have the exclusive right to a production lease over such part of the 
offshore area covered by his exploration licence as he may desire subject to the condition that the 
administering authority  is satisfied that the licensee — 
(i) has undertaken exploration operation to establish mineral resources in such offshore area;  
(ii) has not committed any breach  of the terms and conditions of the exploration licence; and  
(iii) has not become ineligible un der the provisions of this Act.  
(2) The administering authority may, if there is any reasonable cause to believe that any person, to 
whom a production lease has been granted, has violated any undertaking given under clause ( d) of               
sub-section ( 1), terminate the production lease.  
(3) The period for which a production lease may be granted  shall not exceed thirty years.  
(4) A production lease granted und er sub -section ( 1) may be renewed for a period not exceeding 
twenty years, if, after a review, the administering authority is satisfied that the lessee has been conducting 
the production operation in accordance with the work programme approved by the administering 
authority regarding such lease.  
(5) The area under a production lease shall not exceed a block of fifteen minutes latitud e by fifteen 
minutes longitude:  
Provided that if the administering authority is of the opin ion that in the interest of the development of 
any mineral, it is necessary so to do, it may, for reasons to be recorded in writing, permit any person to 
acquire a n area in excess of the area spe cified in this sub -section.  
14. Period of co mmencement of ope rating rights. —A holder of operating right shall commence 
operation within the period specified below after the grant of the operating right and shall thereafter 
conduct such operation in proper, ski lful and wo rkman -like manner, as follows: — 
(a) reconnaissance permi t —   six months;  
(b) exploration licence  —  one year; and  
(c) production lease  —  two years.  
15. Power o f Central Government to authoris e survey, research and scientific investigations in 
areas covered under operating rights. —Any person or agency authorised by notification in the Official 
Gazette, by the Central Government in this behalf, may co nduct survey, research, diving operations and 
scientific investigations in the offshore areas, including any area covered under operating r ights and the 
permittee, licensee or lessee, as the case may be, shall permit such person or agency to undertake the said  
investigations in their respective areas and to render such assistance as may be necessary for conduct of 
the investigations.  
16. Roya lty.—(1) A lessee shall pay royalty to the Central Government in respect of any mineral 
removed or consumed by him from the area covered under the production lease, at the rate for the time 
being specified in the First Sched ule in respect of that mineral.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, amend the First Schedule so 
as to enhance or reduce the rate at which royalty shall be payable in respect of any mineral with effect 
from such date as may be specified in the notif ication:   9 
 Provided that the Central Government shall not enhance the rate of royalty in respect of any mineral 
more than once during any period of three years.  
17. Fixed rent .—(1) A lessee shall pay to the Central Government, every year, fixed rent in respect 
of the area covered under the production lease, at the rate for the time being specified in the Second 
Schedule:  
Provided that where the lessee becomes liable under section 1 6 to pay royalty for any mineral 
removed or consumed by him from the area covered under such lease, he shall be liable to pay either such 
royalty or the fixed rent in respect of t hat area, wh ichever is greater.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notificati on in the Official Gazette, amend the Second Schedule 
so as to enhance or reduce the rate at which fixed rent shall be payable in respect of any area covered 
under a production l ease and such enhancement or red uction shall take effect from such date as may  be 
specified in the notification:  
Provided that the Central Government shall not enhance the rate of the fixed rent more than once 
during any period of three years.  
18. Contribution towards International Seabed Authority .—Every lessee, whose production 
operation extends beyond two hundred nautical miles from the baseline from which the breadth of the 
territorial sea is measured, shall pay  in advance, in addition to other  payments required under this Act, to 
the Central Government, the amount to be paid to the International Seabed Authority towards fulfilment 
of obligation of the Central Government under Article 82 of the United Nations Convention on Law of 
the Sea, 1982. 
19. Safety of persons and property. —(1) The permittee, licensee, lessee or any other pe rson 
undertaking the reconnaissance operation or exploration operation or production operation under                  
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 or any  agency undertaking the reconnai ssance operation or exploration 
operation under the proviso to sub-section ( 1) of the said section shall be responsible to ensure that the 
concerned operation is conducted with due regard to the safety and health of persons including divers and 
safety an d security of pro perty engaged in the operation.  
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, declare safety zones in 
respect of offshore activities as may be necessary and prescribe the norms for regulating the safety and 
health of persons and safety of property engaged in operations authori sed under this Act, the 
implementation thereof and matters connected therewith.  
(3) In the event of any contravention of provisions of sub -section ( 1) or the norms prescribed under 
sub-section ( 2) by the permittee, licensee, lessee or any other person und ertaking the reconnaissance 
operation or explora tion operation or production ope ration under sub -section ( 1) of section 5, or any other 
agency undertaking the reconnaissance operation or exploration operation under the proviso to            
sub-section ( 1) of the said section, shall also be deemed to be responsible for such contravention unles s he 
or it proves that he or it, as the case may be, had taken all reasonable precautions within his or its means 
for enforcing those provisions, to prevent such contr avention.  
20. Prevention and control of pollution and protection of marine environment .—(1) Every 
holder of the operating rights shall carry out the operations authorised under this Act subject to the 
provisions of this Act and the rules made thereunder and any ot her law and the rules made thereunder, for 
the time being in force for the prevention and control of pollution and protection of marine environment.  
(2) Every holder of an operating right shall be liable for any pollution of, or damage to, the ma rine 
environment resulting from his activities relating to his operating right in the offshore areas and shall pay 
such compensation, as may be determined by the administering authority keeping in view the extent of 
pollution  or damage, as the case may be.  
(3) The Central Government may prescribe measures to be taken for prevention and control of 
pollution and protection of marine environment due to activities in the offshore areas.  
21. Power of Central Government and administering authority to issue direct ions.—(1) The 
permittee, licensee or lessee shall comply with such directions as the Central Government or the 
administering authority may issue, from time to time, for the conse rvation and systematic development of 
offshore minerals, prevention of polluti on, protection of marine environment, prevention of coastal 
erosion or prevention of danger to life or prop erty including the marine life.    10 
 (2) The permittee, licensee or lessee shall comply with such directions as may be issued from time to 
time by the com petent authority or Coast Guard regarding national security,  safety and national integrity.  
Explanation .—“competent authority ” means the competent authority appointed for the purposes of 
sub-section ( 2) by the Central Government in the Ministry dealing wit h defence of India.  
CHAPTER III  
POWER OF ENTRY, INSPECTION, SEARCH AND SEIZURE  
22. Power of entry, inspection, search and seizure .—(1) For the purpose of ascertaining the 
position of the working, actual or prospective, of any mine or abandoned mine, or for any other purpose 
connected with this Act or the rules made thereunder, any officer authorised, by the Central Government 
in this be half, by general or special order, may— 
(a) enter and inspect, at all reasonable times, any mine;  
(b) weigh, draw samples or take measurements of the stocks of mi nerals recovered from any 
mine;  
(c) survey and take samples and  measurements in any such mine;  
(d) examine any document, book, register or record in the possession or power of any person 
having the control of, or connected with, any mine and place marks of identification thereon and take 
extracts from, or make copies of, such docu ment, book, regist er or record;  
(e) order the production of any such document, book, register and record, by the person referred 
to in clause ( d); and  
(f) examine any person having the control o f, or connected with, any mine.  
(2) Any authorised officer may, for the purpose  of ascertaining whether or not the requirements of 
this Act or any rule made thereunder have been complied with, either with, or where it is not possible to 
obtain warrant con veniently, then, without, a warr ant, — 
(a) search any mine;  
(b) stop or board and search any vessel which is engaged or which is likely to be engaged in any 
activit y regulated under this Act; and  
(c) require the person for the time being having command or charge of mine or such vessel to 
produce any licence, permit, log book or othe r document relating, to the vessel or mine and examine 
or take copies of such licence , permit, log book or other docu ment, as the case may be, for 
ascertaining the requirements of sub -section ( 1).  
(3) Where the authorised officer has reason to believe tha t any vessel or mine has been, or is being, or 
is about to be, used or employed, as the case may be, in violation of any provision of this Act or rule 
made thereunder, he may, with, or where it is not possible to obtain warrant convenien tly, then, without,  a 
warrant,— 
(a) seize and detain such vessel or mine, including any gear, equipment, stores or cargo found on 
board such vessel or belonging to the vessel and seize any min eral found on board the vessel;  
(b) seize any evidence relating to violation of any  provision of this Act or rule made ther eunder;  
(c) require the person for the time being having command or charge of the vessel, platform or 
erection of the mine so seized or detained to bring such vessel, platform or erection to any specified 
port;  
(d) arrest any person whom such officer has reason to believe , has committed such violation:  
Provided that the authorised officer, after arresting such person and before producing him before the 
competent court, shall inform the administering authority regardin g the arrest and grounds of arrest 
communi cated to the person so arrested.  
(4) In taking any action under sub -section ( 3), the authorised officer may use such force as may be 
reasonably necessary.  
    11 
 (5) Where any vessel or other things are seized or detain ed, under sub -section ( 3),— 
(a) the vessel or other things so seized or detained shall, as soon as possible, be produced before 
the court competent to try an offence under this Act and the court shall make such order as it may 
deem fit for the retention or  custody of such vessel or things with the Central Government or any 
other authority pending the completion of any proceedings for the prosecution of any offence relating 
to such vessel or things, as the case may be, under this Act or rules made thereunder : 
Provided that the court may, on an application made by the owner or the person for the time being 
having command or charge of the vessel or mine, order the release of the vessel or other things so 
seized or detained, to the  owner or the person for the ti e being having command or charge of the 
vessel or mine, furnishing security in the form of cash or a bank guarantee for an amount which is not 
less than fifty per cent. of the value of the vessel o r things so seized or detained;  
(b) the administering autho rity shall be informed by the authorised officer of such s eizure and the 
details thereof.  
(6) Where, in pursuance of the commission of any offence under this Act, any vessel is pursued 
beyond the limits of the offshore area, the powers conferred on an auth orised officer by this section may 
be exercised beyond such limits in the circumstances and to the extent recognised by intern ational law 
and State practice.  
(7) Every person to whom an order or warrant is issued or given by virtue of the powers conferred by 
this section shall be legally bound to comply with such order or warrant.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of this section, — 
(i) “authorised officer ” means an officer of the Central Government notified as such in the 
Official Gazette, by the Central Gover nment;  
(ii) “warrant” means a warrant issued by the Judicial Magistrate or the Metropolitan Magistrate, 
as the case may be, within whose jurisdiction the place, where the warrant is to be executed, is 
situated.  
CHAPTER IV  
OFFENCES  
23. Offences. —(1) (a) Whoever undertakes any reconnaissance operation, exploration operation or 
production operation in offshore area without any permit, licence or lease, as the case may be, granted 
under this Act shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend  to five years, or with 
fine which may extend to fifty  thousand rupees, or with both.  
(b) A permittee, licensee or lessee who does not furnish any data, information or document under    
sub-section (2) of section 5, in the manner provided therein, shall be  punished with imprisonment which 
may extend to three years, or with fine which may ex tend to twenty -five thousand rupees, or with both.  
(c) Any vessel, together with its gear, boats, stores and cargo, used or employed in violation of 
section 5, along with  any mineral recovered or processed in violation of that section , if any, shall be 
confiscated.  
(d) Whoever ships, transports, offers for sale, sells, purchases, imports, exports, or has custody, 
control or possession of, any mineral recovered, processed o r retained in violation of this Act or any rule 
made thereunder shall be punished with  impris onment which may extend to three years, or with fine 
which  may extend to three years, or with fine which may extend to fifty lakh rupees, or with both.  
(2) Whoever — 
(a) intentionally obstructs any authorised officer referred to in section 22 in the exercise of any 
powe rs conferred under this Act; or  
(b) fails to afford reasonable facilities to the authorised officer referred to in section 22 or his 
assistant to boar d the vessel or enter the mine or to provide for adequate security to such officer or 
assistant at the time of entry into the vessel or mine or when they are on board such vessel or mine; or  
    12 
 (c) fails to stop the vessel or mine or to produce the licence , permit, log book or any other 
document, as the case may be, on board such vessel, or mine, when required to do so by the 
authorised officer referred to in section 22; or  
(d) interferes with, delays, or prevents, by any means, the lawful apprehension of any person 
under this Act,  
shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to five years, or with fine which may 
extend to fifty  thousand rupees, or with both.  
(3) Whoever contravenes any other provision of this Act or rules made thereunde r, other than those 
specified in sub -sections ( 1) and ( 2) shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to 
five years, or with  fine which may extend to one cr ore rupees, or with both, and in the case of continuing 
contravention, with an additional fine which may extend to five lakh rupees for every day during which 
such contravention continues.  
24. Offences by companies .—(1) Where an offence under this Act has been committed by a 
company, every person who, at the time the offence was comm itted, was directly in charge of, and was 
responsible to, the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company, shall 
be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished 
accordingly:  
Provided that nothing contained in this sub -section shall render any such person liable to any 
punishment provided in this Act, if he proves that the offence was committed without his knowledge and 
that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the co mmission of such offence.  
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub -section ( 1), where an offence under this Act, has been 
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with the consent or 
connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any director, manager, secretary, or other 
officer of the company, such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty 
of that offence and shall be liable to be proceeded ag ainst and punished  accordingly.  
Explanation. —For the purposes of t his section, — 
(a) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and 
(b) “director”, in relation to a fir m, means a partner in the firm.  
25. Place of trial .—Notwithstanding anything contained in other law for the time being in force, any 
person committing an offence under this Act or any rule made thereunder or under any of the enactment 
extended under this Act or under the rules made the reunder shall be tried  for the offence in such place as 
the Central Government may, by general or special order published in the Official Gazette, direct in this 
behalf.  
26. Previous sanction of Cent ral Government for prosecution. —No prosecution for an offence 
committed under t his Act shall be instituted except with the previous sanction of the Central Government 
or such officer or authorit y as may be authorised by the Ce ntral Government, by order in writing in this 
behalf.  
27. Offences triable by Court of Session .—Notwithstandi ng anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), all offences under this Act shall be triable by the Court of Session.  
CHAPTER V  
CIVIL LIABILITY AND ADJUDICATION  
28. Ci vil liability and adjudication. —(1) A person to whom a permit,  licence or le ase is granted 
under this Act, — 
(a) contravenes the general terms and conditions imposed by the rules made under this Act shall 
be liable to pay to the Central Government an amount which shall not be less than five lakh rupees 
and which may e xtend to one crore rupees;  
(b) contravenes any particular terms and conditions applicable only in case of such permittee, 
licensee or lessee as the case may be, shall also be liable, apart from the liability under clause ( a), to   13 
 pay additional amount to the Central Government whi ch shall not be less than one lakh rupees and 
which  may extend to ten lakh rupees.  
(2) No court or other authority except the authorised officer designated by the Central Government 
for this purpose, shall have jurisdiction to hea r and decide the cases relating to clauses ( a) and ( b) of               
sub-section ( 1). 
(3) An officer of the Central Government who has been authorised by that Government to file an 
application before the authorised officer designated under sub -section ( 2), shall file an application against 
licensee, lessee or permittee, as the case may be , indicating the civil wrong committed by him under 
clause ( a) or clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) in su ch manner as may be prescribed.  
(4) When an application is filed und er sub -section (3), before an authorised officer designated under 
sub-section ( 2), he shall serve notice along with the copy of such application to the person, against whom 
the applicati on is made, to provide him an op portunity to file reply to the applica tion in the prescribed 
manner and the authorised officer shall dispose of the case after considering the evidence produced either 
in support or in opposition to the application and after provid ing the opportunity of hearing.  
(5) For the purposes of this se ction, the authorised officer designated under sub -section ( 2), shall have 
the same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), while 
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any pe rson and examining him on oath;  
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents;  
(c) receiving evidence on affidavits;  
(d) issuing commissions for the examina tion of witnesses or documents;  
(e) reviewing its decisions; and  
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed.  
CHAPTER VI  
MISCELLANEOUS  
29. Extension of enactments to offshore areas .—The Central Government may, by notific ation in 
the Official Gazette, — 
(a) extend with such restrictions and modifications as it thinks fit, any enactment for the time 
being in force in India or any part thereof to the offshor e area or any part thereof; and  
(b) make such provisions as it may consider necessary for facilitating the enforcement of such 
enactmen t,  
and any enactment so extended shall have effect as if the offshore area or the part thereof, as the case may 
be, is a part of the territory of India.  
30. Compounding of offences. —(1) Any offence punishable under this Act may, either before or 
after the  institution of the prosecution, be compounded by the administering  authority or any other officer  
authorised by the Central Government with respect to that offence, on payment for credit to that 
Government of such sum as that administering authority or officer, as the case may be, may specify:  
Provided that such sum shall not, in any case, exceed the maximum amount of the fine which may be 
imposed under this Act  for the offence so compounded.  
(2) Where an offence is compounded under sub -section ( 1), no proceeding or further proceeding, as 
the case may be, shall be taken against the offender in respect of the offence so compounded and the 
offender, if in c ustody, shall be released forthwith.  
31. Recovery of certain sums as arrears of land revenue .—Any licence fee, royalty, fixed rent or 
other sum due to the Central Government under this Act or rules made thereunder or under the terms and 
conditions of a rec onnaissance permit, exploration l icence or production lease may, on a certificate issued 
by the administering authority, be recovered in the same manner as if it were an arrear of land revenue 
and every such sum together with the interest due thereon, shal l be the first charge on the asse ts of the 
permittee, licensee or lessee, as the case may be.    14 
 32. Delegation of powers. —The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that any power exercisable by it under this Act or any rule made thereunder may, in relation to such 
matter and subject t o such conditions, if any, as ma y be specified in the notification, be exercisable also 
by such officer or authority subordinate to that Government as may be specified in the notification.  
33. Pr otection  of action taken in good faith. —No suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings shall 
lie against any person for anything which is in good faith done or intended to be done under this Act or 
any rule made thereunder.  
34. Appeals .—(1) Subject to the  provisions of sub -section ( 2), any person aggrieved by an order 
made by the administering authority or any officer under this Act or the rules made thereunder may prefer 
an appeal against suc h order to the Central Governmen t. 
(2) Every such appeal shall be preferred within prescribed period from the date on whi ch the 
impugned order was made:  
Provided that the Central Government may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by 
sufficient cause from preferring the appeal within such prescribed pe riod, permit the appellant to prefer 
the appeal within a furth er period as may be prescribed.  
(3) On receipt of any such appeal, the Central Government shall, after giving the parties to the appeal 
a reasonable opportunity of being heard and after making s uch inquiry as it deems proper, make such 
order, as it may think fit, confirming, modifying or reversing the order appealed against, or may send 
back the case with such direction as it may think fit for a fresh order after taking additional evidence, if 
necessary.  
35. Power to make rules. —(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rule s for the purposes of this Act.  
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may provide for all or any 
of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the terms and conditions of a reconnaissance permit, exploration licence or production lease 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 5;  
(b) conditions for grant of operating right under clause ( b) of section 6;  
(c) substances to  be prescri bed under proviso to section 6;  
(d) the requisite technical ability and financial resources to undertake exploration operation on 
scientific parameters under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 12;  
(e) the manner in which a work programme shall be prepared and the data by which the work 
programme shall be supported under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 12;  
(f) the manner of transfer referred to in sub -clause ( ii) of clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
12; 
(g) the time within w hich the applications under sub -section ( 3) of section 12 are to be received;  
(h) the requisite technical ability and financial resources to undertake production operation on 
scientific parameters under clause ( b) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(i) the manner in which a work programme shall be prepared and the data by which the work 
programme shall be supported under clause ( c) of sub -section ( 1) of section 13;  
(j) the manner of transfer referred to in sub -clause ( II) of clause ( e) of sub -section ( 1) of section 
13; 
(k) norms for regulating the safety and health of persons and safety of property engaged in 
operations authorised under this Act, the implementation thereof and matters connected therewith 
under sub -section ( 2) of section 19;  
(l) the measures t o be taken for prevention and control of pollution and protection of marine 
environment due to activities in the offshore areas under sub -section ( 3) of section 20;  
(m) the manner of fili ng application under sub -section ( 3) of section 28;  
(n) the manner of  filing reply under sub -section ( 4) of section 28;    15 
 (o) any other matter under clause ( f) of sub -section ( 5) of sec tion 28;  
(p) the period within which appeal shall be preferred under, and the further period which may be 
permitted under the proviso to, sub-section ( 2) of section 34;  
(q) any other matter which is to be, or may  be, prescribed under this Act.  
(3) Every rule made by the Central Government under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after it 
is made, before each House of Parliament, while  it is in session, for a total period of thirty days which 
may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the expiry of the 
session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses a gree in 
making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the rule shall 
thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, that 
any such modification or annulment  shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done 
under that rule.  
36. Relaxation in specific cases. —Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this Act or 
any rule made thereunder, the Central Government may, if it is of t he opinion that in the interests of the 
offshore mineral development, it is necessary s o to do, by order and for reasons to be recorded in writing, 
authorise in any specific case the grant, renewal or transfer of any operating right to any person on such 
terms and conditions as it may specify in this behalf in such order.  
37. Persons to be public servants .—The administering authority or any other officer shall be 
deemed, while acting or purporting to act in pursuance of any of the provisions of this Act, to  be public 
servants within the mea ning of the Indian Penal Code ( 45 of 1860).  
38. Removal of difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, 
or of any of the enactments extended under section 29, the Central Gover nment may, by order published 
in the Official Gazette, make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act or, as the 
case may be, of such enactment, as may appear to it to be necessary or expedient for removing the 
difficulty:  
Provided t hat no order sha ll be made under this section, — 
(a) in the case of any difficulty arising in giving effect to any provision of this Act, after the 
expiry of three years from the commencement of such provision;  
(b) in the case of any difficulty arising in giving effect to the provisions of any enactment 
extended under section 29, after the expiry of three years from the extensi on of such enactment.  
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House o f Parliament.     16 
  
THE FIRST SCHEDULE  
[See section 16( 1)] 
RATES  OF ROYALTY  
 
1. Brown ilmenite (leucoxene), Ilmenite, 
Rutile and Zircon  Two per cent. of sale price on ad valorem basis . 
2. Dolomite  Forty rupees per tonne.  
3. Garnet  Three per cent. of sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
4. Gold  One and half per cent. of London Bullion Market 
Association price (commonly referred to as 
“London Price ”) chargeable on the contained gold 
metal in ore produced.  
5. Limestone and Lime mud  Forty rupees per tonne.  
6. Manganese Ore  Three per cent. of sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
7. Monazite  One hundred and twenty -five rupees per tonne.  
8. Sillimanite  Two and half per cent. of sale price on ad valorem  
basis.  
9. Silver  Five per cent. of London metal Exchange price 
chargeable on the contained silver metal in ore 
produced.  
10. All other minerals not hereinbefore 
specified.  Ten per cent. of sale price on ad valorem  basis.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    17 
 THE SECOND SCHEDULE  
[See section 17( 1)] 
RATES OF FIXED RENT  
Rates of fixed rent in rupees per standard block per annum  
 
Size 1st Year of the lease  2nd to 5th year of 
the lease  6th to 10th year of 
the lease  11th year of the 
lease and onwards  
Standard block of 
5 minutes 
longitude by 5 
minutes latitude  Nil Rupees 50,000  Rupees 1,00,000  Rupees 2,00,000  
 
 
--------------------------The Prevention of Money-Laundering Act, 2002--------------------------
1 THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING ACT, 2002 
__________________ 
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS 
__________________ 
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
SECTIONS 
1.Short title, extent and commencement. 
2.Definitions. 
CHAPTER II 
OFFENCE OF MONEY -LAUNDERING
3.Offence of money-laundering. 
4.Punishment for money-laundering. 
CHAPTER III 
ATTACHMENT , ADJUDICATION AND  CONFISCATION
5.Attachment of property involved in money-laundering. 
6.Adjudicating Authorities, composition, powers, etc. 
7.Staff of Adjudicating Authorities. 
8.Adjudication. 
9.Vesting of property in Central Government. 
10.Management of properties confiscated under this Chapter. 
11.Power regarding summons, production of documents and evidence, etc. 
CHAPTER IV 
OBLIGATIONS OF BANKING COMPANIES , FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND INTERMEDIARIES
12.Reporting entity to maintain records. 
12A. Access to information. 
13.Powers of Director to impose fine. 
14.No civil or criminal proceedings against reporting entity, its directors and employees in certain 
cases. 
15.Procedure and manner of furnishing information by reporting entities.2 CHAPTER V 
SUMMONS , SEARCHES AND SEIZURES, ETC. 
SECTIONS
16.Power of survey. 
17.Search and seizure. 
18.Search of persons. 
19.Power to arrest. 
20.Retention of property. 
21.Retention of records. 
22.Presumption as to records or property in certain cases. 
23.Presumption in inter-connected transactions. 
24.Burden of proof. 
CHAPTER VI 
APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL
25.Appellate Tribunal. 
26.Appeal to Appellate Tribunal. 
27.[Omitted. ] 
28.[Omitted. ]  
29.[Omitted. ] 
30.[Omitted. ] 
31.[Omitted. ] 
32.[Omitted. ] 
33.[Omitted. ] 
34.[Omitted. ] 
35.Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal. 
36.Distribution of business amongst Benches. 
37.Power of Chairperson to transfer cases. 
38.Decision to be by majority. 
39.Right of appellant to take assistance of authorised representative and of Government to appoint 
presenting officers. 
40.Members, etc., to be public servants. 
41.Civil court not to have jurisdiction. 
42.Appeal to High Court. 
CHAPTER VII 
SPECIAL  COURTS
43.Special Courts. 
44.Offences triable by Special Courts. 3 SECTIONS
45.Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable. 
46.Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special Court. 
47.Appeal and revision. 
CHAPTER VIII 
AUTHORITIES
48.Authorities under Act. 
49.Appointment and powers of authorities and other officers. 
50.Powers of authorities regarding summons, production of documents and to give evidence, etc. 
51.Jurisdiction of authorities. 
52.Power of Central Government to issue directions, etc. 
53.Empowerment of certain officers. 
54.Certain officers to assist in inquiry etc. 
CHAPTER IX 
RECIPROCAL ARRANGEMENT FOR ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN  MATTERS AND PROCEDURE FOR
ATTACHMENT AND CONFISCATION OF PROPERTY
55.Definitions. 
56.Agreements with foreign countries. 
57.Letter of request to a contracting State in certain cases. 
58.Assistance to a contracting State in certain cases. 
58A. Special Court to release the property. 
58B. Letter of request of a contracting State or authority for confiscation or release the property. 
59.Reciprocal arrangements for processes and assistance for transfer of accused persons. 
60.Attachment, seizure and confiscation, etc., of property in a contracting State or India. 
61.Procedure in respect of letter of request. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS
62.Punishment for vexatious search. 
63.Punishment for false information or failure to give information, etc. 
64.Cognizance of offences. 
65.Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to apply. 
66.Disclosure of information. 
67.Bar of suits in civil courts. 
68.Notice, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds. 
69.Recovery of fine or penalty. 
70.Offences by companies. 
71.Act to have overriding effect. 4 SECTIONS
72.Continuation of proceedings in the event of death or insolvency. 
73.Power to make rules. 
74.Rules to be laid before Parliament. 
75.Power to remove difficulties. 
THE SCHEDULE. 5 THE PREVENTION OF MONEY-LAUNDERING ACT, 2002 
ACT NO. 15 OF 2003 
[17th January, 2003.]  
An Act to prevent money-laundering and to provide for confiscation of property derived from, or 
involved in, money-laundering and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. 
WHEREAS  the Political Declaration and Global Programme of Action, annexed to the resolution  
S-17/2 was adopted by the General Assembly of the United Nations at its seventeenth special session on 
the twenty-third day of February, 1990; 
AND WHEREAS the Political Declaration adopted by the Special Session of the United Nations 
General Assembly held on 8th to 10th June, 1998 calls upon the Member States to adopt national  
money-laundering legislation and programme; 
AND WHEREAS it is considered necessary to implement the aforesaid resolution and the Declaration. 
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-third Year of the Republic of India as follows: —
CHAPTER I 
PRELIMINARY
1. Short title, extent and commencement.— (1) This Act may be called the Prevention of Money-
laundering Act, 2002. 
(2) It extends to the whole of India. 
(3) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint, and different dates may be appointed for different provisions of this Act and 
any reference in any such provision to the commencement of this Act shall be construed as a reference to 
the coming into force of that provision. 
2. Definitions.— (1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Adjudicating Authority” means an Adjudicating Authority appointed under sub-section ( 1) 
of section 6; 
(b) “Appellate Tribunal” means the Appellate Tribunal 2[referred to in] section 25; 
(c) “Assistant Director” means an Assistant Director appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 
49; 
(d) “attachment” means prohibition of transfer, conversion, disposition or movement of property 
by an order issued under Chapter III; 
3[(da) “authorised person” means an authorised person as defined in clause ( c) of section 2 of the 
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999);] 
(e) “banking company” means a banking company or a co-operative bank to which the Banking 
Regulation Act, 1949 (10 of 1949) applies and includes any bank or banking institution referred to in 
section 51 of that Act; 
(f) “Bench” means a Bench of the Appellate Tribunal; 
4[(fa)“beneficial owner” means an individual who ultimately owns or controls a client of a 
reporting entity or the person on whose behalf a transaction is being conducted and includes a person 
who exercises ultimate effective control over a juridical person;] 
(g) “Chairperson” means the Chairperson of the Appellate Tribunal; 
1. 1st July, 2005, vide notification No. G.S.R. 436(E), dated 1st July, 2005, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, sec. 3( i). 
2. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 232, for “established under” (w.e.f. 1-6-2016).
3. Ins. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-2009). 
4. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).6 (h) “chit fund company” means a company managing, conducting or supervising, as foreman, 
agent or in any other capacity, chits as defined in section 2 of the Chit Funds Act, 1982 (40 of 1982); 
1[(ha)“client” means a person who is engaged in a financial transaction or activity with a reporting 
entity and includes a person on whose behalf the person who engaged in the transaction or activity, is 
acting;] 
(i) “co-operative bank” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( dd) of section 2 
of the Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961); 
1[(ia)“corresponding law” means any law of any foreign country corresponding to any of the 
provisions of this Act or dealing with offences in that country corresponding to any of the scheduled 
offences; 
(ib)“dealer” has the same meaning as assigned to it in clause (b) of section 2 of the Central 
Sales Tax Act, 1956 (74 of 1956);] 
(j) “Deputy Director” means a Deputy Director appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 49; 
2** * * *
(k) “Director” or “Additional Director” or “Joint Director” means a Director or Additional 
Director or Joint Director, as the case may be, appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 49;  
3[(l) “financial institution” means a financial institution as defined in clause (c) of section 45-1 of 
the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934) and includes a chit fund company, a housing finance 
institution, an authorised person, a payment system operator, a non-banking financial company and 
the Department of Posts in the Government of India;] 
(m) “housing finance institution” shall have the meaning as assigned to it in clause ( d) of section 
2 of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987 (53 of 1987); 
4[(n) “intermediary” means,— 
(i) a stock-broker, sub-broker, share transfer agent, banker to an issue, trustee to a trust deed, 
registrar to an issue, merchant banker, underwriter, portfolio manager, investment adviser or any 
other intermediary associated with securities market and registered under section 12 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992); or 
(ii) an association recognised or registered under the Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 
1952 (74 of 1952) or any member of such association; or 
(iii) intermediary registered by the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority; or 
(iv) a recognised stock exchange referred to in clause ( f) of section 2 of the Securities 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);] 
5[(na)“investigation” includes all the proceedings under this Act conducted by the Director or by 
an authority authorised by the Central Government under this Act for the collection of evidence;] 
(o) “Member” means a Member of the Appellate Tribunal and includes the Chairperson; 
(p) “money-laundering” has the meaning assigned to it in section 3; 
(q) “non-banking financial company” shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in clause ( f) 
of section 45-I of the Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934)6***; 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 2 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Clause ( ja) omitted by s. 2, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s. 2, ibid., for clause ( l) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
4. Subs. by s.2, ibid., for clause ( n) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
5. Ins. by Act 20 of 2005, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-7-2005).
6. The words “and includes a person carrying on designated business or profession” omitted by Act 2 of 2013, s. 2               
(w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 7 (r) “notification” means a notification published in the Official Gazette; 
1[(ra) “offence of cross border implications”, means— 
(i) any conduct by a person at a place outside India which constitutes an offence at that place 
and which would have constituted an offence specified in Part A, Part B or Part C of the 
Schedule, had it been committed in India and if such person 2[transfers in any manner] the 
proceeds of such conduct or part thereof to India; or 
(ii) any offence specified in Part A, Part B or Part C of the Schedule which has been 
committed in India and the proceeds of crime, or part thereof have been transferred to a place 
outside India or any attempt has been made to transfer the proceeds of crime, or part thereof from 
India to a place outside India. 
Explanation .—Nothing contained in this clause shall adversely affect any investigation, 
enquiry, trial or proceeding before any authority in respect of the offences specified in Part A or 
Part B of the Schedule to the Act before the commencement of the Prevention of Money-
laundering (Amendment) Act, 2009 (21 of 2009); 
(rb)“payment system” means a system that enables payment to be effected between a payer and a 
beneficiary, involving clearing, payment or settlement service or all of them. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “payment system” includes the systems 
enabling credit card operations, debit card operations, smart card operations, money transfer 
operations or similar operations; 
(rc) “payment system operator” means a person who operates a payment system and such person 
includes his overseas principal. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this clause, “overseas principal” means, —
(A) in the case of a person, being an individual, such individual residing outside India, who 
owns or controls or manages, directly or indirectly, the activities or functions of payment system 
in India; 
(B) in the case of a Hindu undivided family, Karta of such Hindu undivided family residing 
outside India who owns or controls or manages, directly or indirectly, the activities or functions 
of payment system in India; 
(C) in the case of a company, a firm, an association of persons, a body of individuals, an 
artificial juridical person, whether incorporated or not, such company, firm, association of 
persons, body of individuals, artificial juridical person incorporated or registered outside India or 
existing as such and which owns or controls or manages, directly or indirectly, the activities or 
functions of payment system in India;] 
(s) “person” includes —
(i) an individual, 
(ii) a Hindu undivided family, 
(iii) a company, 
(iv) a firm, 
(v) an association of persons or a body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, 
(vi) every artificial juridical person not falling within any of the preceding sub-clauses, and 
1. Ins. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 2 (w.e.f. 1-6-2009). 
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 2, for “remits” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).8 (vii) any agency, office or branch owned or controlled by any of the above persons mentioned 
in the preceding sub-clauses; 
1[(sa) “person carrying on designated business or profession” means,— 
(i) a person carrying on activities for playing games of chance for cash or kind, and includes 
such activities associated with casino; 
(ii) a Registrar or Sub-Registrar appointed under section 6 of the Registration Act, 1908          
(16 of 1908), as may be notified by the Central Government;  
(iii) real estate agent, as may be notified by the Central Government; 
(iv) dealer in precious metals, precious stones and other high value goods, as may be notified 
by the Central Government; 
(v) person engaged in safekeeping and administration of cash and liquid securities on behalf 
of other persons, as may be notified by the Central Government; or 
(vi) person carrying on such other activities as the Central Government may, by notification, 
so designate, from time to time; 
(sb)“precious metal” means gold, silver, platinum, palladium or rhodium or such other metal as 
may be notified by the Central Government; 
(sc)“precious stone” means diamond, emerald, ruby, sapphire or any such other stone as may be 
notified by the Central Government;] 
(t) “prescribed” means prescribed by rules made under this Act; 
(u) “proceeds of crime” means any property derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any 
person as a result of criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence or the value of any such property 
2[or where such property is taken or held outside the country, then the property equivalent in value 
held within the country] 3[or abroad]; 
(v) “property” means any property or assets of every description, whether corporeal or 
incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible and includes deeds and instruments 
evidencing title to, or interest in, such property or assets, wherever located; 
1[Explanation .—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that the term “property” includes 
property of any kind used in the commission of an offence under this Act or any of the scheduled 
offences; 
(va) “real estate agent” means a real estate agent as defined in clause (88) of section 65 of the 
Finance Act, 1994 (32 of 1994);] 
(w) “records” include the records maintained in the form of books or stored in a computer or such 
other form as may be prescribed; 
1[(wa) “reporting entity” means a banking company, financial institution, intermediary or a 
person carrying on a designated business or profession;] 
(x) “Schedule” means the Schedule to this Act; 
(y) “scheduled offence” means — 
(i) the offences specified under Part A of the Schedule; or 
4[(ii) the offences specified under Part B of the Schedule if the total value involved in such 
offences is 5[one crore rupees] or more; or 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 2 (w.e.f.  15-2-2013). 
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 145 (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
3. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 208 (w.e.f. 19-4-2018). 
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 2, for sub-clause ( ii) (w.e.f. 1-6-2009). 
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 145, for “thirty lakh rupees” (w.e.f. 14-5-2015).  9 (iii) the offences specified under Part C of the Schedule.] 
(z) “Special Court” means a Court of Session designated as Special Court under sub-section ( 1) of 
section 43; 
(za) “transfer” includes sale, purchase, mortgage, pledge, gift, loan or any other form of transfer 
of right, title, possession or lien; 
(zb) “value” means the fair market value of any property on the date of its acquisition by any 
person, or if such date cannot be determined, the date on which such property is possessed by such 
person. 
(2) Any reference, in this Act or the Schedule, to any enactment or any provision thereof shall, in 
relation to an area in which such enactment or such provision is not in force, be construed as a reference 
to the corresponding law or the relevant provisions of the corresponding law, if any, in force in that area. 
CHAPTER II 
OFFENCE OF MONEY -LAUNDERING
3. Offence of money-laundering.— Whosoever directly or indirectly attempts to indulge or 
knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually involved in any process or activity connected with 
the 1[proceeds of crime including its concealment, possession, acquisition or use and projecting or 
claiming] it as untainted property shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering. 
4. Punishment for money-laundering.— Whoever commits the offence of money-laundering shall 
be punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which 
may extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine2***: 
Provided that where the proceeds of crime involved in money-laundering relates to any offence 
specified under paragraph 2 of Part A of the Schedule, the provisions of this section shall have effect as if 
for the words “which may extend to seven years”, the words “which may extend to ten years” had been 
substituted. 
CHAPTER III 
ATTACHMENT , ADJUDICATION AND  CONFISCATION 
5. Attachment of property involved in money-laundering.—3[(1)Where the Director or any other 
officer not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised by the Director for the purposes of this  
section, has reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing), on the basis of 
material in his possession, that— 
(a) any person is in possession of any proceeds of crime; and 
(b) such proceeds of crime are likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt with in any manner 
which may result in frustrating any proceedings relating to confiscation of such proceeds of crime 
under this Chapter, 
he may, by order in writing, provisionally attach such property for a period not exceeding one hundred 
and eighty days from the date of the order, in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that no such order of attachment shall be made unless, in relation to the scheduled offence, a 
report has been forwarded to a Magistrate under section 173 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974), or a complaint has been filed by a person authorised to investigate the offence mentioned in 
that Schedule, before a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the scheduled offence, as the case 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 3, for “proceeds of crime and projecting” (w.e.f.  15-2-2013). 
2. The words “which may extend to five lakh rupees” omitted by s. 4, ibid. (w.e.f.  15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s. 5, ibid., for sub-section ( 1) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).10 may be, or a similar report or complaint has been made or filed under the corresponding law of any other 
country: 
Provided further that, notwithstanding anything contained in 1[first proviso], any property of any 
person may be attached under this section if the Director or any other officer not below the rank of 
Deputy Director authorised by him for the purposes of this section has reason to believe (the reasons for 
such belief to be recorded in writing), on the basis of material in his possession, that if such property 
involved in money-laundering is not attached immediately under this Chapter, the non-attachment of the 
property is likely to frustrate any proceeding under this Act.] 
2[Provided also that for the purposes of computing the period of one hundred and eighty days, the 
period during which the proceedings under this section is stayed by the High Court, shall be excluded and 
a further period not exceeding thirty days from the date of order of vacation of such stay order shall be 
counted.]; 
(2) The Director, or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy Director, shall, immediately after 
attachment under sub-section ( 1), forward a copy of the order, along with the material in his possession, 
referred to in that sub-section, to the Adjudicating Authority, in a sealed envelope, in the manner as may 
be prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such order and material for such period as may 
be prescribed. 
(3) Every order of attachment made under sub-section ( 1) shall cease to have effect after the expiry of 
the period specified in that sub-section or on the date of an order made under 3[sub-section ( 3)] of section 
8, whichever is earlier. 
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the person interested in the enjoyment of the immovable 
property attached under sub-section ( 1) from such enjoyment. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, “person interested”, in relation to any immovable 
property, includes all persons claiming or entitled to claim any interest in the property. 
(5) The Director or any other officer who provisionally attaches any property under sub-section ( 1) 
shall, within a period of thirty days from such attachment, file a complaint stating the facts of such 
attachment before the Adjudicating Authority. 
6. Adjudicating Authorities, composition, powers, etc.— (1) The Central Government shall, by 
notification, appoint 4[an  Adjudicating Authority] to exercise jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred 
by or under this Act. 
(2) An Adjudicating Authority shall consist of a Chairperson and two other Members: 
Provided that one Member each shall be a person having experience in the field of law, 
administration, finance or accountancy. 
(3) A person shall, however, not be qualified for appointment as Member of an Adjudicating 
Authority, —
(a) in the field of law, unless he —
(i) is qualified for appointment as District Judge; or 
(ii) has been a member of the Indian Legal Service and has held a post in Grade I of that 
service; 
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 146, for “clause ( b)” (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 208 (w.e.f. 19-4-2018).   
3. Subs. by s. 208, ibid ., for “ sub-section ( 2)” (w.e.f. 19-4-2018). 
4. Subs. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 4, for “one or more Adjudicating Authorities” (w.e.f.  1-6-2009). 11 (b) in the field of finance, accountancy or administration unless he possesses such qualifications, 
as may be prescribed. 
(4) The Central Government shall appoint a Member to be the Chairperson of the Adjudicating 
Authority. 
(5) Subject to the provisions of this Act, —
(a) the jurisdiction of the Adjudicating Authority may be exercised by Benches thereof; 
(b) a Bench may be constituted by the Chairperson of the Adjudicating Authority with one or two 
Members as the Chairperson of the Adjudicating Authority may deem fit; 
(c) the Benches of the Adjudicating Authority shall ordinarily sit at New Delhi and at such other 
places as the Central Government may, in consultation with the Chairperson, by notification, specify; 
(d) the Central Government shall, by notification, specify the areas in relation to which each 
Bench of the Adjudicating Authority may exercise jurisdiction. 
(6) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 5), the Chairperson may transfer a Member 
from one Bench to another Bench. 
(7) If at any stage of the hearing of any case or matter it appears to the Chairperson or a Member that 
the case or matter is of such a nature that it ought to be heard by a Bench consisting of two Members, the 
case or matter may be transferred by the Chairperson or, as the case may be, referred to him for transfer, 
to such Bench as the Chairperson may deem fit. 
(8) The Chairperson and every Member shall hold office as such for a term of five years from the date 
on which he enters upon his office: 
Provided that no Chairperson or other Member shall hold office as such after he has attained the age 
of 1[sixty-five] years. 
(9) The salary and allowances payable to and the other terms and conditions of service of the Member 
shall be such as may be prescribed: 
Provided that neither the salary and allowances nor the other terms and conditions of service of the 
Member shall be varied to his disadvantage after appointment. 
(10) If, for reasons other than temporary absence, any vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairperson 
or any other Member, then, the Central Government shall appoint another person in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act to fill the vacancy and the proceedings may be continued before the Adjudicating 
Authority from the stage at which the vacancy is filled. 
(11) The Chairperson or any other Member may, by notice in writing under his hand addressed to the 
Central Government, resign his office: 
Provided that the Chairperson or any other Member shall, unless he is permitted by the Central 
Government to relinquish his office sooner, continue to hold office until the expiry of three months from 
the date of receipt of such notice or until a person duly appointed as his successor enters upon his office 
or until the expiry of his term of office, whichever is the earliest. 
(12) The Chairperson or any other Member shall not be removed from his office except by an order 
made by the Central Government after giving necessary opportunity of hearing. 
(13) In the event of the occurrence of any vacancy in the office of the Chairperson by reason of his 
death, resignation or otherwise, the senior-most Member shall act as the Chairperson of the Adjudicating 
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 4, for “sixty-two” (w.e.f.  1-6-2009). 12 Authority until the date on which a new Chairperson, appointed in accordance with the provisions of this 
Act to fill such vacancy, enters upon his office. 
(14) When the Chairperson of the Adjudicating Authority is unable to discharge his functions owing 
to absence, illness or any other cause, the senior-most Member shall discharge the functions of the 
Chairperson of the Adjudicating Authority until the date on which the Chairperson of the Adjudicating 
Authority resumes his duties. 
(15) The Adjudicating Authority shall not be bound by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil 
Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the principles of natural justice and, subject to the 
other provisions of this Act, the Adjudicating Authority shall have powers to regulate its own procedure. 
7. Staff of Adjudicating Authorities.— (1) The Central Government shall provide each Adjudicating 
Authority with such officers and employees as that Government may think fit. 
(2) The officers and employees of the Adjudicating Authority shall discharge their functions under 
the general superintendence of the Chairperson of the Adjudicating Authority. 
(3) The salaries and allowances and other conditions of service of the officers and employees of the 
Adjudicating Authority shall be such as may be prescribed. 
8. Adjudication.— (1) On receipt of a complaint under sub-section ( 5) of section 5, or applications 
made under sub-section ( 4) of section 17 or under sub-section ( 10) of section 18, if the Adjudicating 
Authority has reason to believe that any person has committed an 1[offence under section 3 or is in 
possession of proceeds of crime], it may serve a notice of not less than thirty days on such person calling 
upon him to indicate the sources of his income, earning or assets, out of which or by means of which he 
has acquired the property attached under sub-section ( 1) of section 5, or, seized 2[or frozen] under section 
17 or section 18, the evidence on which he relies and other relevant information and particulars, and to 
show cause why all or any of such properties should not be declared to be the properties involved in 
money-laundering and confiscated by the Central Government:  
Provided that where a notice under this sub-section specifies any property as being held by a person 
on behalf of any other person, a copy of such notice shall also be served upon such other person:  
Provided further that where such property is held jointly by more than one person, such notice shall 
be served to all persons holding such property. 
(2) The Adjudicating Authority shall, after — 
(a) considering the reply, if any, to the notice issued under sub-section ( 1); 
(b) hearing the aggrieved person and the Director or any other officer authorised by him in this 
behalf; and 
(c) taking into account all relevant materials placed on record before him, 
by an order, record a finding whether all or any of the properties referred to in the notice issued under 
sub-section ( 1) are involved in money-laundering: 
Provided that if the property is claimed by a person, other than a person to whom the notice had been 
issued, such person shall also be given an opportunity of being heard to prove that the property is not 
involved in money-laundering. 
(3) Where the Adjudicating Authority decides under sub-section ( 2) that any property is involved in 
money-laundering, he shall, by an order in writing, confirm the attachment of the property made under 
sub-section ( 1) of section 5 or retention of property or 3[record seized or frozen under section 17 or 
section 18 and record a finding to that effect, whereupon such attachment or retention or freezing of the 
seized or frozen property] or record shall — 
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 5, for “offence under section 3” (w.e.f. 1-6-2009). 
2. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 6 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for certain words and figures (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 13 (a) continue during 1[investigation for a period not exceeding ninety days or] the pendency of the 
proceedings relating to any 2[offence under this Act before a court or under the corresponding law of 
any other country, before the competent court of criminal jurisdiction outside India, as the case may 
be; and]  
3[(b) become final after an order of confiscation is passed under sub-section ( 5) or sub-section ( 7) 
of section 8 or section 58B or sub-section (2A) of section 60 by the 4[Special Court];] 
(4) Where the provisional order of attachment made under sub-section ( 1) of section 5 has been 
confirmed under sub-section ( 3), the Director or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf shall 
forthwith take the 5[possession of the property attached under section 5 or frozen under sub-section ( 1A) 
of section 17, in such manner as may be prescribed: 
Provided that if it is not practicable to take possession of a property frozen under sub-section ( 1A) of 
section 17, the order of confiscation shall have the same effect as if the property had been taken 
possession of.] 
6[(5) Where on conclusion of a trial of an offence under this Act, the Special Court finds that the 
offence of money-laundering has been committed, it shall order that such property involved in the money-
laundering or which has been used for commission of the offence of money-laundering shall stand 
confiscated to the Central Government. 
(6) Where on conclusion of a trial under this Act, the Special Court finds that the offence of money-
laundering has not taken place or the property is not involved in money-laundering, it shall order release 
of such property to the person entitled to receive it. 
(7) Where the trial under this Act cannot be conducted by reason of the death of the accused or the 
accused being declared a proclaimed offender or for any other reason or having commenced but could not 
be concluded, the Special Court shall, on an application moved by the Director or a person claiming to be 
entitled to possession of a property in respect of which an order has been passed under sub-section ( 3) of 
section 8, pass appropriate orders regarding confiscation or release of the property, as the case may be, 
involved in the offence of money-laundering after having regard to the material before it.] 
7[(8) Where a property stands confiscated to the Central Government under sub-section ( 5), the 
Special Court, in such manner as may be prescribed, may also direct the Central Government to restore 
such confiscated property or part thereof of a claimant with a legitimate interest in the property, who may 
have suffered a quantifiable loss as a result of the offence of money laundering: 
Provided that the Special Court shall not consider such claim unless it is satisfied that the claimant 
has acted in good faith and has suffered the loss despite having taken all reasonable precautions and is not 
involved in the offence of money laundering:] 
1[Provided further that the Special Court may, if it thinks fit, consider the claim of the claimant for the 
purposes of restoration of such properties during the trial of the case in such manner as may be 
prescribed.] 
9. Vesting of property in Central Government.— Where an order of confiscation has been made 
under 8[sub-section ( 5) or sub-section ( 7) of section 8 or section 58B or sub-section ( 2A) of section 60] in 
respect of any property of a person, all the rights and title in such property shall vest absolutely in the 
Central Government free from all encumbrances: 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 208 (w.e.f. 19-4-2018). 
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 6, for “scheduled offence before a court; and” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for clause ( b) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
4. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 147, for “Adjudicating Authority” (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
5. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 6, for “possession of the attached property” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
6. Subs. by s. 6, ibid., for sub-sections ( 5) and ( 6) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).  
7. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 147 (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
8. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 7, for “sub-section ( 6) of section 8” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 14 Provided that where the 1[Special Court or the Adjudicating Authority, as the case may be,] after 
giving an opportunity of being heard to any other person interested in the property attached under this 
Chapter, or seized 2[or frozen] under Chapter V, is of the opinion that any encumbrance on the property or 
or lease-hold interest has been created with a view to defeat the provisions of this Chapter, it may, by 
order, declare such encumbrance or lease-hold interest to be void and thereupon the aforesaid property 
shall vest in the Central Government free from such encumbrances or lease-hold interest: 
Provided further that nothing in this section shall operate to discharge any person from any liability in 
respect of such encumbrances which may be enforced against such person by a suit for damages. 
10. Management of properties confiscated under this Chapter.— (1) The Central Government 
may, by order published in the Official Gazette, appoint as many of its officers (not below the rank of a 
Joint Secretary to the Government of India) as it thinks fit to perform the functions of an Administrator. 
(2) The Administrator appointed under sub-section ( 1) shall receive and manage the property in 
relation to which an order has been made under 3[sub-section (5) or sub-section ( 6) or sub-section ( 7) of 
section 8 or section 58B or sub-section (2A) of section 60] in such manner and subject to such conditions 
as may be prescribed. 
(3) The Administrator shall also take such measures, as the Central Government may direct, to 
dispose of the property which is vested in the Central Government under section 9. 
11. Power regarding summons, production of documents and evidence, etc.— (1) The 
Adjudicating Authority shall, for the purposes of this Act, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit in respect of the following 
matters, namely: —
(a) discovery and inspection; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer of a banking company or a 
financial institution or a company, and examining him on oath; 
(c) compelling the production of records; 
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses and documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(2) All the persons so summoned shall be bound to attend in person or through authorised agents, as 
the Adjudicating Authority may direct, and shall be bound to state the truth upon any subject respecting 
which they are examined or make statements, and produce such documents as may be required. 
(3) Every proceeding under this section shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding within the 
meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
CHAPTER IV 
OBLIGATIONS OF BANKING COMPANIES, FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS AND INTERMEDIARIES 
4[12. Reporting entity to maintain records.— (1) Every reporting entity shall— 
(a) maintain a record of all transactions, including information relating to transactions covered 
under clause ( b), in such manner as to enable it to reconstruct individual transactions; 
(b) furnish to the Director within such time as may be prescribed, information relating to such 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 7, for “Adjudicating Authority” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Ins. by s.7, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s. 8, ibid., for “sub-section ( 6) of section 8” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).
4. Subs. by s. 9, ibid., for section 12 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 15 transactions, whether attempted or executed, the nature and value of which may be prescribed; 
(c) verify the identity of its clients in such manner and subject to such conditions, as may be 
prescribed; 
(d) identify the beneficial owner, if any, of such of its clients, as may be prescribed; 
(e) maintain record of documents evidencing identity of its clients and beneficial owners as well 
as account files and business correspondence relating to its clients. 
(2) Every information maintained, furnished or verified, save as otherwise provided under any law 
for the time being in force, shall be kept confidential. 
(3) The records referred to in clause ( a) of sub-section ( 1) shall be maintained for a period of five 
years from the date of transaction between a client and the reporting entity. 
(4) The records referred to in clause ( e) of sub-section ( 1) shall be maintained for a period of five 
years after the business relationship between a client and the reporting entity has ended or the account has 
been closed, whichever is later. 
(5) The Central Government may, by notification, exempt any reporting entity or class of reporting 
entities from any obligation under this Chapter.] 
1[12A. Access to information .—(1) The Director may call for from any reporting entity any of the 
records referred to in sub-section ( 1) of section 12 and any additional information as he considers 
necessary for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Every reporting entity shall furnish to the Director such information as may be required by him 
under sub-section ( 1) within such time and in such manner as he may specify. 
(3) Save as otherwise provided under any law for the time being in force, every information sought 
by the Director under sub-section ( 1), shall be kept confidential.] 
13. Powers of Director to impose fine.— (1) The Director may, either of his own motion or on an 
application made by any authority, officer or person, 2[make such inquiry or cause such inquiry to be 
made, as he thinks fit to be necessary, with regard to the obligations of the reporting entity, under this 
Chapter]. 
3[(1A) If at any stage of inquiry or any other proceedings before him, the Director having regard to the 
nature and complexity of the case, is of the opinion that it is necessary to do so, he may direct the 
concerned reporting entity to get its records, as may be specified, audited by an accountant from amongst 
a panel of accountants, maintained by the Central Government for this purpose. 
(1B)The expenses of, and incidental to, any audit under sub-section ( 1A) shall be borne by the Central 
Government.] 
4[(2) If the Director, in the course of any inquiry, finds that a reporting entity or its designated director 
on the Board or any of its employees has failed to comply with the obligations under this Chapter, then, 
without prejudice to any other action that may be taken under any other provisions of this Act, he may— 
(a) issue a warning in writing; or 
(b) direct such reporting entity or its designated director on the Board or any of its employees, to 
comply with specific instructions; or 
(c) direct such reporting entity or its designated director on the Board or any of its employees, to 
send reports at such interval as may be prescribed on the measures it is taking; or 
(d) by an order, impose a monetary penalty on such reporting entity or its designated director on 
the Board or any of its employees, which shall not be less than ten thousand rupees but may extend to 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 10 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for certain words, brackets and figures (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Ins. by s. 11, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
4. Subs. by s. 11, ibid., for sub-section ( 2) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 16 one lakh rupees for each failure.] 
(3) The Director shall forward a copy of the order passed under sub-section ( 2) to every banking 
company, financial institution or intermediary or person who is a party to the proceedings under that  
sub-section. 
1[Explanation .—For the purpose of this section, “accountant” shall mean a chartered accountant 
within the meaning of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949).] 
2[14. No civil or criminal proceedings against reporting entity, its directors and employees in 
certain cases.— Save as otherwise provided in section 13, the reporting entity, its directors and 
employees shall not be liable to any civil or criminal proceedings against them for furnishing information 
under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of section 12.] 
3[15. Procedure and manner of furnishing information by reporting entities.—  The Central 
Government may, in consultation with the Reserve Bank of India, prescribe the procedure and the manner 
of maintaining and furnishing information by a reporting entity under sub-section ( 1) of section 12 for the 
purpose of implementing the provisions of this Act.] 
CHAPTER V 
SUMMONS, SEARCHES AND SEIZURES, ETC . 
16. Power of survey.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Act, 
where an authority, on the basis of material in his possession, has reason to believe (the reasons for such 
belief to be recorded in writing) that an offence under section 3 has been committed, he may enter any 
place — 
(i) within the limits of the area assigned to him; or 
(ii) in respect of which he is authorised for the purposes of this section by such other authority, 
who is assigned the area within which such place is situated, 
at which any act constituting the commission of such offence is carried on, and may require any 
proprietor, employee or any other person who may at that time and place be attending in any manner to, 
or helping in, such act so as to, — 
(i) afford him the necessary facility to inspect such records as he may require and which may be 
available at such place; 
(ii) afford him the necessary facility to check or verify the proceeds of crime or any transaction 
related to proceeds of crime which may be found therein; and 
(iii) furnish such information as he may require as to any matter which may be useful for, or 
relevant to, any proceedings under this Act. 
Explanation —For the purposes of this sub-section, a place, where an act which constitutes the 
commission of the offence is carried on, shall also include any other place, whether any activity is carried 
on therein or not, in which the person carrying on such activity states that any of his records or any part of 
his property relating to such act are or is kept. 
(2) The authority referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall, after entering any place referred to in that  
sub-section immediately after completion of survey, forward a copy of the reasons so recorded along with 
material in his possession, referred to in that sub-section, to the Adjudicating Authority in a sealed 
envelope, in the manner as may be prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such reasons 
and material for such period as may be prescribed. 
(3) An authority acting under this section may — 
1. The Explanation  inserted by Act 2 of 2013, s. 11 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by s. 12, ibid.,  for section 14 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s. 13, ibid., for section 15 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 17 (i) place marks of identification on the records inspected by him and make or cause to be made 
extracts or copies there from, 
(ii) make an inventory of any property checked or verified by him, and 
(iii) record the statement of any person present in the place which may be useful for, or relevant 
to, any proceeding under this Act. 
17. Search and seizure.— (1) Where 1[the Director or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy 
Director authorised by him for the purposes of this section,] on the basis of information in his possession, 
has reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing) that any person —
(i) has committed any act which constitutes money-laundering, or 
(ii) is in possession of any proceeds of crime involved in money-laundering, or 
(iii) is in possession of any records relating to money-laundering,2[or] 
2[(iv) is in possession of any property related to crime,] 
then, subject to the rules made in this behalf, he may authorise any officer subordinate to him to —
(a) enter and search any building, place, vessel, vehicle or aircraft where he has reason to suspect 
that such records or proceeds of crime are kept; 
(b) break open the lock of any door, box, locker, safe, almirah or other receptacle for exercising 
the powers conferred by clause ( a) where the keys thereof are not available; 
(c) seize any record or property found as a result of such search; 
(d) place marks of identification on such record or2[property, if required or] make or cause to be 
made extracts or copies therefrom; 
(e) make a note or an inventory of such record or property; 
(f) examine on oath any person, who is found to be in possession or control of any record or 
property, in respect of all matters relevant for the purposes of any investigation under this Act: 
3[Provided that no search shall be conducted unless, in relation to the scheduled offence, a report 
has been forwarded to a Magistrate under section 157 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973               
(2 of 1974), or a complaint has been filed by a person, authorised to investigate the offence mentioned 
in the Schedule, before a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the scheduled offence, as the 
case may be, or in cases where such report is not required to be forwarded, a similar report of 
information received or otherwise has been submitted by an officer authorised to investigate a 
scheduled offence to an officer not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India 
or equivalent being head of the office or Ministry or Department or Unit, as the case may be, or any 
other officer who may be authorised by the Central Government, by notification, for this purpose.] 
4[(1A) Where it is not practicable to seize such record or property, the officer authorised under            
sub-section ( 1), may make an order to freeze such property whereupon the property shall not be 
transferred or otherwise dealt with, except with the prior permission of the officer making such order, and 
a copy of such order shall be served on the person concerned: 
Provided that if, at any time before its confiscation under sub-section ( 5) or sub-section ( 7) of section 
8 or section 58B or sub-section ( 2A) of section 60, it becomes practical to seize a frozen property, the 
officer authorised under sub-section ( 1) may seize such property.] 
1. Subs. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 7, for “the Director” (w.e.f.  1-6-2009). 
2. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).
3. Subs. by s.14, ibid., for the proviso (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
4. Ins. by s. 14, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-3013). 18 (2) The authority, who has been authorised under sub-section (1) shall, immediately after search and 
seizure 1[or upon issuance of a freezing order], forward a copy of the reasons so recorded along with 
material in his possession, referred to in that sub-section, to the Adjudicating Authority in a sealed 
envelope, in the manner, as may be prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such reasons 
and material for such period, as may be prescribed. 
(3) Where an authority, upon information obtained during survey under section 16, is satisfied that 
any evidence shall be or is likely to be concealed or tampered with, he may, for reasons to be recorded in 
writing, enter and search the building or place where such evidence is located and seize that evidence:  
Provided that no authorisation referred to in sub-section ( 1) shall be required for search under this 
sub-section. 
2[(4) The authority seizing any record or property under sub-section ( 1) or freezing any record or 
property under sub-section ( 1A) shall, within a period of thirty days from such seizure or freezing, as the 
case may be, file an application, requesting for retention of such record or property seized under  
sub-section ( 1) or for continuation of the order of freezing served under sub-section ( 1A), before the 
Adjudicating Authority.] 
18. Search of persons.— (1) If an authority, authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by 
general or special order, has reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing) that 
any person has secreted about his person or in anything under his possession, ownership or control, any 
record or proceeds of crime which may be useful for or relevant to any proceedings under this Act, he 
may search that person and seize such record or property which may be useful for or relevant to any 
proceedings under this Act: 
3[Provided that no search of any person shall be made unless, in relation to the scheduled offence, a 
report has been forwarded to a Magistrate under section 157 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 
(2 of 1974) or a complaint has been filed by a person, authorised to investigate the offence mentioned in 
the Schedule, before a Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the scheduled offence, as the case may 
be, or in cases where such report is not required to be forwarded, a similar report of information received 
or otherwise has been submitted by an officer authorised to investigate a scheduled offence to an officer 
not below the rank of Additional Secretary to the Government of India or equivalent being head of the 
office or Ministry or Department or Unit, as the case may be, or any other officer who may be authorised 
by the Central Government, by notification, for this purpose.] 
(2) The authority, who has been authorised under sub-section ( 1) shall, immediately after search and 
seizure, forward a copy of the reasons so recorded along with material in his possession, referred to in that 
sub-section, to the Adjudicating Authority in a sealed envelope, in the manner, as may be prescribed and 
such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such reasons and material for such period, as may be prescribed. 
(3) Where an authority is about to search any person, he shall, if such person so requires, take such 
person within twenty-four hours to the nearest Gazetted Officer, superior in rank to him, or a Magistrate:  
Provided that the period of twenty-four hours shall exclude the time necessary for the journey 
undertaken to take such person to the nearest Gazetted Officer, superior in rank to him, or Magistrate’s 
Court. 
(4) If the requisition under sub-section ( 3) is made, the authority shall not detain the person for more 
than twenty-four hours prior to taking him before the Gazetted Officer, superior in rank to him, or the 
Magistrate referred to in that sub-section: 
1.  Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 14 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by s. 14, ibid., for sub-section ( 4) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s. 15, ibid,. for the proviso (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 19 Provided that the period of twenty-four hours shall exclude the time necessary for the journey from 
the place of detention to the office of the Gazetted Officer, superior in rank to him, or the Magistrate’s 
Court. 
(5) The Gazetted Officer or the Magistrate before whom any such person is brought shall, if he sees 
no reasonable ground for search, forthwith discharge such person but otherwise shall direct that search be 
made. 
(6) Before making the search under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 5), the authority shall call upon 
two or more persons to attend and witness the search, and the search shall be made in the presence of such 
persons. 
(7) The authority shall prepare a list of record or property seized in the course of the search and obtain 
the signatures of the witnesses on the list. 
(8) No female shall be searched by any one except a female. 
(9) The authority shall record the statement of the person searched under sub-section ( 1) or  
sub-section ( 5) in respect of the records or proceeds of crime found or seized in the course of the search: 
1* * * * * 
(10) The authority, seizing any record or property under sub-section ( 1) shall, within a period of thirty 
days from such seizure, file an application requesting for retention of such record or property, before the 
Adjudicating Authority. 
19. Power to arrest.— (1) If the Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director or any other officer 
authorised in this behalf by the Central Government by general or special order, has on the basis of 
material in his possession, reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing) that any 
person has been guilty of an offence punishable under this Act, he may arrest such person and shall, as 
soon as may be, inform him of the grounds for such arrest. 
(2) The Director, Deputy Director, Assistant Director or any other officer shall, immediately after 
arrest of such person under sub-section ( 1), forward a copy of the order along with the material in his 
possession, referred to in that sub-section, to the Adjudicating Authority in a sealed envelope, in the 
manner, as may be prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such order and material for 
such period, as may be prescribed. 
(3) Every person arrested under sub-section ( 1) shall, within twenty-four hours, be taken to a 
2[Special Court or] Judicial Magistrate or a Metropolitan Magistrate, as the case may be, having 
jurisdiction:  
Provided that the period of twenty-four hours shall exclude the time necessary for the journey from 
the place of arrest to the 2[Special Court or] Magistrate’s Court. 
3[20.Retention of property.— (1) Where any property has been seized under section 17 or section 18 
or frozen under sub-section ( 1A) of section 17 and the officer authorised by the Director in this behalf has, 
on the basis of material in his possession, reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded by 
him in writing) that such property is required to be retained for the purposes of adjudication under section 
8, such property may, if seized, be retained or if frozen, may continue to remain frozen, for a period not 
exceeding one hundred and eighty days from the day on which such property was seized or frozen, as the 
case may be. 
(2) The officer authorised by the Director shall, immediately after he has passed an order for retention 
or continuation of freezing of the property for purposes of adjudication under section 8, forward a copy of 
1. The proviso omitted by Act 21 of 2009 s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-6-2009). 
2. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 208 (w.e.f. 19-4-2018).  
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s.16, for sections 20 and 21 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 20 the order along with the material in his possession, referred to in sub-section ( 1), to the Adjudicating 
Authority, in a sealed envelope, in the manner as may be prescribed and such Adjudicating Authority 
shall keep such order and material for such period as may be prescribed. 
(3) On the expiry of the period specified in sub-section ( 1), the property shall be returned to the 
person from whom such property was seized or whose property was ordered to be frozen unless the 
Adjudicating Authority permits retention or continuation of freezing of such property beyond the said 
period. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority, before authorising the retention or continuation of freezing of such 
property beyond the period specified in sub-section ( 1), shall satisfy himself that the property is prima 
facie  involved in money-laundering and the property is required for the purposes of adjudication under 
section 8. 
(5) After passing the order of confiscation under sub-section ( 5) or sub-section ( 7) of section 8, 
1[Special Court], shall direct the release of all property other than the property involved in  
money-laundering to the person from whom such property was seized or the persons entitled to receive it. 
(6) Where an order releasing the property has been made by the 2[Special Court] under sub-section 
(6) of section 8 or by the Adjudicating Authority under section 58B or sub-section ( 2A) of section 60, the 
Director or any officer authorised by him in this behalf may withhold the release of any such property for 
a period of ninety days from the date of3[receipt of] such order, if he is of the opinion that such property is 
relevant for the appeal proceedings under this Act. 
21. Retention of records.— (1) Where any records have been seized, under section 17 or section 18 
or frozen under sub-section ( 1A) of section 17 and the Investigating Officer or any other officer 
authorised by the Director in this behalf has reason to believe that any of such records are required to be 
retained for any inquiry under this Act, such records may if seized, be retained or if frozen, may continue 
to remain frozen, for a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days from the day on which such 
records were seized or frozen, as the case may be. 
(2) The person, from whom records seized or frozen, shall be entitled to obtain copies of records. 
(3) On the expiry of the period specified under sub-section ( 1), the records shall be returned to the 
person from whom such records were seized or whose records were ordered to be frozen unless the 
Adjudicating Authority permits retention or continuation of freezing of such records beyond the said 
period. 
(4) The Adjudicating Authority, before authorising the retention or continuation of freezing of such 
records beyond the period specified in sub-section ( 1), shall satisfy himself that the records are required 
for the purposes of adjudication under section 8. 
(5) After passing of an order of confiscation 4[or release under sub-section ( 5) or sub-section ( 6) or 
sub-section ( 7) of section 8 or section 58B or sub-section ( 2A) of section 60], the Adjudicating Authority 
shall direct the release of the records to the person from whom such records were seized. 
(6) Where an order releasing the records has been made by the Court 5[Adjudicating Authority under 
sub-section ( 5) of section 21], the Director or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf may 
withhold the release of any such record for a period of ninety days from the date of 6[receipt of] such 
order, if he is of the opinion that such record is relevant for the appeal proceedings under this Act.] 
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 148, for “the Court or the Adjudicating Authority, as the case may be” (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
2. Subs. by s. 148, ibid., for “Court” (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
3. Ins. by s. 148, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
4. Subs. by s. 149, ibid., for “under sub-section ( 5) or sub-section ( 7) of section 8” (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
5. Subs. by s. 149, ibid., for  certain words, brackets, figures and letters  (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
6. Ins. by s. 149, ibid. (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 21 22. Presumption as to records or property in certain cases.— (1) Where any records or property 
are or is found in the possession or control of any person in the course of a survey or a search1[or where 
any record or property is produced by any person or has been resumed or seized from the custody or 
control of any person or has been frozen under this Act or under any other law for the time being in 
force,] it shall be presumed that —
(i) such records or property belong or belongs to such person; 
(ii) the contents of such records are true; and 
(iii) the signature and every other part of such records which purport to be in the handwriting of 
any particular person or which may reasonably be assumed to have been signed by, or to be in the 
handwriting of, any particular person, are in that person’s handwriting, and in the case of a record, 
stamped, executed or attested, that it was executed or attested by the person by whom it purports to 
have been so stamped, executed or attested. 
(2) Where any records have been received from any place outside India, duly authenticated by such 
authority or person and in such manner as may be prescribed, in the course of proceedings under this Act, 
the Special Court, the Appellate Tribunal or the Adjudicating Authority, as the case may be, shall —
(a) presume, that the signature and every other part of such record which purports to be in the 
handwriting of any particular person or which the court may reasonably assume to have been signed 
by, or to be in the handwriting of, any particular person, is in that person’s handwriting; and in the 
case of a record executed or attested, that it was executed or attested by the person by whom it 
purports to have been so executed or attested; 
(b) admit the document in evidence, notwithstanding that it is not duly stamped, if such document 
is otherwise admissible in evidence. 
23. Presumption in inter-connected transactions.— Where money-laundering involves two or more 
inter-connected transactions and one or more such transactions is or are proved to be involved in  
money-laundering, then for the purposes of adjudication or confiscation 2[under section 8 or for the trial 
of the money-laundering offence, it shall unless otherwise proved to the satisfaction of the Adjudicating 
Authority or the Special Court], be presumed that the remaining transactions from part of such inter-
connected transactions. 
3[24. Burden of proof.— In any proceeding relating to proceeds of crime under this Act,— 
(a) in the case of a person charged with the offence of money-laundering under section 3, the 
Authority or Court shall, unless the contrary is proved, presume that such proceeds of crime are 
involved in money-laundering; and 
(b) in the case of any other person the Authority or Court, may presume that such proceeds of 
crime are involved in money-laundering.] 
CHAPTER VI 
APPELLATE  TRIBUNAL
4[25. Appellate Tribunal.— The Appellate Tribunal constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 12 of 
of the Smugglers and Foreign Exchange Manipulators (Forfeiture of Property) Act, 1976 (13 of 1976) 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s.17 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by s.18, ibid.,  for certain words and figure (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s.19 , ibid.,  for section 24 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).
4. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 232, for section 25 (w.e.f. 1-6-2016). 22 shall be the Appellate Tribunal for hearing appeals against the orders of the Adjudicating Authority and 
the other authorities under this Act.] 
26. Appeal to Appellate Tribunal.— (1) Save as otherwise provided in sub-section ( 3), the Director 
or any person aggrieved by an order made by the Adjudicating Authority under this Act, may prefer an 
appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. 
(2) Any 1[reporting entity] aggrieved by any order of the Director made under sub-section ( 2) of 
section 13, may prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal. 
(3) Every appeal preferred under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall be filed within a period of 
forty-five days from the date on which a copy of the order made by the Adjudicating Authority or 
Director is received and it shall be in such form and be accompanied by such fee as may be prescribed:  
Provided that the Appellate Tribunal may, after giving an opportunity of being heard, entertain an 
appeal after the expiry of the said period of forty-five days if it is satisfied that there was sufficient cause 
for not filing it within that period. 
(4) On receipt of an appeal under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2), the Appellate Tribunal may, after 
giving the parties to the appeal an opportunity of being heard, pass such orders thereon as it thinks fit, 
confirming, modifying or setting aside the order appealed against. 
(5) The Appellate Tribunal shall send a copy of every order made by it to the parties to the appeal and 
to the concerned Adjudicating Authority or the Director, as the case may be. 
(6) The appeal filed before the Appellate Tribunal under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) shall be 
dealt with by it as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made by it to dispose of the appeal 
finally within six months from the date of filing of the appeal. 
27. [Compositions, etc., of Appellate Tribunal. ] Omitted by the Finance Act, 2016  (28 of 2016 ), s. 232
(w.e.f. 1-6-2016 ).
28. [Qualifications for appointment .] Omitted by s.  232, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-6-2016). 
29. [ Term of office .]Omitted by the Prevention of Money-laundering (Amendment ) Act, 2005 
(20 of 2005), s. 4 (w.e.f. 1-7-2005). 
30. [Conditions of service .] Omitted by the Finance Act, 2016  (28 of 2016 ), s. 232(w.e.f. 1-6-2016). 
31. [Vacancies .] Omitted by s . 232, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-6-2016). 
32. [Resignation and removal .] Omitted by s.  232, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-6-2016). 
 33. [Member to act as Chairperson in certain circumstances .]Omitted by s.  232, ibid.
(w.e.f . 1-6-2016). 
34. [Staff of Appellate Tribunal .] Omitted by s.  232, ibid. (w.e.f . 1-6-2016). 
35. Procedure and powers of Appellate Tribunal.— (1) The Appellate Tribunal shall not be bound 
by the procedure laid down by the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), but shall be guided by the 
principles of natural justice and, subject to the other Provisions of this Act, the Appellate Tribunal shall 
have powers to regulate its own procedure. 
(2) The Appellate Tribunal shall have, for the purposes of discharging its functions under this Act, the 
same powers as are vested in a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while 
trying a suit, in respect of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath; 
(b) requiring the discovery and production of documents; 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 20, for “banking company, financial institution or intermediary” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 23 (c) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(d) subject to the provisions of sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 
1872), requisitioning any public record or document or copy of such record or document from any 
office; 
(e) issuing commissions for the examination of witnesses or documents; 
(f) reviewing its decisions; 
(g) dismissing a representation for default or deciding it ex parte ; 
(h) setting aside any order of dismissal of any representation for default or any order passed by it 
ex parte ; and 
(i) any other matter, which may be, prescribed by the Central Government. 
(3) An order made by the Appellate Tribunal under this Act shall be executable by the Appellate 
Tribunal as a decree of civil court and, for this purpose, the Appellate Tribunal shall have all the powers 
of a civil court. 
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 3), the Appellate Tribunal may transmit any 
order made by it to a civil court having local jurisdiction and such civil court shall execute the order as if 
it were a decree made by that court.  
(5) All proceedings before the Appellate Tribunal shall be deemed to be judicial proceedings within 
the meaning of sections 193 and 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860) and the Appellate Tribunal 
shall be deemed to be a civil court for the purposes of sections 345 and 346 of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974). 
36. Distribution of business amongst Benches.— Where any Benches are constituted, the 
1[Chairman] may, from time to time, by notification, make provisions as to the distribution of the business 
of the Appellate Tribunal amongst the Benches and also provide for the matters which may be dealt with 
by each Bench. 
37. Power of 1[Chairman] to transfer cases.— On the application of any of the parties and after 
notice to the parties, and after hearing such of them as he may desire to be heard, or on his own motion 
without such notice, the 1[Chairman] may transfer any case pending before one Bench, for disposal, to 
any other Bench. 
38. Decision to be by majority.— If the Members of a Bench consisting of two Members differ in 
opinion on any point, they shall state the point or points on which they differ, and make a reference to the 
1[Chairman] who shall either hear the point or points himself or refer the case for hearing on such point or 
points by 2[third Member] of the Appellate Tribunal and such point or points shall be decided according 
to the opinion of the majority of the Members of the Appellate Tribunal who have heard the case, 
including those who first heard it. 
39. Right of appellant to take assistance of authorised representative and of Government to 
appoint presenting officers.— (1) A person preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal under this Act 
may either appear in person or take the assistance of an authorised representative of his choice to present 
his case before the Appellate Tribunal. 
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 232, for “Chairperson” (w.e.f. 1-6-2016). 
2. Subs. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 11, for “one or more of the other Members” (w.e.f. 1-6-2009). 24 Explanation .—For the purposes of this sub-section, the expression “authorised representative” shall 
have the same meaning as assigned to it under sub-section ( 2) of section 288 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 
(43 of 1961). 
(2) The Central Government or the Director may authorise one or more authorised representatives or 
any of its officers to act as presenting officers and every person so authorised may present the case with 
respect to any appeal before the Appellate Tribunal. 
40. Members, etc., to be public servants.— The 1[Chairman], Members and other officers and 
employees of the Appellate Tribunal, the Adjudicating Authority, Director and the officers subordinate to 
him shall be deemed to be public servants within the meaning of section 21 of the Indian Penal Code (45 
of 1860). 
41. Civil court not to have jurisdiction.— No civil court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit 
or proceeding in respect of any matter which the Director, an Adjudicating Authority or the Appellate 
Tribunal is empowered by or under this Act to determine and no injunction shall be granted by any court 
or other authority in respect of any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or 
under this Act. 
42. Appeal to High Court.— Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Appellate 
Tribunal may file an appeal to the High Court within sixty days from the date of communication of the 
decision or order of the Appellate Tribunal to him on any question of law or fact arising out of such order: 
 Provided that the High Court may, if it is satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient 
cause from filing the appeal within the said period, allow it to be filed within a further period not 
exceeding sixty days. 
Explanation .—For the purposes of this section, “High Court” means —
(i) the High Court within the jurisdiction of which the aggrieved party ordinarily resides or carries 
on business or personally works for gain; and 
(ii) where the Central Government is the aggrieved party, the High Court within the jurisdiction 
of which the respondent, or in a case where there are more than one respondent, any of the 
respondents, ordinarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain. 
CHAPTER VII 
SPECIAL  COURTS
43. Special Courts.— (1) The Central Government, in consultation with the Chief Justice of the High 
Court, shall, for trial of offence punishable under section 4, by notification, designate one or more Courts 
of Session as Special Court or Special Courts or such area or areas or for such case or class or group of 
cases as may be specified in the notification. 
Explanation .—In this sub-section, “High Court” means the High Court of the State in which a 
Sessions Court designated as Special Court was functioning immediately before such designation. 
(2) While trying an offence under this Act, a Special Court shall also try an offence, other than an 
offence referred to in sub-section ( 1), with which the accused may, under the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), be charged at the same trial. 
1. Subs. by Act 28 of 2016, s. 232, for “Chairperson” (w.e.f. 1-6-2016). 25 44. Offences triable by Special Courts.— (1) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), — 
1[(a) an offence punishable under section 4 and any scheduled offence connected to the offence 
under that section shall be triable by the Special Court constituted for the area in which the offence 
has been committed: 
Provided that the Special Court, trying a scheduled offence before the commencement of this Act, 
shall continue to try such scheduled offence; or]; 
(b) a Special Court may, 2*** upon a complaint made by an authority authorised in this behalf 
under this Act take 3[cognizance of offence under section 3, without the accused being committed to 
it for trial]; 
4[(c) if the court which has taken cognizance of the scheduled offence is other than the Special 
Court which has taken cognizance of the complaint of the offence of money-laundering under  
sub-clause ( b), it shall, on an application by the authority authorised to file a complaint under this 
Act, commit the case relating to the scheduled offence to the Special Court and the Special Court 
shall, on receipt of such case proceed to deal with it from the stage at which it is committed. 
(d) a Special Court while trying the scheduled offence or the offence of money-laundering shall 
hold trial in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 ( 2 of 1974) as it 
applies to a trial before a Court of Session.] 
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to affect the special powers of the High Court 
regarding bail under section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and the High Court 
may exercise such powers including the power under clause ( b) of sub-section ( 1) of that section as if the 
reference to “Magistrate” in that section includes also a reference to a “Special Court” designated under 
section 43. 
45. Offences to be cognizable and non-bailable.— (1) 5[Notwithstanding anything contained in the 
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), no person accused of an offence 6[under this Act] shall be 
released on bail or on his own bond unless —]
(i) the Public Prosecutor has been given a opportunity to oppose the application for such 
release; and 
(ii) where the Public Prosecutor opposes the application, the court is satisfied that there are 
reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to 
commit any offence while on bail: 
Provided that a person, who, is under the age of sixteen years, or is a woman or is sick or infirm, 7[or 
is accused either on his own or along with other co-accused of money-laundering a sum of less than one 
crore rupees] may be released on bail, if the Special Court so directs: 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 21, for clause ( a) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. The words “ upon perusal of police report of the facts which constitute an offence under this Act or” omitted by Act 
20 of 2005, s. 6 (w.e.f. 1-7-2005). 
3. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 21, for “cognizance of the offence for which the accused is committed to it for trial”  
(w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
4. Ins. by s. 21, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
5. Subs. by Act 20 of 2005, s. 7, for certain words, figures, brackets and letters (w.e.f. 1-7-2005). 
6. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 208, for “punishable for a term of imprisonment of more than three years under Part A of the 
Schedule” (w.e.f. 19-4-2018).  
7.  Ins. by s. 208 ibid, (w.e.f. 19-4-2018).  26 Provided further that the Special Court shall not take cognizance of any offence punishable under 
section 4 except upon a complaint in writing made by —
(i) the Director; or 
(ii) any officer of the Central Government or a State Government authorised in writing in this 
behalf by the Central Government by a general or special order made in this behalf by that 
Government. 
1[(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or 
any other provision of this Act, no police officer shall investigate into an offence under this Act unless 
specifically authorised, by the Central Government by a general or special order, and, subject to such 
conditions as may be prescribed.] 
(2) The limitation on granting of bail specified in 2*** sub-section ( 1) is in addition to the limitations 
under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) or any other law for the time being in force on 
granting of bail. 
46. Application of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to proceedings before Special Court.— (1) 
Save as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 
1974) (including the provisions as to bails or bonds), shall apply to the proceedings before a Special 
Court and for the purposes of the said provisions, the Special Court shall be deemed to be a Court of 
Session and the persons conducting the prosecution before the Special Court, shall be deemed to be a 
Public Prosecutor: 
Provided that the Central Government may also appoint for any case or class or group of cases a 
Special Public Prosecutor. 
(2) A person shall not be qualified to be appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public 
Prosecutor under this section unless he has been in practice as an advocate for not less than seven years, 
under the Union or a State, requiring special knowledge of law. 
(3) Every person appointed as a Public Prosecutor or a Special Public Prosecutor under this section 
shall be deemed to be a Public Prosecutor within the meaning of clause ( u) of section 2 of the Code of 
Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) and the provisions of that Code shall have effect accordingly. 
47. Appeal and revision.— The High Court may exercise, so far as may be applicable, all the powers 
conferred by Chapter XXIX or Chapter XXX of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), on a 
High Court, as if a Special Court within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court were a Court 
of Session trying cases within the local limits of the jurisdiction of the High Court. 
CHAPTER VIII 
AUTHORITIES
48. Authorities under Act.— There shall be the following classes of authorities for the purposes of 
this Act, namely: — 
(a) Director or Additional Director or Joint Director,  
(b) Deputy Director, 
(c) Assistant Director, and 
(d) such other class of officers as may be appointed for the purposes of this Act. 
1. Ins. by Act 20 of 2005, s. 7 (w.e.f. 1-7-2005). 
2. The words, brackets and letter “clause ( b) of” omitted by s. 7, ibid. (w.e.f. 1-7-2005). 27 49. Appointment and powers of authorities and other officers.— (1) The Central Government may 
appoint such persons as it thinks fit to be authorities for the purposes of this Act. 
(2) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may authorise the 
Director or an Additional Director or a Joint Director or a Deputy Director or an Assistant Director 
appointed under that sub-section to appoint other authorities below the rank of an Assistant Director. 
(3) Subject to such conditions and limitations as the Central Government may impose, an authority 
may exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred or imposed on it under this Act. 
50. Powers of authorities regarding summons, production of documents and to give evidence, 
etc.— (1) The Director shall, for the purposes of section 13, have the same powers as are vested in a civil 
court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) while trying a suit in respect of the following 
matters, namely: —
(a) discovery and inspection; 
(b) enforcing the attendance of any person, including any officer of a 1[reporting entity] and 
examining him on oath; 
(c) compelling the production of records; 
(d) receiving evidence on affidavits; 
(e) issuing commissions for examination of witnesses and documents; and 
(f) any other matter which may be prescribed. 
(2) The Director, Additional Director, Joint Director, Deputy Director or Assistant Director shall have 
power to summon any person whose attendance he considers necessary whether to give evidence or to 
produce any records during the course of any investigation or proceeding under this Act. 
(3) All the persons so summoned shall be bound to attend in person or through authorised agents, as 
such officer may direct, and shall be bound to state the truth upon any subject respecting which they are 
examined or make statements, and produce such documents as may be required. 
(4) Every proceeding under sub-sections ( 2) and ( 3) shall be deemed to be a judicial proceeding 
within the meaning of section 193 and section 228 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860). 
(5) Subject to any rules made in this behalf by the Central Government, any officer referred to in  
sub-section ( 2) may impound and retain in his custody for such period, as he thinks fit, any records 
produced before him in any proceedings under this Act: 
Provided that an Assistant Director or a Deputy Director shall not —
(a) impound any records without recording his reasons for so doing; or 
(b) retain in his custody any such records for a period exceeding three months, without obtaining 
the previous approval of the 2[Joint Director]. 
51. Jurisdiction of authorities.— (1) The authorities shall exercise all or any of the powers and 
perform all or any of the functions conferred on, or, assigned, as the case may be, to such authorities by or 
under this Act or the rules framed thereunder in accordance with such directions as the Central 
Government may issue for the exercise of powers and performance of the functions by all or any of the 
authorities. 
(2) In issuing the directions or orders referred to in sub-section ( 1), the Central Government may have 
regard to any one or more of the following criteria, namely: —
(a) territorial area; 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 22, for “banking company or a financial institution or a company,” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 208, for “Director” (w.e.f. 19-4-2018).  28 (b) classes of persons; 
(c) classes of cases; and 
(d) any other criterion specified by the Central Government in this behalf. 
52. Power of Central Government to issue directions, etc.— The Central Government may, from 
time to time, issue such orders, instructions and directions to the authorities as it may deem fit for the 
proper administration of this Act and such authorities and all other persons employed in execution of this 
Act shall observe and follow such orders, instructions and directions of the Central Government:  
Provided that no such orders, instructions or directions shall be issued so as to —
(a) require any authority to decide a particular case in a particular manner; or 
(b) interfere with the discretion of the Adjudicating Authority in exercise of his functions. 
53. Empowerment of certain officers.— The Central Government may, by a special or general order, 
empower an officer not below the rank of Director of the Central Government or of a State Government 
to act as an authority under this Act: 
Provided that the Central Government may empower an officer below the rank of Director if the 
officer of the rank of the Director or above are not available in a particular area. 
54. Certain officers to assist in inquiry, etc.— The following 1[officers and others] are hereby 
empowered and required to assist the authorities in the enforcement of this Act, namely: — 
(a) officers of the Customs and Central Excise Departments; 
(b) officers appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 5 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985);  
(c) income-tax authorities under sub-section ( 1) of section 117 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 
1961); 
2[(d) members of the recognised stock exchange referred to in clause ( f) of section 2 and the 
officers of the stock exchanges recognised under section 4 of the Securities Contracts (Regulation) 
Act, 1956 (42 of 1956);] 
(e) officers of the Reserve Bank of India constituted under sub-section ( 1) of section 3 of the 
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (2 of 1934); 
(f) officers of Police; 
(g) officers of enforcement appointed under sub-section ( 1) of section 36 of the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 (40 of 1999); 
(h) officers of the Securities and Exchange Board of India established under section 3 of the 
Securities and Exchange Board of India Act, 1992 (15 of 1992); 
3[(ha) officers of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority established under section 
3 of the Insurance Regulatory and Development Authority Act, 1999 (41 of 1999); 
(hb) officers of the Forward Markets Commission established under section 3 of the Forward 
Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (74 of 1952); 
(hc) officers and members of the recognised association recognised under section 6 of the 
Forward Contracts (Regulation) Act, 1952 (74 of 1952); 
(hd) officers of the Pension Fund Regulatory and Development Authority; 
(he) officers of the Department of Posts in the Government of India; 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 23 for “officers” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by s. 23, ibid., for clause ( d) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).
3. Ins. by s. 23, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 29 (hf) Registrars or Sub-Registrars appointed by the State Governments under section 6 of the 
Registration Act, 1908 (16 of 1908); 
(hg) registering authority empowered to register motor vehicles under Chapter IV of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988); 
(hh) officers and members of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of India constituted under 
section 3 of the Chartered Accountants Act, 1949 (38 of 1949); 
(hi) officers and members of the Institute of Cost and Works Accountants of India constituted 
under section 3 of the Cost and Works Accountants Act, 1959 (23 of 1959); 
(hj) officers and members of the Institute of Company Secretaries of India constituted under 
section 3 of the Company Secretaries Act, 1980 (56 of 1980);] 
(i) officers of any other body corporate constituted or established under a Central Act or a State 
Act; 
(j) such other officers of the Central Government, State Government, local authorities or 
1[reporting entities] as the Central Government may, by notification, specify, in this behalf. 
CHAPTER IX 
RECIPROCAL  ARRANGEMENT FOR  ASSISTANCE IN CERTAIN  MATTERS AND  PROCEDURE FOR 
ATTACHMENT AND  CONFISCATION OF  PROPERTY
55. Definitions.— In this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, —
(a) “contracting State” means any country or place outside India in respect of which arrangements 
have been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country through a treaty or 
otherwise; 
(b) “identifying” includes establishment of a proof that the property was derived from, or used in 
the commission of an offence under section 3; 
(c) “tracing” means determining the nature, source, disposition, movement, title or ownership of 
property. 
56. Agreements with foreign countries.— (1) The Central Government may enter into an agreement 
with the Government of any country outside India for — 
(a) enforcing the provisions of this Act; 
(b) exchange of information for the prevention of any offence under this Act or under the 
corresponding law in force in that country or investigation of cases relating to any offence under this 
Act,  
and may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make such provisions as may be necessary for 
implementing the agreement. 
(2) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the application of 
this Chapter in relation to a contracting State with which reciprocal arrangements have been made, shall 
be subject to such conditions, exceptions or qualifications as are specified in the said notification. 
57. Letter of request to a contracting State in certain cases.— (1) Notwithstanding anything 
contained in this Act or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) if, in the course of an 
investigation into an offence or other proceedings under this Act, an application is made to a Special 
Court by the Investigating Officer or any officer superior in rank to the Investigating Officer that any 
evidence is required in connection with investigation into an offence or proceedings under this Act and he 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 23, for “banking companies” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).30 is of the opinion that such evidence may be available in any place in a contracting State, and the Special 
Court, on being satisfied that such evidence is required in connection with the investigation into an 
offence or proceedings under this Act, may issue a letter of request to a court or an authority in the 
contracting State competent to deal with such request to —
(i) examine facts and circumstances of the case, 
(ii) take such steps as the Special Court may specify in such letter of request, and  
(iii) forward all the evidence so taken or collected to the Special Court issuing such letter of 
request. 
(2) The letter of request shall be transmitted in such manner as the Central Government may specify 
in this behalf. 
(3) Every statement recorded or document or thing received under sub-section ( 1) shall be deemed to 
be the evidence collected during the course of investigation. 
58. Assistance to a contracting State in certain cases.— Where a letter of request is received by the 
Central Government from a court or authority in a contracting State requesting for investigation into an 
offence or proceedings under this Act and forwarding to such court or authority any evidence connected 
therewith, the Central Government may forward such letter of request to the Special Court or to any 
authority under the Act as it thinks fit for execution of such request in accordance with the provisions of 
this Act or, as the case may be, any other law for the time being in force. 
1[58A. Special Court to release the property.— Where on closure of the criminal case or conclusion 
of a trial in a criminal court outside India under the corresponding law of any other country, such court 
finds that the offence of money-laundering has not taken place or the property in India is not involved in 
money-laundering, the Special Court may, on an application moved by the concerned person or the 
Director, after notice to the other party, order release of such property to the person entitled to receive it. 
58B. Letter of request of a contracting State or authority for confiscation or release the 
property.— Where the trial under the corresponding law of any other country cannot be conducted by 
reason of the death of the accused or the accused being declared a proclaimed offender or for any other 
reason or having commenced but could not be concluded, the Central Government shall, on receipt of a 
letter of request from a court or authority in a contracting State requesting for confiscation or release of 
property, as the case may be, forward the same to the Director to move an application before the Special 
Court and upon such application the Special Court shall pass appropriate orders regarding confiscation or 
release of such property involved in the offence of money-laundering.]
59. Reciprocal arrangements for processes and assistance for transfer of accused persons.— (1) 
Where a Special Court, in relation to an offence punishable under section 4, desires that —
(a) a summons to an accused person, or 
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or 
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or other thing or to 
produce it, or 
(d) a search warrant,  
issued by it shall be served or executed at any place in any contracting State, it shall send such summons 
or warrant in duplicate in such form, to such Court, Judge or Magistrate through such authorities, as the 
Central Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf and that Court, Judge or Magistrate, as 
the case may be, shall cause the same to be executed. 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 24 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 31 (2) Where a Special Court, in relation to an offence punishable under section 4 has received for 
service or execution —
(a) a summons to an accused person, or 
(b) a warrant for the arrest of an accused person, or  
(c) a summons to any person requiring him to attend and produce a document or other thing, or to 
produce it, or 
(d) a search warrant,  
issued by a Court, Judge or Magistrate in a contracting State, it shall, cause the same to be served or 
executed as if it were a summons or warrant received by it from another Court in the said territories for 
service or execution within its local jurisdiction; and where —
(i) a warrant of arrest has been executed, the person arrested shall be dealt with in accordance 
with the procedure specified under section 19; 
(ii) a search warrant has been executed, the things found in this search shall, so far as possible, be 
dealt with in accordance with the procedure specified under sections 17 and 18: 
Provided that in a case where a summon or search warrant received from a contracting State has been 
executed, the documents or other things produced or things found in the search shall be forwarded to the 
Court issuing the summons or search-warrant through such authority as the Central Government may, by 
notification, specify in this behalf. 
(3) Where a person transferred to a contracting State pursuant to sub-section ( 2) is a prisoner in India, 
the Special Court or the Central Government may impose such conditions as that Court or Government 
deems fit.  
(4) Where the person transferred to India pursuant to sub-section ( 1) is a prisoner in a contracting 
State, the Special Court in India shall ensure that the conditions subject to which the prisoner is 
transferred to India are complied with and such prisoner shall be kept in such custody subject to such 
conditions as the Central Government may direct in writing. 
60. Attachment, seizure and confiscation, etc., of property in a contracting State or India.— (1) 
Where the Director has made an order for attachment of any 1[property under section 5 or for freezing 
under sub-section ( 1A) of section 17 or where an Adjudicating Authority has made an order relating to a 
property under section 8 or where a Special Court has made an order of confiscation relating to a property 
under sub-section ( 5) or sub section ( 6) of section 8] and such property is suspected to be in a contracting 
State, the Special Court, on an application by the Director or the Administrator appointed under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 10, as the case may be , may issue a letter of request to a court or an authority in 
the contracting State for execution of such order. 
(2) Where a letter of request is received by the Central Government from a court or an authority in a 
contracting State requesting 2[attachment, seizure, freezing or confiscation] of the property in India, 
derived or obtained, directly or indirectly, by any person from the commission of an offence under 3[a 
corresponding law] committed in that contracting State, the Central Government may forward such letter 
of request to the Director, as it thinks fit, for execution in accordance with the provisions of this Act. 
4[(2A) Where on closure of the criminal case or conclusion of trial in a criminal court outside India 
under the corresponding law of any other country, such court finds that the offence of money-laundering 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 25, for certain words and figures (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Subs. by s. 25, ibid.,for “attachment or confiscation” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s. 25, ibid., for “section 3” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
4. Ins. by s. 25, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 32 under the corresponding law of that country has been committed, the 1[Special Court] shall, on receipt of 
an application from the Director for execution of confiscation under sub-section (2), order, after giving 
notice to the affected persons, that such property involved in money-laundering or which has been used 
for commission of the offence of money-laundering stand confiscated to the Central Government.] 
(3) The Director shall, on receipt of a letter of request under section 58 or section 59, direct any 
authority under this Act to take all steps necessary for tracing and identifying such property. 
(4) The steps referred to in sub-section ( 3) may include any inquiry, investigation or survey in respect 
of any person, place, property, assets, documents, books of account in any bank or public financial 
institutions or any other relevant matters. 
(5) Any inquiry, investigation or survey referred to in sub-section ( 4) shall be carried out by an 
authority mentioned in sub-section ( 3) in accordance with such directions issued in accordance with the 
provisions of this Act. 
(6) The provisions of this Act relating to attachment, adjudication, confiscation and vesting of 
property in the Central Government contained in Chapter III and survey, searches and seizures contained 
in Chapter V shall apply to the property in respect of which letter of request is received from a court or 
contracting State for attachment or confiscation of property. 
2[(7) When any property in India is confiscated as a result of execution of a request from a contracting 
State in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may either return such 
property to the requesting State or compensate that State by disposal of such property on mutually agreed 
terms that would take into account deduction for reasonable expenses incurred in investigation, 
prosecution or judicial proceedings leading to the return or disposal of confiscated property.] 
61. Procedure in respect of letter of request.— Every letter of request, summons or warrant, 
received by the Central Government from, and every letter of request, summons or warrant, to be 
transmitted to a contracting State under this Chapter shall be transmitted to a contracting State or, as the 
case may be, sent to the concerned Court in India and in such form and in such manner as the Central 
Government may, by notification, specify in this behalf. 
CHAPTER X 
MISCELLANEOUS
62. Punishment for vexatious search.— Any authority or officer exercising powers under this Act or 
any rules made thereunder, who, without reasons recorded in writing, — 
(a) searches or causes to be searched any building or place; or 
(b) detains or searches or arrests any person,  
shall for every such offence be liable on conviction for imprisonment for a term which may extend to two 
years or fine which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or both. 
63. Punishment for false information or failure to give information, etc.— (I) Any person wilfully 
and maliciously giving false information and so causing an arrest or a search to be made under this Act 
shall on conviction be liable for imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine 
which may extend to fifty thousand rupees or both. 
1. Subs. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 150, for “Adjudicating Authority” (w.e.f. 14-5-2015).  
2. Ins. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 12 (w.e.f. 1-6-2009). 33 (2) If any person, —
(a) being legally bound to state the truth of any matter relating to an offence under section 3, 
refuses to answer any question put to him by an authority in the exercise of its powers under this Act; 
or 
(b) refuses to sign any statement made by him in the course of any proceedings under this Act, 
which an authority may legally require to sign; or 
(c) to whom a summon is issued under section 50 either to attend to give evidence or produce 
books of account or other documents at a certain place and time, omits to attend or produce books of 
account or documents at the place or time, 
he shall pay, by way of penalty, a sum which shall not be less than five hundred rupees but which may 
extend to ten thousand rupees for each such default or failure. 
(3) No order under this section shall be passed by an authority referred to in sub-section ( 2) unless the 
person on whom the penalty is proposed to be imposed is given an opportunity of being heard in the 
matter by such authority. 
1[(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2), a person who intentionally 
disobeys any direction issued under section 50 shall also be liable to be proceeded against under section 
174 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).] 
64. Cognizance of offences.— (1) No court shall take cognizance of any offence under section 62 or 
sub-section ( 1) of section 63 except with the previous sanction of the Central Government. 
(2) The Central Government shall, by an order, either give sanction or refuse to give sanction within 
ninety days of the receipt of the request in this behalf. 
65. Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 to apply.— The provisions of the Code of Criminal 
Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974) shall apply, in so far as they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
Act, to arrest, search and seizure, attachment, confiscation investigation, prosecution and all other 
proceedings under this Act. 
66. Disclosure of information.—2[(1)] The Director or any other authority specified by him by a 
general or special order in this behalf may furnish or cause to be furnished to —
(i) any officer, authority or body performing any functions under any law relating to imposition of 
any tax, duty or cess or to dealings in foreign exchange, or prevention of illicit traffic in the narcotic 
drugs and psychotropic substances under the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 
(61 of 1985); or 
(ii) such other officer, authority or body performing functions under any other law as the Central 
Government may, if in its opinion it is necessary so to do in the public interest, specify, by 
notification in the Official Gazette, in this behalf, any information received or obtained by such 
Director or any other authority, specified by him in the performance of their functions under this Act, 
as may, in the opinion of the Director or the other authority, so specified by him, be necessary for the 
purpose of the officer, authority or body specified in clause ( i) or clause ( ii) to perform his or its 
functions under that law. 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s.26 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Section 66 numbered as sub-section ( 1)  by Act 13 of 2018, s. 208 (w.e.f. 19-4-2018).  34 1[(2) If the Director or other authority specified under sub-section ( 1) is of the opinion, on the basis of 
information or material in his possession, that the provisions of any other law for the time being in force 
are contravened, then the Director or such other authority shall share the information with the concerned 
agency for necessary action.] 
67. Bar of suits in civil courts.— No suit shall be brought in any civil court to set aside or modify 
any proceeding taken or order made under this Act and no prosecution, suit or other proceeding shall lie 
against the Government or any officer of the Government for anything done or intended to be done in 
good faith under this Act. 
68. Notice, etc., not to be invalid on certain grounds.— No notice, summons, order, document or 
other proceeding, furnished or made or issued or taken or purported to have been furnished or made or 
issued or taken in pursuance of any of the provisions of his Act shall be invalid, or shall be deemed to be 
invalid merely by reason of any mistake, defect or omission in such notice, summons, order, document or 
other proceeding if such notice, summons, order, document or other proceeding is in substance and effect 
in conformity with or according to the intent and purpose of this Act. 
2[69. Recovery of fine or penalty.— Where any fine or penalty imposed on any person under section 
13 or section 63 is not paid within six months from the day of imposition of fine or penalty, the Director 
or any other officer authorised by him in this behalf may proceed to recover the amount from the said 
person in the same manner as prescribed in Schedule II of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961) for the 
recovery of arrears and he or any officer authorised by him in this behalf shall have all the powers of the 
Tax Recovery Officer mentioned in the said Schedule for the said purpose.] 
70. Offences by companies.— (1) Where a person committing a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder is a company, every person who, 
at the time the contravention was committed, was in charge of and was responsible to the company, for 
the conduct of the business of the company as well as the company, shall be deemed to be guilty of the 
contravention and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly: 
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall render any such person liable to punishment 
if he proves that the contravention took place without his knowledge or that he exercised all due diligence 
to prevent such contravention. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section ( 1), where a contravention of any of the 
provisions of this Act or of any rule, direction or order made thereunder has been committed by a 
company and it is proved that the contravention has taken place with the consent or connivance of, or is 
attributable to any neglect on the part of any director, manager, secretary or other officer of any company, 
such director, manager, secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of the contravention 
and shall be liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. 
Explanation 3[1].—For the purposes of this section, — 
(i) “company” means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals; 
and  
(ii) “director”, in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm. 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 208 (w.e.f. 19-4-2018).  
2. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s.27, for section 69 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Explanation  shall be numbered as Explanation  1 by s.28, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-2013) 35 1[Explanation 2.—For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that a company may be prosecuted, 
notwithstanding whether the prosecution or conviction of any legal juridical person shall be contingent on 
the prosecution or conviction of any individual.] 
71. Act to have overriding effect.— The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding 
anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for the time being in force.
72. Continuation of proceedings in the event of death or insolvency.— (1) Where —
(a) any property of a persons has been attached under section 8 and no appeal against the order 
attaching such property has been preferred; or 
(b) any appeal has been preferred to the Appellate Tribunal, and —
(i) in a case referred to in clause ( a), such person dies or is adjudicated an insolvent before 
preferring an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal; or 
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), such person dies or is adjudicated an insolvent during 
the pendency of the appeal, 
then, it shall be lawful for the legal representatives of such person or the official assignee or the official 
receiver, as the case may be, to prefer an appeal to the Appellate Tribunal or as the case may be, to 
continue the appeal before the Appellate Tribunal, in place of such person and the provisions of             
section 26 shall, so far as may be, apply, or continue to apply, to such appeal. 
(2) Where — 
(a) after passing of a decision or order by the Appellate Tribunal, no appeal has been preferred to 
the High court under section 42; or 
(b) any such appeal has been preferred to the High Court, — 
then—
(i) in a case referred to in clause ( a), the person entitled to file the appeal dies or is adjudicated an 
insolvent before preferring an appeal to the High Court, or 
(ii) in a case referred to in clause ( b), the person who had filed the appeal dies or is adjudicated an 
insolvent during the pendency of the appeal before the High Court,  
then, it shall be lawful for the legal representatives of such person, or the official assignee or the official 
receiver, as the case may be, to prefer an appeal to the High Court or to continue the appeal before the 
High Court in place of such person and the provisions of section 42 shall, so far as may be, apply, or 
continue to apply, to such appeal. 
(3) The powers of the official assignee or the official receiver under sub-section ( 1) or sub-section ( 2) 
shall be exercised by him subject to the provisions of the Presidency-towns Insolvency Act, 1909               
(3 of 1909) or the Provincial Insolvency Act, 1920 (5 of 1920), as the case may be. 
73. Power to make rules.— (1) The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for 
carrying out the provisions of this Act. 
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely :—
(a) the form in which records referred to in this Act may be maintained; 
2[(aa) the manner of provisional attachment of property under sub-section (1) of section 5;] 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013,  s. 28 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Ins. by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 36 (b) the manner in which the order and the material referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 5 to be 
maintained; 
(c) matters in respect of experience of Members under sub-section ( 3) of section 6; 
(d) the salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of Members 
of the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 9) of section 6; 
(e) the salaries and allowances payable to and other terms and conditions of service of the officers 
and employees of the Adjudicating Authority under sub-section ( 3) of section 7; 
1[(ee) the manner of seizing or taking possession of property attached under section 5 or frozen 
under sub-section ( 1A) of section 17 or under sub-section ( 4) of section 8;] 
(f) the manner in which and the conditions subject to which the properties confiscated may be 
received and managed under sub-section ( 2) of section 10; 
(g) the additional matters in respect of which the Adjudicating Authority may exercise the powers 
of a civil court under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 11; 
2* * * * * 
(i) 3[the nature and value of transactions and the time within which] the information of 
transactions under clause ( b) of sub- section ( 1) of section 12 shall be furnished; 
4[(j) the manner and the conditions in which identity of clients shall be verified by the reporting 
entities under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 1) of section 12; 
(jj) the manner of identifying beneficial owner, if any, from the clients by the reporting entities 
under clause (d) of sub-section ( 1) of section 12; 
(jjj) the period of interval in which the reports are sent by the reporting entities or any of its 
employees under clause ( c) of sub-section ( 2) of section 13;] 
(k) the procedure and the manner of maintaining and furnishing information under  
sub-section ( 1) of section 12 as required under section 15; 
(l) the manner in which the reasons and the material referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 16 
shall be maintained; 
(m) the rules relating to search and seizure under sub-section ( 1) of section 17; 
(n) the manner in which the reasons and the material referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 17 
shall be maintained; 
(o) the manner in which the reasons and the material referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 18 
shall be maintained; 
(p) the manner in which the order and the material referred to in sub-section ( 2) of section 19 
shall be maintained; 
1[(pp) the manner in which the forwarding of the order for retention or continuation of freezing of 
the property and the period of keeping such order and material under sub-section ( 2) of section 20;] 
1. Ins. by Act 2 of 2013, s. 29 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
2. Clause ( h) omitted by s. 29, ibid. (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
3. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for “the time within which” (w.e.f. 15-2-2013).  
4. Subs. by s. 29, ibid., for clause ( j) (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 37 (q) the manner in which records authenticated outside India may be received under 
sub-section ( 2) of section 22; 
(r) the form of appeal and the fee for filing such appeal, under sub-section ( 3) of section 26;  
1* * * * * 
(u) the additional matters in respect of which the Appellate Tribunal may exercise the powers of a 
civil court under clause ( i) of sub-section ( 2) of section 35;  
2[(ua) conditions subject to which a police officer may be authorised to investigate into an 
offence under sub-section ( 1A) of section 45;] 
(v) the additional matters in respect of which the authorities may exercise powers of a civil court 
under clause ( f) of sub-section ( 1) of section 50; 
(w) the rules relating to impounding and custody of records under sub-section ( 5) of section 50; 
(x) any other matter which is required to be, or may be, prescribed. 
74. Rules to be laid before Parliament.— Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as 
may be after it is made, before each House of Parliament, while it is in session, for a total period of thirty 
days which may be comprised in one session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the 
expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive sessions aforesaid, both Houses 
agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not be made, the 
rule shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything 
previously done under that rule. 
75. Power to remove difficulties.— (1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order, published in the Official Gazette, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no order shall be made under this section after the expiry of two years from the 
commencement of this Act. 
(2) Every order made under this section shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each 
House of Parliament. 
1. Clauses ( s) and ( t) omitted by Act 28 of 2016, s. 232 (w.e.f. 1-6-2016). 
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 2005, s. 8 (w.e.f. 1-7-2005). 38 THE SCHEDULE 
[See section 2( y)] 
1[PART A 
PARAGRAPH 1 
OFFENCES UNDER THE INDIAN  PENAL  CODE 
(45 OF 1860) 
Section Description of offence 
120B Criminal conspiracy. 
121 Waging or attempting to wage war or abetting waging of war, against the Government of 
India. 
121A 
255 
257 
258 
259 
260 
302 
304 
307 
308 
327 
329 
364A 
384 to 389 
392 to 402 
411 
412 
413 
414 
417 
418 
419 
420 
421 Conspiracy to commit offences punishable by section 121 against the State. 
Counterfeiting Government stamp. 
Making or selling instrument for counterfeiting Government stamp. 
Sale of counterfeit Government stamp. 
Having possession of counterfeit Government stamp. 
Using as genuine a Government stamp known to be counterfeit. 
Murder. 
Punishment for culpable homicide not amounting to murder. 
Attempt to murder. 
Attempt to commit culpable homicide. 
Voluntarily causing hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal act. 
Voluntarily causing grievous hurt to extort property, or to constrain to an illegal act. 
Kidnapping for ransom, etc. 
Offences relating to extortion. 
Offences relating to robbery and dacoity. 
Dishonestly receiving stolen property. 
Dishonestly receiving property stolen in the commission of a dacoity. 
Habitually dealing in stolen property. 
Assisting in concealment of stolen property. 
Punishment for cheating. 
Cheating with knowledge that wrongful loss may ensue to person whose interest offender 
is bound to protect. 
Punishment for cheating by personation. 
Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property. 
Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property to prevent distribution among 
creditors. 
1. Subs. by Act 2 of 2013, s.30, for Part A (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 39 Section Description of offence 
422 Dishonestly or fraudulently preventing debt being available for creditors. 
423 Dishonest or fraudulent execution of deed of transfer containing false statement of 
consideration. 
424 Dishonest or fraudulent removal or concealment of property. 
467 Forgery of valuable security, will, etc. 
471 Using as genuine a forged document or electronic record. 
472 and 473 Making or possessing counterfeit seal, etc., with intent to commit forgery. 
475 and 476 Counterfeiting device or mark. 
481 Using a false property mark. 
482 Punishment for using a false property mark. 
483 Counterfeiting a property mark used by another.
484 Counterfeiting a mark used by a public servant. 
485 Making or possession of any instrument for counterfeiting a property mark. 
486 Selling goods marked with a counterfeit property mark. 
487 Making a false mark upon any receptacle containing goods. 
488 Punishment for making use of any such false mark. 
489A Counterfeiting currency notes or bank notes. 
489B Using as genuine, forged or counterfeit currency notes or bank notes. 
PARAGRAPH 2 
OFFENCES UNDER THE NARCOTIC  DRUGS AND PSYCHOTROPIC  SUBSTANCES  ACT, 1985 
(61 OF 1985) 
Section Description of offence 
15 
16 
17 Contravention in relation to poppy straw. 
Contravention in relation to coca plant and coca leaves. 
Contravention in relation to prepared opium. 
18 
19 Contravention in relation to opium poppy and opium. 
Embezzlement of opium by cultivator. 
20 
21 Contravention in relation to cannabis plant and cannabis. 
Contravention in relation to manufactured drugs and preparations. 
22 Contravention in relation to psychotropic substances. 
23 Illegal import into India, export from India or transhipment of narcotic drugs and psychotropic 
substances. 40 Section Description of offence 
24 External dealings in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances in contravention of section 12 
of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985. 
25A Contravention of orders made under section 9A of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic 
Substances Act, 1985. 
27A Financing illicit traffic and harbouring offenders. 
29 Abetment and criminal conspiracy. 
PARAGRAPH 3 
OFFENCES UNDER THE EXPLOSIVE SUBSTANCES  ACT,1908 
(6 OF 1908) 
Section Description of offence 
3 Causing explosion likely to endanger life or property. 
4 Attempt to cause explosion, or for making or keeping explosives with intent to endanger life or 
property. 
5 Making or possessing explosives under suspicious circumstances. 
PARAGRAPH 4 
OFFENCES UNDER THE  UNLAWFUL  ACTIVITIES  (PREVENTION ) ACT, 1967 
(37 OF 1967) 
Section Description of offence 
10 read with section 3 Penalty for being member of an unlawful association, etc. 
11 read with section 3  Penalty for dealing with funds of an unlawful association. 
13 read with section 3 Punishment for unlawful activities. 
16 read with section 15 Punishment for terrorist act. 
16A  Punishment for making demands of radioactive substances, nuclear devices, 
etc. 
17 Punishment for raising funds for terrorist act. 
18 Punishment for conspiracy, etc. 
18A Punishment for organising of terrorist camps. 
18B Punishment for recruiting of any person or persons for terrorist act. 
19 Punishment for harbouring, etc. 
20 Punishment for being member of terrorist gang or organisation. 
21 Punishment for holding proceeds of terrorism. 
38 Offence relating to membership of a terrorist organisation. 
39 Offence relating to support given to a terrorist organisation. 41 Section Description of offence 
40 Offence of raising fund for a terrorist organisation. 
PARAGRAPH 5 
OFFENCES UNDER THE ARMS ACT, 1959 
(54 OF 1959) 
Section Description of offence 
25 To manufacture, sell, transfer, convert, repair or test or prove or expose or offer for sale or 
transfer or have in his possession for sale, transfer, conversion, repair, test or proof, any arms 
or ammunition in contravention of section 5 of the Arms Act, 1959. 
To acquire, have in possession or carry any prohibited arms or prohibited ammunition in 
contravention of section 7 of the Arms Act, 1959. 
Contravention of section 24A of the Arms Act, 1959 relating to prohibition as to possession of 
notified arms in disturbed areas, etc. 
Contravention of section 24B of the Arms Act, 1959 relating to prohibition as to carrying of 
notified arms in or through public places in disturbed areas. 
Other offences specified in section 25. 
26 To do any act in contravention of any provisions of section 3, 4, 10 or section 12 of the Arms 
Act, 1959 in such manner as specified in sub-section ( 1) of section 26 of the said Act. 
To do any act in contravention of any provisions of section 5, 6, 7 or section 11 of the Arms 
Act, 1959 in such manner as specified in sub-section ( 2) of section 26 of the said Act. 
Other offences specified in section 26. 
27 Use of arms or ammunitions in contravention of section 5 or use of any arms or ammunition in 
contravention of section 7 of the Arms Act, 1959. 
28 Use and possession of fire arms or imitation fire arms in certain cases. 
29 Knowingly purchasing arms from unlicensed person or for delivering arms, etc., to person not 
entitled to possess the same. 
30 Contravention of any condition of a licence or any provisions of the Arms Act, 1959 or any 
rule made thereunder. 
PARAGRAPH 6 
OFFENCES UNDER THE WILD LIFE (PROTECTION ) ACT, 1972 
(53 OF 1972) 
Section Description of offence 
 51 read with section 9    Hunting of wild animals. 
51 read with section 17A Contravention of provisions of section 17A relating to prohibition of 
picking, uprooting, etc., of specified plants. 
51 read with section 39 Contravention of provisions of section 39 relating to wild animals, etc., to 
be Government property. 42 Section Description of offence 
51 read with section 44 Contravention of provisions of section 44 relating to dealings in trophy 
and animal articles without licence prohibited. 
51 read with section 48 Contravention of provisions of section 48 relating to purchase of animal, 
etc., by licensee. 
51 read with section 49B Contravention of provisions of section 49B relating to prohibition of 
dealings in trophies, animals articles, etc., derived from scheduled animals. 
PARAGRAPH 7 
OFFENCES UNDER THE IMMORAL  TRAFFIC  (PREVENTION ) ACT, 1956 
(104 OF 1956) 
Section Description of offence 
5 Procuring, inducing or taking person for the sake of prostitution. 
6 Detaining a person in premises where prostitution is carried on. 
8 Seducing or soliciting for purpose of prostitution. 
9 Seduction of a person in custody. 
1[PARAGRAPH 8 
OFFENCES UNDER THE PREVENTION OF  CORRUPTION  ACT, 1988 
(49 OF 1988) 
Section Description of offence 
7. Offence relating to public servant being bribed. 
7A. Taking undue advantage to influence public servant by corrupt or illegal means or by exercise 
of personal influence. 
8. Offence relating to bribing a public servant. 
9. Offence relating to bribing a public servant by a commercial organisation. 
10. Person in charge of commercial organisation to be guilty of offence. 
11. Public servant obtaining undue advantage, without consideration from person concerned in 
proceeding or business transacted by such public servant. 
12. Punishment for abetment of offences. 
13. Criminal misconduct by a public servant. 
14 Punishment for habitual offender.] 
1. Subs. by Act 16 of 2018, s. 19, for Paragraph 8 (w.e.f. 26-7-2018). 43 PARAGRAPH 9 
OFFENCES UNDER THE EXPLOSIVES  ACT, 1884 
(4 OF 1884) 
Section Description of offence 
9B Punishment for certain offences. 
9C Offences by companies. 
PARAGRAPH 10 
OFFENCES UNDER THE ANTIQUITIES AND ARTS TREASURES  ACT, 1972 
(52 OF 1972) 
Section Description of offence 
25 read with 
section 3  Contravention of export trade in antiquities and art treasures. 
28 Offences by companies. 
PARAGRAPH 11 
OFFENCES UNDER THE  SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE  BOARD OF
INDIA  ACT, 1992 
(15 OF 1992) 
Section Description of offence 
12A read with 
section 24 Prohibition of manipulative and deceptive devices, insider trading and 
substantial.  
24 Acquisition of securities or control. 
PARAGRAPH 12 
OFFENCES UNDER THE CUSTOMS  ACT, 1962 
(52 OF 1962) 
Section Description of offence 
135 Evasion of duty or prohibitions. 44 PARAGRAPH 13 
OFFENCES UNDER THE BONDED  LABOUR  SYSTEM  (ABOLITION ) ACT, 1976 
(19 OF 1976) 
Section Description of offence 
16 Punishment for enforcement of bonded labour. 
18 Punishment for extracting bonded labour under the bonded labour system. 
20 Abetment to be an offence. 
PARAGRAPH 14 
OFFENCES UNDER THE  CHILD  LABOUR  (PROHIBITION AND REGULATION ) 
ACT, 1986 
(61 OF 1986) 
Section Description of offence 
14 Punishment for employment of any child to work in contravention of the provisions of 
section 3 
PARAGRAPH 15 
OFFENCES UNDER THE TRANSPLANTATION OF HUMAN  ORGANS  ACT, 1994 
(42 OF 1994) 
Section Description of offence 
18 Punishment for removal of human organ without authority. 
19 Punishment for commercial dealings in human organs. 
20 Punishment for contravention of any other provision of this Act. 
PARAGRAPH 16 
OFFENCES UNDER THE JUVENILE  JUSTICE (CARE AND PROTECTION OF CHILDREN ) ACT, 2000 
(56 OF 2000) 
Section Description of offence 
23 Punishment for cruelty to juvenile or child. 
24 Employment of juvenile or child for begging. 
25 Penalty for giving intoxicating liquor or narcotic drug or psychotropic substance to 
juvenile or child. 
26 Exploitation of juvenile or child employee. 45 PARAGRAPH 17 
OFFENCES UNDER THE EMIGRATION  ACT, 1983 
(31 OF 1983) 
Section Description of offence 
24    Offences and penalties. 
PARAGRAPH 18 
OFFENCES UNDER THE PASSPORTS  ACT, 1967 
(15 OF 1967) 
Section Description of offence 
12          Offences and penalties. 
PARAGRAPH 19 
OFFENCES UNDER THE FOREIGNERS  ACT, 1946 
(31 OF 1946) 
Section Description of offence 
14 Penalty for contravention of provisions of the Act, etc. 
14B Penalty for using forged passport. 
14C Penalty for abetment. 
PARAGRAPH 20 
OFFENCES UNDER THE COPYRIGHT  ACT, 1957 
(14 OF 1957) 
Section Description of offence 
63 Offence of infringement of copyright or other rights conferred by this Act. 
63A Enhanced penalty on second and subsequent convictions. 
63B Knowing use of infringing copy of computer programme. 
68A Penalty for contravention of section 52A. 
PARAGRAPH 21 
OFFENCES UNDER THE TRADE  MARKS  ACT, 1999 
(47 OF 1999) 
Section Description of offence 
103 Penalty for applying false trademarks, trade descriptions, etc. 
104 Penalty for selling goods or providing services to which false trademark or false trade 
description is applied. 
105 Enhanced penalty on second or subsequent conviction. 
107 Penalty for falsely representing a trademark as registered. 
120 Punishment of abetment in India of acts done out of India. 46 PARAGRAPH 22 
OFFENCES UNDER THE  INFORMATION  TECHNOLOGY  ACT, 2000 
(21 OF 2000) 
Section Description of offence 
72 Penalty for breach of confidentiality and privacy. 
75 Act to apply for offence or contravention committed outside India. 
PARAGRAPH 23 
OFFENCES UNDER THE  BIOLOGICAL  DIVERSITY  ACT, 2002 
(18 OF 2003) 
Section Description of offence 
55 read with section 6 Penalties for contravention of section 6, etc. 
PARAGRAPH 24 
OFFENCES UNDER THE  PROTECTION OF PLANT  VARIETIES AND  FARMERS  RIGHTS  ACT, 2001 
(53 OF 2001) 
Section Description of offence 
70 read with section 68 Penalty for applying false denomination, etc. 
71 read with section 68 Penalty for selling varieties to which false denomination is applied. 
72 read with section 68 Penalty for falsely representing a variety as registered. 
73 read with section 68 Penalty for subsequent offence. 
PARAGRAPH 25 
OFFENCES UNDER THE ENVIRONMENT  PROTECTION  ACT, 1986 
(29 OF 1986) 
Section Description of offence 
15 read with section 7 Penalty for discharging environmental pollutants, etc., in excess of prescribed 
standards. 
15 read with section 8 Penalty for handling hazardous substances without complying with procedural 
safeguards. 47 PARAGRAPH 26 
OFFENCES UNDER THE  WATER  (PREVENTION AND  CONTROL OF  POLLUTION ) ACT, 1974 
(6 OF 1974) 
Section Description of offence 
41 (2) Penalty for pollution of stream or well. 
43 Penalty for contravention of provisions of section 24. 
PARAGRAPH 27 
OFFENCES UNDER THE  AIR (PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF  POLLUTION ) ACT, 1981 
(14 OF 1981) 
Section Description of offence 
37 Failure to comply with the provisions for operating industrial plant. 
PARAGRAPH 28 
OFFENCES UNDER THE  SUPPRESSION  OF UNLAWFUL , ACTS AGAINST  SAFETY
OF MARITIME  NAVIGATION AND  FIXED  PLATFORMS ON
CONTINENTAL  SHELF  ACT, 2002 
(69 OF 2002) 
Section Description of offence 
3 Offences against ship, fixed platform, cargo of a ship, maritime navigational 
facilities, etc.] 
1[PARAGRAPH 29 
OFFENCE UNDER THE COMPANIES ACT, 2013 
(18 OF 2013) 
Section Description of offence 
447 Punishment for fraud] 
2[PART B 
OFFENCE UNDER THE  CUSTOMS  ACT, 1962 
(52 OF 1962) 
Section Description of offence 
132 False declaration, false documents, etc.] 
3[PART C 
An offence which is the offence of cross border implications and is specified in, — 
(1) Part A; or 
4*  * * * * 
(3) the offences against property under Chapter XVII of the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860).] 
5[(4) The offence of wilful attempt to evade any tax, penalty or interest referred to in section 51 of the 
Black Money (Undisclosed Foreign Income and Assets) and Imposition of Tax Act, 2015 (22 of 2015).] 
1. Ins. by Act 13 of 2018, s. 208 (w.e.f. 19-4-2018). 
2. Ins. by Act 20 of 2015, s. 151 (w.e.f. 14-5-2015). 
3. Ins. by Act 21 of 2009, s. 13 (w.e.f. 1-6-2009). 
4. Serial number ( 2) omitted by Act 2 of 2013, s. 30 (w.e.f. 15-2-2013). 
5. Ins. by Act 22 of 2015, s. 88 (w.e.f. 1-4-2016). 
--------------------------The Repatriation of Prisoners Act, 2003--------------------------
1 
 THE REPATRIATION OF PRISONERS ACT, 2003  
__________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Application of Act.  
4. Application for transfer by a prisoner . 
5. Consideration of request by Central Government . 
6. Comments of  contracting State . 
7. Consideration of request by Central Government.  
8. Provision to issue warrant for transfer . 
9. Operation of warrant and retaking prisoner.  
10. Transfer of record.  
11. Power of court and Central Government shall not be affected . 
12. Transfer into India . 
13. Determination of prison and issue of warrant for receiving transfer in India . 
14. Power to make rules . 
15. Laying of rules, etc.  
16. Power to remove difficulties . 
  2 
 THE REPATRIATION OF PRISONERS ACT, 2003  
ACT NO. 49 OF 2003  
[28th September , 2003.]  
An Act to provide for  the transfer of certain prisoners from India to country or place outside 
India and reception in India of certain prisoners from country or place outside India.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fourth Year of the Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Repatriation of Prisoners Act, 
2003 . 
(2) It shall come into force on such date1 as the Central Government may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “contracting State ” means a Government of any country or place outside India in respect of 
which arrangement has been made by the Central Government with the Government of such country 
or place through  a treaty or otherwise for transfer of prisoners from India to such country or place and 
vice versa and includes any other Government of such country or place specified by the Central 
Government, by notification in the Official Gazette, under sub -section ( 1) of section 3;  
(b) “prescribed ” means prescribed by rules made under this Act;  
(c) “prisoner ” means a person undergoing a sentence of imprisonment under an order passed by a 
criminal court including the courts established under the law for the time being  in force in contracting 
States;  
(d) “warrant ” means a warrant issued under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 or sub -section ( 2) of 
section 12, as the case may be;  
(e) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in the Code of Criminal 
Procedu re, 1973 (2 of 1974) have the meanings respectively assigned to them in that Code.  
3. Application of Act .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
direct that the provisions of this Act shall apply to a country or place outside India as may be specified in 
the notification.  
(2) If the notification under sub -section ( 1) relates to a country or place outside India with which a 
treaty has been entered into by India for the transfer of prisoners between that country and India , then, 
such notification shall also set out the full text of the said treaty and shall in no case remain in force 
longer than the period of the said treaty.  
(3) If the Central Government is of the opinion that, with respect to a country or place outside I ndia, 
provisions of this Act require to be modified to give effect to a treaty in relation to such country, it may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, direct that the application of this Act to such country shall be 
subject to such conditions, except ions and modifications specified in the notification.  
4. Application for transfer by a prisoner .—Any prisoner who is a citizen of a contracting State may 
make an application to the Central Government for transfer of his custody from I ndia to that contracti ng 
State:  
Provided that if a prisoner is not able to make an application himself because of his ill health, mental 
condition, old age or being a minor, then, the application may be made by any other person entitled to act 
on his behalf.  
5. Consideration of  request by Central Government .—(1) On receipt of the application under 
section 4, the Central Government shall direct the officer in charge of the prison, where the prisoner is 
confined, to furnish such information which in the opinion of that Government is relevant for the purpose 
of transfer.   
                                                           
1. 1st January, 2004, vide notification No. S.O. 1464(E), dated 24th December, 2003, see Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, 
sec. 3( ii). 3 
 (2) On receipt of the information under sub -section ( 1), if the Central Government is satisfied that — 
(a) no inquiry, trial or any other proceeding is pending against the prisoner;  
(b) death penalty has not been aw arded to the prisoner;  
(c) the prisoner has not been convicted for an offence under the 1[military  law]; and  
(d) transfer of custody of the prisoner to the contracting State shall not be prejudicial to the 
sovereignty, security  or any other interest of India,  
it shall pass an order for forwarding the application of the prisoner to the contracting State.  
6. Comments of contracting State .—(1) The application of the prisoner shall be forwarded by the 
Central Government through pres cribed means to the Government of the contracting State to deal with 
such application alongwith the following information, namely: — 
(a) a copy of the judgment and a copy of the relevant provisions of the law under which the 
sentence has been passed against  the prisoner;  
(b) the nature, duration and date of commencement of the sentence of the prisoner;  
(c) medical report or any other report regarding the antecedents and character of the prisoner, 
where it is relevant for the disposal of his application or fo r deciding the nature of his confinement; 
and 
(d) any other information which the Central Government may consider necessary.  
(2) Where any application of a prisoner forwarded by the Central Government has been accepted by 
the contracting State, the Central  Government may seek from such contracting State, all or any of the 
following information or documents before taking decision to transfer the prisoner to the contracting 
State, namely: — 
(a) a statement or document indicating that the prisoner is a citizen of the contracting State;  
(b) a copy of the relevant law of the contracting State constituting the act or omission as the 
offence, on account of which the sentence has been passed in India, as if such act or omission was an 
offence under the law of that St ate; 
(c) a statement of the fact or any law or regulation relating to the duration and enforcement of the 
sentence of the prisoner in the contracting State upon his transfer;  
(d) the  willingness of the contracting State to accept the transfer of the prisoner and an 
undertaking to administer the remaining part of the sentence of the prisoner;  
(e) an undertaking to comply with the conditions, if any, specified by the Central Government; 
and 
(f) any other information or document which the Central Government may consider necessary.  
7. Consideration of request by Central Government .—(1) If the Central Go vernment, on receipt of 
a communication from the concerned contracting State, — 
(a) expressing its willingness to accept the transfer of the prisoner; and  
(b) undertaking to comply with the conditions specified in the warrant,  
is satisfied that the prisoner  should be transferred to the said State, the Central Government may, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, issue a warrant in 
accordance with the provisions of section 8 in such form as may be prescribed.  
(2) Whe re a warrant is issued under sub -section ( 1), the Central Government shall inform the 
contracting State accordingly and request that State to specify the person to whom and the place within 
India where custody of the p risoner shall be delivered.  
8. Provisi on to issue warrant for transfer. —(1) The Central Government shall authorise an officer 
not below the rank of a Joint Secretary to a StateGovernment, w ithin the limits of whose jurisdiction the 
                                                           
1. Subs. by Act 6 of 2011, s. 2, for “martial law” ( w.e.f. 1 -4-2011 ). 4 
 place of imprisonment of the prisoner is situated, to  issue a warrant on behalf of the Central Government 
under sub -section ( 1) of section 7 directing the officer  incharge of the prison therein to deliver the custody 
of the prisoner to the person authorised by the  contracting State to which the prisoner is to be tran sferred, 
presenting such person a copy of the warrant  together with all the records relating to the prisoner and the 
personal effects taken from the prisoner at the  time of his admission in the prison.  
(2) Upon the presentation of a warrant referred to in sub-section ( 1), the officer in  charge of the prison 
shall  forthwith comply with the warrant and obtain thereon the signature of the person to whom delivery 
of the  prisoner, records and the personal effects relating to the prisoner to be removed from the p rison is 
given.  
(3)After delivery of the prisoner to the person authorised by the contracting State under sub -section 
(2), the  officer in  charge of the prison transferring the prisoner shall forward a copy of the warrant to the 
court which  committed the pr isoner to the prison, along with a statement that the prisoner has been 
delivered to the  person authorised by the contracting State under sub -section ( 1). 
(4) The delivery of the prisoner in compliance of the warrant issued under sub -section ( 1) shall 
discharge the  officer incharge of the prison from the responsibility of keeping the prisoner in his custody.  
9. Operation  of warrant and retaking prisoner. —It shall be lawful for the person authorised by the 
contracting State to whom the custody of a prisoner is delivered under the provisions of sub -section ( 2) of 
section 8 to receive and hold in custody such prisoner  and to convey him out of India and if the prisoner 
escapes from such custody within India , the prisoner maybe arrested without warrant by any per son who 
shall without undue delay deliver such prisoner to the officer  incharge of the nearest police station and the 
prisoner so arrested shall be liable for committing an offence  under section 224 of the Indian Penal Code  
(45 of 1860 ) and shall also be liable for such sentence of imprisonment in India which he would have to 
undergo if the delivery of custody of such prisoner had not been made under  section 8.  
10. Transfer of record .—Where a prisoner is or is to be transferred to a cont racting State under the 
provisions of this Act, the Central Government may requisition the records of any proceeding, including 
judicial proceedings relating to that prisoner from any court or office, and may direct that such records 
shall be sent to the G overnment of the contracting State.  
11. Power of court and Central Government shall not be affected .—The transfer of a prisoner 
from India to a contracting State shall not affect the power of the court which passed the judgment to 
review its judgment and p ower of the Central Government or State Government to suspend, remit or 
commute the sentence in accordance with any law for the time being in force.  
12. Transfer into India .—(1) The Central Government may accept the transfer of a prisoner, who is 
a citizen  of India, from a contracting State wherein he is undergoing any sentence of imprisonment 
subject to such terms and conditions as may be agreed to between India and that State.  
(2) If the Central Government accepts the request for a transfer under sub -section ( 1), then, 
notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, it may issue a warrant to 
detain the prisoner in prison in accordance with the provisions of section 13 in such form as may be 
prescribed.  
13. Determination of prison and issue of warrant for receiving transfer in India. —(1) The 
Central Government shall, in consultation with a State Government, determine the prison situated within 
the jurisdiction of such State Government where the prisoner with respect to whom awarrant has been 
issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 12, shall be lodged and the officer who shall r eceive and hold him 
in custody.  
(2) The Central Government shall authorise any officer not below the rank of a Joi nt Secretary to that 
Government to is sue a warrant under sub -section ( 2) of section 12 and to direct the officer referred to in 
sub-section ( 1) to receive and hold the prisoner, with respect to whom the warrant is issued, in custody.  
(3) It shall be lawful for the officer referred to in sub-section ( 1) to receive and hold in custody any  
prisoner delivered to him under the direction made in the warrant issued under sub -section ( 2) of 
section12 and to convey such prisoner to any prison determined under sub -section ( 1) for being dealt with 
in accordance with the said warrant and if the prisoner escapes from such custody, the prisoner may be  
arrested without warrant by any person who shall without undue delay deliver such prisoner to the 5 
 officerincharge of the nearest police station and the pr isoner so arrested shall be liable for committing an 
offenceunder section 224 of the Indian Penal Code  (45 of 1860 ) and shall also be liable to be dealt with in 
accordance with thesaid warrant.  
(4) A warrant under sub -section ( 2) of section 12 shall provid e for— 
(a) the bringing of the prisoner into India from a contracting State or a place outside India;  
(b) the taking of such prisoner in any part of India being a place at which effect may be given to 
theprovisions contained in the warrant;  
(c) the nature and duration of imprisonment of the prisoner in accordance with the terms 
andconditions referred  to in sub -section ( 1) of section 12 and the imprisonment of such prisoner in 
Indiain such manner as may be contained in the warrant; and  
(d) any  other matter which may be prescribed.  
(5)Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the imprisonment 
of a prisoner in compliance with a warrant issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 12 shall be deemed to 
be imprison ment  under a sentence of a court competent to pass such a sentence of imprisonment in India.  
(6) If the sentence of imprisonment passed against the prisoner in the contracting State is 
incompatible with  the Indian law as to its nature, duration or both, th e Central Government may, by order, 
adapt the  sentence of such punishment as to the nature, duration or both, as the case may be, as is 
compatible to the  sentence of imprisonment provided for a similar offence had that offence been 
committed in India:  
Prov ided that the sentence so adapted shall, as far as possible, correspond with the sentence imposed 
by the judgment of the contracting State to the prisoner and such adapted sentence shall not aggravate the  
punishment, by its nature, duration or both in rela ting to the sentence imposed in the contracting State.  
14. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, 
make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the  generality of the foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following matters, namely: — 
(a) the means through which an application may be forwarded under sub -section ( 1) of section 6;  
(b) the form in which a warrant may be issued under  sub-section ( 1) of section 7;  
(c) the form in which a warrant may be issued under sub -section ( 2) of section 12; and  
(d) any other matter which may be prescribed under clause ( d) of sub -section ( 4) of section 13.  
15. Laying of rules, etc. —Every notificati on issued under sub -sections ( 1) and ( 3) of section 3 and 
every rule made under section 14 shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before each  House of 
Parliament, while it is in session,  for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session 
or in two or more successive sessions , and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the 
session or the successive sessions aforesaid , both Houses agree in making any modification in the 
notification or rule or both Houses agree that  the notification or rule should not be made, the notification 
or rule shall thereafter have effect only in such  modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, 
however, that any such modification or annulment shall  be without prejudice  to the validity of anything 
previously done under that notification or rule.  
16. Power to remove difficulties .—(1) If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of 
this Act, the Central Government may, by order published in the Official Gaze tte, make such provisions 
not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, as appear to it to be necessary for removing the difficulty:  
Provided that no such order shall be made after the expiry of a period of two years from the date of 
commencement of th is Act.  
(2) Every order made under sub -section ( 1) shall be laid, as soon as may be after it is made, before 
each House of Parliament.  
