--------------------------The Customs and Central Excise Laws (Repeal) Act, 2004--------------------------
1 
 THE CUSTOMS AND CENTRAL EXCISE LAWS (REPEAL) ACT, 2004  
________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
_________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title . 
2. Repeal of certain enactments . 
3. Savings . 
THE SCHEDULE . 
 
  2 
 THE CUSTOMS AND CENTRAL EXCISE LAWS (REPEAL) ACT, 2004  
ACT NO. 25 OF 2004  
[21st December, 2004 .] 
An Act to repeal certain Customs and Central Excise enactments.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fifth Year of the  Republic of India as follows: — 
1. Short title .—This Act may called the Customs and Central Excise Laws (Repeal) Act, 2004.  
2. Repeal of certain enactments .—The enactments specified in the Schedule are hereby repealed.  
3. Savings .—(1) The repeal by this Act of any enactment shall not affect any other enactment in 
which the repealed enactment has been applie d, incorporated or referred to;  
and this Act shall not affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything already done 
or suffered, or any right, title, obligation or liability already acquired, accrued or incurred, or any remedy 
or proceedin gs in respect thereof, or any release or discharge of or from any debt, penalty, obligation, 
liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing;  
nor sh all this Act affect any princip le or rule of law, or est ablished jurisdiction, form or course of 
pleading, practice or procedure, or existing usage, custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or 
appointment, notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed or 
recognised or derived by, in or from  any enactment hereby repealed;  
nor shall the repeal by this Act of any enactment revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, 
liability, right, title, privilege, restriction, exemption, usage, practice, procedure or other matt er or thin g 
not now existing or in force.  
(2) Sub -section ( 1) shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general application of section 6 of the 
General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897) with regard to the effect of repeal of the Acts specified in the 
Sched ule.  3 
 THE SCHEDULE  
(See section 2)  
 
Year  Number  Short title  
(1) (2) (3) 
1958  27  The Mineral Oils (Additional Duties of Excise and Customs) Act, 1958.  
1959  58  The Sugar (Special Excise Duty) Act, 1959.  
1986  45  The Central Duties of Excise (Retrospective Exemption) Act, 1986.  
1986  62  The Customs and Excise Revenues Appellate Tribunal Act, 1986.  
1988  29  The Customs and Central Excises Laws (Amendment) Act, 1988.  
________  
--------------------------The Prevention of Terrorism (Repeal) Act, 2004--------------------------
 
 THE PREVENTION OF TERRORISM (REPEAL) ACT, 2004  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Repeal of Act 15 of 2002 and saving . 
3. Repeal and saving . 
   
 THE PREVENTION OF TERRORISM (REPEAL) ACT, 2004  
ACT NO. 26 OF 2004  
[21st December , 2004.]  
An Act to repeal the Prevention of Terrorism Act, 2002.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fifth Year of the Republic of  India  as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the  Prevention of Terrorism  
(Repeal) Act, 2004.  
(2) It shall be deemed to have come into force on the 21st day of  September, 2004.  
2. Repeal of Act 15 of 2002 and saving .—(1) The Prevention of Terrorism  Act, 2002 (hereinafter 
referred to as the principal Act) is hereby  repealed.  
(2) The repeal of the  principal Act shall not affect — 
(a) the previous operation of, or anything duly done or suffered under  the principal Act, or  
(b) any right, privilege or obligation or liability acquired, accrued  or incurred under the principal 
Act, or  
(c) any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of any  offence under the principal 
Act, or  
(d) any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of any  such right, privilege, 
obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or  punishment as aforesaid,  
and, any such investigation, legal proceeding or remedy may be  instituted, continued or enforced and any 
such penalty, forfeiture or  punishment may be imposed as if the principal Act had not been  repealed:  
Provided that notwithstanding anything contained in this sub -section or  in any other law for the time 
being in force, no court shall take  cognizance of an offence under the principal Act after the expiry of  the 
period of one year from the commencement of this Act.  
(3) Notwithstanding the repeal  of section 60 of the principal Act, the  Review Committee constituted 
by the Central Government under sub -section  (1) of that section, whether or not an application under           
sub-section  (4) of that section has been made, shall review all cases  regis tered under the principal Act as 
to whether there is a prima facie  case for proceeding against the accused thereunder and such review  shall 
be completed within a period of one year from the commencement of  this Act and where the Review 
Committee is of the opinion that there is  no prima facie  case for proceeding against the accused, then, — 
(a) in cases in which cognizance has been taken by the Court, the cases  shall be deemed to have 
been withdrawn; and  
(b) in cases in which investigations are pending, the i nvestigations  shall be closed forthwith,  
with effect from the date of issuance of the direction by such Review  Committee in this regard.  
(4) The Review Committee constituted by the Central Government under  sub-section  (1) of            
section 60 of the pr incipal Act shall, while reviewing  cases, have powers of a civil court under the Code 
of Civil Procedure,1908 (5 of 1908) in respect of  the following matters, namely: — 
(a) discovery and production of any document;  
(b) requisitioning  any public record or copy thereof from any court or  office.  
(5) The Central Government may constitute more Review Committees, as it  may consider necessary, 
for completing the review within the period  specified in sub -section ( 3). 
3. Repeal and saving .—(1) The Prevention of Terrorism (Repeal)  Ordinance, 2004 (Ord. 1 of 2004) 
is hereby repealed.  
(2) Notwithstanding such repeal, anything done or any action taken  under the said Ordinance shall be 
deemed to have been done or taken  under the corresponding provis ions of this Act.  
--------------------------The Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Repeal Act, 2003--------------------------
1 
 THE SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES (SPECIAL PROVISIONS)  REPEAL ACT, 2003  
_________  
ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS  
___________  
SECTIONS  
1. Short title and commencement . 
2. Definitions . 
3. Repeal of Act 1 of 1986 and dissolution of Appellate Authority and  Board . 
4. Consequential provisions . 
5. Saving . 
6. Power to make rules . 
 
  2 
 THE SICK INDUSTRIAL COMPANIES (SPECIAL PROVISIONS)  REPEAL ACT, 2003  
ACT NO. 1 OF 2004  
[1st January , 2004.]  
An Act to repeal the Sick Industrial Companies (Special Provisions)  Act, 1985.  
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty -fourth Year of the Republic of  India as follows: — 
1. Short title and commencement .—(1) This Act may be called the Sick  Industrial Companies 
(Special Provisions) Repeal Act, 2003.  
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government  may, by notification in the 
Official Gazette, appoint.  
2. Definitions .—In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires, — 
(a) “Appellate Authority'' means the Appellate Authority for Industrial  and Financial 
Reconstruction constituted under section 5 of the Sick  Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 
1985 (1 of 1986);  
(b) “Board'' means the Board for Industrial and Financial  Reconstruction established under 
section 4 of the Sick Industrial  Companies (Special Provisio ns) Act, 1985 (1 of 1986);  
(c) words and expressions used herein and not defined but defined in  the Sick Industrial 
Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985 (1 of1986), shall have the meanings respectively assigned 
to them in that  Act. 
3. Repeal of Act 1 o f 1986 and dissolution of Appellate Authority and  Board .—The Sick 
Industrial Companies (Special Provisions) Act, 1985(hereinafter referred to as the repealed enactment) is 
hereby repealed  and the Appellate Authority and the Board stand dissolved.  
4. Consequential provisions .—On the dissolution of the Appellate  Authority and the Board, — 
(a) (i) the persons appointed as Chairman and Member of the Appellate  Authority or the Board; 
and 
(ii) every other person appointed by the Central Government, Appellate  Authority or the Board,  
and holding office as such immediately before the commencement of this  Act, shall vacate his office and 
no such Chairman, Member or other person  shall be entitled to claim any compensation for premature 
termination  of the term of his office or of any contract of service:  
Provided that every officer or employee who has been, immediately  before the dissolution of the 
Appellate Authority or the Board,  appointed on deputation basis to the Appellate Authority or the Boar d, 
shall stand reverted to his parent cadre, Ministry or Department, as  the case may be:  
Provided further that every officer or employee who has been,  immediately before the dissolution of 
the Appellate Authority or the  Board, employed on regular basis by the Appellate Authority or the  Board, 
shall become, on and from the date of such dissolution, the  officer and employee, respectively, of the 
Central Government with the  same rights and privileges as to pension, gratuity and other like  matters as 
would have  been admissible to him if the rights in relation  to such Appellate Authority or the Board had 
not been transferred to,  and vested in, the Central Government and shall continue to do so  unless and until 
his employment in the Central Government is duly  terminated or until his remuneration, terms and 
conditions of  employment are duly altered by that Government:  
Provided also that notwithstanding anything contained in the Industrial  Disputes Act, 1947               
(14 of 1947), or in any other law for the tim e being  in force, the transfer of the services of any officer or 
other  employee, employed in the Appellate Authority or the Board, to the  Central Government, shall not 
entitle such officer or employee to any  compensation under this Act or any other law for  the time being in  
force and no such claim shall be entertained by any court, tribunal or  other authority:  
Provided also that where the Appellate Authority or the Board has  established a provident fund, 
superannuation, welfare or other fund for  the benefit  of the officers and employees employed in the 
Appellate  Authority or the Board, the monies relatable to the officers and  employees whose services have 3 
 been transferred by or under this Act to  the Central Government shall, out of the monies standing, on th e 
dissolution of the Appellate Authority or the Board, to the credit of  such provident fund, superannuation, 
welfare or other fund, stand  transferred to, and vest in, the Central Government and such monies  which 
stand so transferred shall be dealt with by that Government in  such manner as may be prescribed;  
(b) any appeal preferred to the Appellate Authority or any reference  made to the Board or any 
inquiry pending before the Board or any other  authority or any proceeding of whatever nature 
pending before the Appellate Authority or the Board immediately before the commencement of  this 
Act shall stand abated:  
Provided that a company: — 
(i) in respect of which such appeal or reference or inquiry stand abated  under this clause may 
make a reference under PART VI A of the  Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) within one hundred and 
eighty days from  the commencement of this Act in accordance with the provisions of the  Companies 
Act, 1956;  
(ii) which had become a sick industrial company as defined in clause  (46AA) of secti on 2 of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), before the  commencement of the Companies (Second Amendment) 
Act, 2002 (11 of 2003)  may make a reference under PART VIA of the Companies Act, 1956 within  
one hundred and eighty days from the commencement of the C ompanies  (Second Amendment) Act, 
2002 or within sixty days of final adoption of  accounts after such commencement,  whichever is 
earlier,  
and reference so made shall be dealt with in accordance with the  provisions of the Companies Act, 1956   
(1 of 1956):  
Provided further that no fee shall be payable for making such reference  under PART VIA of the 
Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956) by a company  whose appeal or reference or inquiry stand abated under 
this clause:  
Provided also that any scheme sanctioned under sub-section ( 4) or any  scheme under implementation 
under sub -section ( 12) of section 18 of the  repealed enactment shall be deemed to be a scheme sanctioned 
or under  implementation under section 424D of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of1956) and shall be dealt 
with in accordance with the provisions  contained in PART VIA of that Act;  
(c) the balance of all monies (including any fee) received by, or  advanced to the Appellate 
Authority or the Board, as the case may be,  and not spent by it before the commencement of  this Act 
shall, on the  commencement of this Act, stand transferred to, and vest in, the  Central Government and 
shall be utilised for the purposes of clauses  (e) and ( f); 
(d) all property of whatever kind owned by, or vested in, the Appellate  Authority or the Board, as 
the case may be, and not spent by it before  the commencement of this Act shall, on the 
commencement of this Act,  stand transferred to, and shall vest in the Central Government;  
(e) all liabilities and obligations of whatever kind incurred by the Appellate Authority or the 
Board and subsisting immediately before the  commencement of this Act shall, on and from the 
commencement of this  Act, be deemed to be the liabilities or obligations, as the case maybe, of the 
Central Government; and any proce eding or cause of action,  pending or existing immediately before 
the commencement of this Act by  or against the Appellate Authority or the Board in relation to such  
liability or obligation may, as from the commencement of this Act, be  continued or enforced  by or 
against the Central Government;  
(f) all monies vested in the Central Government under clause ( c) shall,  after deducting the amount 
incurred for discharging the liabilities and  obligations referred to in that clause, be refunded by the 
Central  Govern ment to the person to whom such amount is due.  
5. Saving .—(1) The repeal by this Act of the repealed enactment shall  not— 
(a) affect any other enactment in which the repealed enactment has been  applied, incorporated or 
referred to;  
(b) affect  the previous operation of the repealed enactment or anything  duly done or suffered 
thereunder;  4 
 (c) affect any right, privilege, obligation or liability acquired,  accrued, or incurred under the 
repealed enactment;  
(d) affect any order made by the Board for  sanction of the schemes;  
(e) affect the validity, invalidity, effect or consequences of anything  already done or suffered, or 
any right, title, obligation or liability  already acquired, accrued or incurred or any remedy or 
proceeding in  respect thereof or  any release or discharge of or from any debt,  penalty, obligation, 
liability, claim or demand, or any indemnity  already granted, or the proof of any past act or thing;  
(f) affect any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred in respect of  any offence committed 
against the repealed enactment, affect any investigation , legal proceedings or remedy in respect of 
any such  right, privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or  punishment as aforesaid, and any 
such investigation, legal procee ding or  remedy may be instituted, continued or enforced, and any such  
privilege, forfeiture or punishment may be imposed as if this Act had  not been passed;  
(g) affect any principle or rule of law, or established jurisdiction,  form or course of pleading, 
practice or procedure, or existing usage,  custom, privilege, restriction, exemption, office or 
appointment,  notwithstanding that the same respectively may have been in any manner affirmed  or 
recognised or derived by, in, or from, the repealed  enactment;  
(h) revive or restore any jurisdiction, office, custom, liability,  right, title, privilege, restriction, 
exemption, usage, practice,  procedure or other matter or thing not now existing or in force.  
(2) Save as otherwise provided in section 4 and in sub -sectio n (1) of this section, the mention of 
particular matters in the said section and  sub-section shall not be held to prejudice or affect the general  
application of section 6 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (10 of 1897),with regard to the effect of repeal.  
6. Power to make rules .—(1) The Central Government may, by notification,  make rules for carrying 
out the provisions of this Act.  
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the  foregoing power, such rules may 
provide for all or any of the following  matters, namely: — 
(a) the manner in which the monies standing to the credit of provident  fund, superannuation, 
welfare or other fund of officers and employees  on their transfer to the Central Government, shall be 
dealt with by  that Government und er the fourth proviso to clause ( a) of section 4;  
(b) any other matter which is to be, or may be, prescribed, or in  respect of which provision is to 
be made, by rules.  
(3) Every rule made under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be  after it is made, be fore each House 
of Parliament, while it is in  session, for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in  one 
session or in two or more successive sessions, and if, before the  expiry of the session immediately 
following the session or the  successi ve sessions aforesaid, both Houses agree in making any  modification 
in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should not  be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect only 
in such modified  form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so, however, tha t any such  modification or 
annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of  anything previously done under that rule.  
 
___________  
